CITY OF CLEVELAND, OHIO
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Current through legislation passed December 1, 2025
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4cc937dcc99cd9ae45e5f9bfbf6bc5ab64112b8f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11554.jpg]
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
Cincinnati, Ohio
800-445-5588
www.amlegal.com
CHARTER OF THE CITY OF CLEVELAND
   Note: The original City Charter was adopted by the electors at a special
election on July 1, 1913, certified to the Secretary of State on July 4, 1913,
and effective January 1, 1914. Dates appearing in parentheses after a section
heading indicate the effective date of such section either as an amendment, new
enactment or repeal.
   The inclusion of the Charter of the City of Cleveland in this publication of
the Codified Ordinances of the City of Cleveland has suggested the desirability
of providing chapter arrangement and titles for the respective sections of the
Charter, and accordingly these have been supplied by the editor, although they
do not appear in the Charter as adopted and amended by the electors.
   Chapter
1   Powers of City
   Chapter
3   Nominations and Elections
   Chapter
5   The Council
   Chapter
7   Initiative and Referendum
   Chapter
9   Conflicting Ordinances
   Chapter
11   The Executive
   Chapter
13   Departments and Divisions
   Chapter
15   Department of Law
   Chapter
17   Department of Finance
   Chapter
19   Department of Public Utilities
   Chapter
21   Transit System Operation
   Chapter
23   Public Health
   Chapter
25   Police and Fire Service
   Chapter
27   Civil Service
   Chapter
29   Merit System for Transit Employees
   Chapter
31   Improvements and Assessments
   Chapter
33   Appropriation of Property
   Chapter
35   Franchises
   Chapter
37   Officers and Employees
   Chapter
39   Amendments and Charter Review
   Chapter
40
CHAPTER 1 – POWERS OF CITY
§
1   General Powers
§
2   Enumeration of Powers Not Exclusive
§ 1 General Powers
   The inhabitants of the City of Cleveland, as its limits now are, or may
hereafter be, shall be a body politic and corporate by name the City of
Cleveland, and as such shall have perpetual succession; may use a corporate
seal; may sue and be sued; may acquire property in fee simple or lesser
interest or estate by purchase, gift, devise, appropriation, lease, or lease
with privileges to purchase, for any Municipal purpose; may sell, lease, hold,
manage, and control such property, and make any and all rules and regulations
by ordinance or resolution which may be required to carry out fully all the
provisions of any conveyance, deed, or will, in relation to any gift or
bequest, or the provisions of any lease by which it may acquire property; may
acquire, construct, own, lease and operate and regulate public utilities; may
assess, levy, and collect taxes for general and special purposes on all the
subjects or objects which the City may lawfully tax; may borrow money on the
faith and credit of the City; by the issue or sale of bonds or notes of the
City; may appropriate the money of the City for all lawful purposes; may
create, provide for, construct, regulate and maintain all things of the nature
of public works and improvements; may levy and collect assessments for local
improvements; may license and regulate persons, corporations and associations
engaged in any business, occupation, profession or trade; may define, prohibit,
abate, suppress and prevent all things detrimental to the health, morals,
comfort, safety, convenience and welfare of the inhabitants of the City, and
all nuisances and causes thereof; may regulate the construction, height, and
the material used in all buildings, and the maintenance and occupancy thereof;
may regulate and control the use, for whatever purposes, of the streets and
other public places; may create, establish, abolish and organize offices and
fix the salaries and compensations of all officers and employees; may make and
enforce local police, sanitary and other regulations; and may pass such
ordinances as may be expedient for maintaining and promoting the peace, good
government and welfare of the City, and for the performance of the functions
thereof. The City shall have all powers that now are, or hereafter may be
granted to municipalities by the Constitution or laws of Ohio; and all such
powers whether expressed or implied, shall be exercised and enforced in the
manner prescribed by this Charter, or when not prescribed herein, in such
manner as shall be provided by ordinance or resolution of the Council.
(Effective January 1, 1914)
§ 2 Enumeration of Powers Not Exclusive
   The enumeration of particular powers by this Charter shall not be held or
deemed to be exclusive but, in addition to the powers enumerated herein,
implied thereby or appropriate to the exercise thereof, the City shall have,
and may exercise all other powers which, under the Constitution and laws of
Ohio, it would be competent for this Charter specifically to enumerate.
(Effective January 1, 1914)
CHAPTER 3 – NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS
§
3   Elections
§
4   Nominations
§
5   Nominating Petitions
§
6   Petition Form
§
7   Candidacy and Nominating Petition Papers
§
8   Filing and Verification of Petitions
§
9   Acceptance of Nomination – Repealed
§
10   Selection of Candidates
§
11   Ballots
§
12   Rotation of Names
§
13   Write-in Spaces on Ballots
§
14   Rules for Counting Ballots
§
15   General Laws to Apply
§
16   Removal Procedure of Mayor or Member of Council
§
17   Filing Recall Petition
§
18   Recall Election Ordered
§
19   Separate Recall Petitions Required
§
20   Ballots in Recall Elections
§
21   Result of Recall Election
§
22   Election When Member Resigns
§
23   Limitations on Recall Petitions
§
23-1   Campaign Financing Laws
§
23-2   Comprehensive Disclosure Rules – Repealed
§
23-3   Fair Campaign Finance Commission – Repealed
§
23-4   Penalties – Repealed
§
23-5   Appeals Process – Repealed
§
23-6   Review of Campaign Financing Laws – Repealed
§
23-7   Passage of Legislation – Repealed
§ 3 Elections
   A general election for the choice of elective officers provided for in this
Charter shall be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November
every four years commencing November 1981. Elections so held shall be known as
regular Municipal elections. The other elections shall be held as may be
required by law, or provided for in this Charter.
(Effective November 4, 2008)
§ 4 Nominations
   Candidates for all offices to be voted for at any regular Municipal election
under the provisions of this Charter shall be nominated at a non-partisan
primary election to be held on the second Tuesday in September prior to the
regular Municipal election. Candidates for all offices to be voted for at any
other Municipal election under the provisions of this Charter shall be
nominated at a non-partisan primary election to be held on the eighth Tuesday
prior to the other Municipal elections.
(Effective November 4, 2008)
§ 5 Nominating Petitions
   The name of any elector of the City shall be printed upon the ballot, when a
petition in the form prescribed in this Charter is filed in the elector's
behalf with the election authorities, and the elector has been an elector of
the City for at least twelve (12) consecutive months immediately prior to the
next regular Municipal election or the next election, as required by law or
Charter, whichever occurs first. Such petition shall be signed by at least
three thousand (3,000) electors of the City, for the nomination of a candidate
for an office filled by election from the City at large, and by at least two
hundred (200) electors of the ward if for the nomination for an office to be
filled by election from a ward.
(Effective November 5, 2019)
§ 6 Petition Form
   The signatures to a nominating petition need not all be appended to one
paper, but on each separate paper the circulator shall indicate the number of
signatures contained on the petition, and shall sign a statement made under
penalty of election falsification that the circulator witnesses the affixing of
every signature, that all signers were to the best of the circulator’s
knowledge and belief qualified to sign, and that every signature is to the best
of the circulator’s knowledge and belief the signature of the person whose name
it purports to be. Each signer of a petition shall sign his or her name in ink
or indelible pencil, and shall place on the petition after his or her name the
signer’s place of residence by street and number, or other description
sufficient to identify the place, and give the date when the signer’s signature
was made.
(Effective November 4, 2008)
§ 7 Candidacy and Nominating Petition Papers
   The statement of candidacy and nominating petition papers shall be standard
forms of the Secretary of State as required under the general law of the State.
(Effective November 5, 2019)
§ 8 Filing and Verification of Petitions
   All separate papers comprising a statement of candidacy and nominating
petition shall be assembled and filed with the election authorities as one
instrument no later than four p.m. on the ninetieth (90th ) day prior to the
day of the primary election. Within ten (10) days after the filing of a
nominating petition the election authorities shall notify the person named in
the petition as a candidate whether the petition is found to be signed by the
required number of qualified electors. If insufficient, the person named in the
petition as candidate may amend the petition by filing additional petition
papers within five (5) days after notification of insufficiency by the election
authorities. Within five (5) days after the filing of the additional petition
papers, the election authorities shall notify the person named in the petition
as candidate whether the amended petition is found to be signed by the required
number of qualified electors.
(Effective November 5, 2019)
§ 9 Acceptance of Nomination – Repealed
   Note: This section was repealed by the electors on November 4, 2008.
§ 10 Selection of Candidates
   The number of candidates for any office at any regular Municipal election in
the City at large or in each ward, as the case may be, shall be the two
candidates on the primary election ballot receiving the highest number of votes
at the primary election. In case there shall not be for any office more than
two persons who shall have filed petitions as provided for in this Charter,
then said persons shall be the candidates at the regular Municipal election and
the primary for the particular office shall not be held.
   The name of each person who is nominated in compliance herewith shall be
printed on the official ballot at the general election, and the names of no
other candidates shall be printed thereon.
(Effective October 8, 1971)
§ 11 Ballots
   All ballots used in elections held under authority of this Charter shall be
without party marks or designations. Ballots used for the nomination or
election of candidates shall contain a complete list of the offices to be
filled, and the names of candidates for each office shall be arranged under the
title thereof. Voters shall record their choices in the manner prescribed by
the general law of the State.
(Effective November 4, 2008)
§ 12 Rotation of Names
   The names of candidates to be nominated or elected shall be printed on the
ballot in rotation in the manner prescribed by general law.
(Effective October 8, 1971)
§ 13 Write-in Spaces on Ballots
   A write-in space shall be provided on the ballot in the manner prescribed by
general law of the State.
(Effective November 4, 2008)
§ 14 Rules for Counting Ballots
   Counting the ballots cast at every election held under the authority of this
Charter shall be administered as provided by the general laws of the State of
Ohio. The candidate having the largest number of votes for each office voted
upon at the regular Municipal election shall be declared elected to the office.
In case it cannot be determined which of two or more candidates shall be
declared elected, by reason of the fact that they have received the same number
of votes, the election authorities shall determine by lot which of the
candidates shall be declared elected.
(Effective April 28, 2020)
§ 15 General Laws to Apply
   All elections provided for by this Charter, whether for the choice of
officers or the submission of questions to the voters, shall be conducted by
the election authorities prescribed by general law of the State; and the
provisions of the general election laws of the State shall apply to all the
elections except as provision is otherwise made by this Charter, and except
further that the Council may, by ordinance, provide measures to promote and
insure the purity and integrity of the ballot, and against corrupt practices in
elections.
(Effective November 4, 2008)
§ 15-1 Balloting by Armed Forces – Repealed
   Note: This section was repealed by the electors on November 4, 2008.
§ 16 Removal Procedure of Mayor or Member of Council
   The Mayor or any member of the Council may be removed from office by the
electors of the City. The procedure for effecting such a removal shall be as
follows:
   Any elector of the City may make and file with the Clerk of the Council an
affidavit stating the name of the officer whose removal is sought and the
grounds alleged for such removal. The Clerk shall thereupon deliver to the
elector making the affidavit copies of petition papers for demanding such a
removal, printed copies of which he shall keep on file for distribution as
herein provided. In issuing any such petition paper, the Clerk shall enter in a
record to be kept in his office the name of the elector to whom issued, the
date of issuance, and the number of papers issued, and shall certify upon each
such paper the name of the elector to whom issued and the date of issuance. No
petition paper shall be accepted as part of a petition unless it bears such
certificate of the Clerk and unless filed as hereinafter provided.
(Effective November 8, 1994)
§ 17 Filing Recall Petition
   A petition demanding the removal of the Mayor or a member of the Council
shall be known as a recall petition. A recall petition to be effective must be
returned and filed with the City Clerk within thirty days after the filing of
the affidavit as provided in the next preceding section, and to be sufficient,
must bear the signatures of not less than twenty percent of those who voted in
the City or ward respectively at the last preceding regular Municipal election.
Within ten (10) days from the date of the filing of such petition, the Clerk
shall determine the sufficiency thereof and attach thereto a certificate
showing the result of his examination. If the Clerk shall certify that the
petition is insufficient he shall set forth in the certificate the particulars
in which the petition is defective, and shall return a copy of the certificate
to the person designated in such petition to receive it. Such recall petition
may be amended at any time within twenty (20) days after the return of a copy
of the certificate of insufficiency by filing a supplementary petition upon
additional petition papers, issued, signed and filed as provided herein for the
original petition. The Clerk shall, within ten (10) days after such amendment
is filed, make like examination of the amended petition, and if his certificate
shall show the same to be still insufficient, he shall return it to the person
designated in such petition to receive it, without prejudice, however, to the
filing of a new petition for the same purpose.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 18 Recall Election Ordered
   If a recall petition, or amended petition, shall be certified by the Clerk
to be sufficient he shall at once submit it to the Council with his certificate
to that effect and shall notify the person whose removal is sought by such
action. If the person whose removal is sought does not resign within five days
after such notice the Council shall thereupon order and fix a day for holding a
recall election. Any such election shall be held not less than forty nor more
than sixty days after the petition has been presented to the Council, at the
same time as any other general or special election held within such period but,
if no such election be held within such period, the Council shall call a
special election to be held within the time aforesaid.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 19 Separate Recall Petitions Required
   The question of recalling the Mayor and any number of members of the Council
may be submitted at the same election, but as to each person whose removal is
sought a separate petition shall be filed and provision shall be made for an
entirely separate ballot.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 20 Ballots in Recall Elections
   Ballots used at a recall election shall conform to the following
requirements: With respect to the officer whose removal is sought the question
shall be submitted, “Shall (name of person) be removed from the Council (or
from the office of Mayor) by recall”. Immediately below such question there
shall be printed on the ballots the two following propositions, one above the
other, in the order here indicated:
   “For the recall of (name of person).”
   “Against the recall of (name of person).”
   Immediately at the left of each proposition there shall be a square in which
the elector by making a cross mark (X) may vote for either of such
propositions.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 21 Result of Recall Election
   If a majority of the votes cast on the question of recalling a member of the
Council or Mayor shall be against his recall he shall continue in office for
the remainder of his unexpired term, but subject to recall as before. If a
majority of such votes be for the recall of the member indicated on the ballots
he shall, regardless of any defect in the recall petition, be deemed removed
from office. When a person is removed from office by recall, Council shall
immediately provide for the nomination and election of his successor for the
unexpired term by fixing the time of the elections. The nomination and election
of a person to succeed a person so removed shall be held within one hundred and
twenty days after the date of the recall election and shall be conducted in the
same manner as provided for regular Municipal elections.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 22 Election When Member Resigns
   If the Mayor or a member of the Council in regard to whom a recall petition
is submitted to the Council shall resign within five days after notice thereof,
the successor for the unexpired term shall be nominated and elected as
hereinbefore provided and the recall election shall not be held.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 23 Limitations on Recall Petitions
   No recall petition shall be filed against the Mayor or a member of the
Council within three months after he takes office nor, in case of a person
subjected to a recall election and not removed thereby, until at least six
months after that election.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 23-1 Campaign Financing Laws
   The Council shall provide by ordinance for limitations on campaign
contributions made to the campaign committees for all candidates in all
primary, regular and special elections for the office of Mayor and the office
of member of Council. The Council shall by ordinance provide penalties for
exceeding the campaign contribution limitations and an appeal process for
persons alleged to have violated the campaign contribution limitations.
(Effective November 4, 2008)
§ 23-2 Comprehensive Disclosure Rules – Repealed
   Note: This section was repealed by the electors on November 4, 2008.
§ 23-3 Fair Campaign Finance Commission – Repealed
   Note: This section was repealed by the electors on November 4, 2008.
§ 23-4 Penalties – Repealed
   Note: This section was repealed by the electors on November 4, 2008.
§ 23-5 Appeals Process – Repealed
   Note: This section was repealed by the electors on November 4, 2008.
§ 23-6 Review of Campaign Financing Laws – Repealed
   Note: This section was repealed by the electors on November 4, 2008.
§ 23-7 Passage of Legislation – Repealed
   Note: This section was repealed by the electors on November 4, 2008.
CHAPTER 5 – THE COUNCIL
§
24   Powers, Terms and Vacancies
§
25   Dividing the City into Wards
§
25-1   Reapportionment of Wards
§
26   Qualifications of Council Members
§
27   Salary and Attendance of Council Members
§
28   Meetings of Council
§
29   Rules of Council
§
30   President of Council
§
31   Clerk of Council
§
32   Legislative Procedure
§
33   Enactment of Ordinances and Resolutions
§
34   Revision and Codification of Ordinances
§
35   Amending Ordinances and Resolutions
§
36   Emergency Measures
§
37   Mayor’s Veto
§
37-1   Limitation on Rate of Taxation for Current Operating Expenses
§
37-2   Levy for Special Purposes of Improvements and Equipment
§
37-3   Levies for Debt Service
§
37-4   Submission of Extra Levy to Vote
§
37-5   Severability of Sections
§
38   Mayor’s Estimate
§
39   Appropriation Ordinance
§
40   Preliminary Appropriations
§
41   Transfer of Appropriations
§
42   Current Revenue
§
43   Limitation on Appropriations
§
44   Use of Appropriations
§
45   Alienation of Water Front Lands
§
46   Investigations by Council or Mayor
§
47   Audit and Examination
§
48   Publication of Ordinances and Resolutions
§ 24 Powers, Terms and Vacancies
   The legislative powers of the City, except as reserved to the people by this
Charter, shall be vested in a Council, each member of which shall be elected
from a separate ward. Members of Council shall be elected for a term of four
years and shall serve until their successors are chosen and have qualified.
   If at any time, the office of a member is vacant by reason of non-election,
death, resignation, removal of residence from the ward represented or from any
other cause whatsoever, except when the vacancy is caused by a recall petition,
the vacancy shall be filled by the Council for the unexpired term; provided,
however, that if the vacancy occurs at any time which is more than two years
before the next regular Municipal election, the person selected by the Council
to fill the vacancy shall hold office until the person’s successor is elected
at special municipal elections to be held in accordance with this section and
is qualified. If a general election is to be in the City held upon a date not
less than 160 days nor more than one year after the occurrence of the vacancy,
the special municipal election shall be held at the general election and a
special primary election to nominate candidates for the vacancy shall be held
on the eighth Tuesday prior to the general election. Otherwise, the aforesaid
special municipal elections shall be held on the first Tuesday after one
hundred days from the day on which the vacancy first occurs, at which time the
primary election shall be held, and on the eighth Tuesday following the primary
election, at which time the final special municipal election shall be held, and
all the provisions in this Charter contained as to nomination and election of
candidates for member of Council at regular Municipal elections shall apply to
the special municipal elections. The person so elected shall hold office for
the unexpired portion of the term in which the vacancy in the office of member
of Council occurred and until the person’s successor is elected and qualified
and shall assume office immediately upon election and qualification.
(Effective November 4, 2008)
§ 25 Dividing the City into Wards
   The Council not later than April 1, 2009, shall redivide the City into wards
based on the City’s population as of February 15, 2009 as determined by
estimated population figures compiled by the U.S. Census Bureau or other
reliable source as determined by the Council as of that date. The number of
wards shall be an odd number between a maximum of 25 wards and a minimum of 11
wards using the following table that reflects a ratio of one ward for every
25,000 people based on the estimated population figures:
If the City’s population isThe City shall be divided into the following
                             number of wards:
If the City’s population is:        The City shall be divided into the
                                      following number of wards:
More than 575,000                     25
575,000 or less but more than 525,000 23
525,000 or less but more than 475,000 21
475,000 or less but more than 425,000 19
425,000 or less but more than 375,000 17
375,000 or less but more than 325,000 15
325,000 or less but more than 275,000 13
275,000 or less                       11
 
   The wards so formed shall be as nearly equal in population as may be fair
and equitable, composed of contiguous and compact territory, and bounded by
natural boundaries or street lines. When any territory is annexed to the City
the Council shall by ordinances declare it a part of the adjacent ward or
wards.
   If the Council fails or neglects to redivide the City into wards by April 1,
2009, the Mayor shall within 7 days thereafter submit to Council the plan for
redividing the City into wards using the above table to determine the number of
wards, which division plan of the Mayor shall become effective until the next
decennial Federal census when the wards shall be reapportioned as provided in
Section
25-1.
   The members of Council to be elected under the terms herein shall be elected
at the regular Municipal election on November 3, 2009, in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 3 of the Charter of the City of Cleveland. The division
of the City into wards existing at the time of the adoption of this amendment
shall continue until changed as provided herein.
(Effective November 4, 2008)
§ 25-1 Reapportionment of Wards
   Commencing with the Federal census decennially taken in the closest
proximity to January 1, 2010, and following each subsequent Federal decennial
census, the Council no later than April 1 prior to the next regular municipal
election shall reapportion the wards of the City, provided however that if the
proclamation by the Secretary of State stating the population of cities in Ohio
as determined by any such Federal census occurs in any year when the City
conducts a regular Municipal election and the proclamation of the Secretary of
State occurs less than 120 days before the date for filing nominating petitions
for the election under Charter Section
8, the reapportionment of wards under this section shall be effective by no
later than April 1 prior to the next regular Municipal election four years
thereafter and for all subsequent elections for City offices until the next
decennial Federal census. The number of wards shall be an odd number between a
maximum of 25 wards and a minimum of 11 wards using the following table that
reflects a ratio of one ward for every 25,000 people based on the estimated
population figure contained in the proclamation of the Secretary of State:
If the City’s population isThe City shall be divided into the following
                             number of wards:
If the City’s population is:        The City shall be divided into the
                                      following number of wards:
More than 575,000                     25
575,000 or less but more than 525,000 23
525,000 or less but more than 475,000 21
475,000 or less but more than 425,000 19
425,000 or less but more than 375,000 17
375,000 or less but more than 325,000 15
325,000 or less but more than 275,000 13
275,000 or less                       11
 
   The wards so formed shall be as nearly equal in population as may be,
composed of contiguous and compact territory, and bound by natural boundaries
and street lines.
   If the Council fails to reapportion the wards by the dates herein provided,
the Mayor shall within fifteen business days thereafter submit to Council a
plan for the reapportionment of the wards. The Council shall within ten
business days after receiving the Mayor’s plan, reapportion the wards as herein
provided. If the Council does not reapportion the wards within this latter ten
business day period, the reapportionment plan of the Mayor shall become
effective until the next decennial Federal census when the wards shall be
reapportioned as herein provided.
(Effective May 4, 2010)
§ 26 Qualifications of Council Members
   Members of the Council shall be residents of the City and have the
qualifications of electors therein. A member of the Council, who at the time of
his election, was a resident of the ward which he represents shall forfeit his
office if he removes therefrom. Members of Council shall not hold any other
public office or employment except that of notary public or member of the State
militia, and shall not be interested in the profits or emoluments of any
contract job, work or service of the Municipality. Any member who shall cease
to possess any of the qualifications herein required shall forthwith forfeit
his office, and any such contract in which any member is or may become
interested may be declared void by the Council. No member of the Council shall,
except in so far as is necessary in the performance of the duties of his
office, directly or indirectly interfere in the conduct of the administrative
department, or directly or indirectly take any part in the appointment,
promotion or dismissal of any officer, or employee in the service of the City
other than the officers or employees of the Council.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 27 Salary and Attendance of Council Members
   The salaries of the members of the Council first elected under this Charter
shall be fixed by the outgoing Council. Thereafter the Council may, by
ordinance passed in any even numbered year, change the salary of members of the
Council thereafter elected. The annual salary of members of Council shall be
increased each year by an amount which shall be computed by applying that
percentage of the immediately preceding year's salary that is equal to the
percentage for increases in salaries and wages established for that year in a
majority of the collective bargaining agreements between the City and the
various unions recognized by the City. Such increase shall be effective on
January 1st of each year. The salary of a member of the Council shall be paid
in equal semimonthly installments. The Council may by ordinance provide
compensation for its President in addition to that which he or she receives as
a member of the Council.
   For each absence of a member from regular meetings of the Council, unless
authorized by a two-thirds vote of all members thereof, there shall be deducted
a sum equal to two percent (2%) of the annual salary of each member. Absence
from ten (10) consecutive regular meetings shall operate to vacate the seat of
a member unless such absence is authorized by the Council.
(Effective April 28, 2020)
§ 28 Meetings of Council
   At seven o'clock p.m., on the first Monday in January following a regular
Municipal election, the Council shall meet at the usual place for holding
meetings, at which time the newly-elected members of the Council shall assume
the duties of their offices; provided however, that if the first Monday in
January following a regular Municipal election falls on a legal holiday, the
Council shall meet at the usual place for holding meetings at seven o'clock
p.m. the next business day following that holiday, at which time the newly-
elected members of the Council shall assume the duties of their offices.
Thereafter the Council shall meet at times as may be prescribed by ordinance or
resolution. The Mayor, the President of the Council, or any five members of
Council may call special meetings of the Council upon at least twelve (12)
hours' written notice to each member of the Council, served personally on each
member or left at the usual place of residence of the member. Any notice shall
state the subjects to be considered at the meeting and no other subjects shall
be considered. All meetings of the Council or committees shall be public and
any citizen shall have access to the minutes and records at all reasonable
times.
(Effective April 28, 2020)
§ 29 Rules of Council
   The Council shall determine its own rules and order of business and shall
keep a Journal of its proceedings. It may punish or expel any member for
disorderly conduct or violation of its rules. No expulsion shall take place
without the concurrence of two-thirds of all the members elected nor until the
delinquent member shall have been notified of the charge against him and been
given an opportunity to be heard.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 30 President of Council
   At the first meeting in January following a regular Municipal election, the
Council shall elect one of its members President who shall preside at meetings
of the Council and perform such duties as presiding officer as may be imposed
upon him by the Council. In the absence of the President the Council shall
elect a President pro tempore.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 31 Clerk of Council
   The Council shall choose a Clerk and such other officers and employees of
its own body as are necessary. The Clerk shall keep the records of the Council
and perform such other duties as may be required by this Charter or by the
Council. All such officers and employees chosen by the Council shall serve
during the pleasure thereof.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 32 Legislative Procedure
   The Council shall be the judge of the election and qualification of its
members. A majority of all the members elected shall be a quorum to do
business, but a less number may adjourn from day to day, and compel the
attendance of absent members in such manner and under such penalties as may be
prescribed by ordinance. The affirmative vote of a majority of the members
elected to the Council shall be necessary to adopt any ordinance or resolution.
The vote upon the passage of all ordinances, and upon the adoption of such
resolutions as the Council by its rules shall prescribe, shall be taken by
“yeas” and “nays” and entered upon the Journal.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 33 Enactment of Ordinances and Resolutions
   Ordinances and resolutions shall be introduced in the Council only in
electronic, digital, written or printed form. All ordinances or resolutions,
except ordinances making appropriations, shall be confined to one subject which
shall be clearly expressed in the title, except as provided in the next
section. Ordinances making appropriations shall be confined to the subjects of
appropriation. No ordinance shall be passed until it has been read on three
separate days unless the requirement of reading on three separate days has been
dispensed with by a two-thirds vote of all the members of the Council. The
final reading shall be in full unless an electronic, digital, written or
printed copy of the measure is furnished to each member of the Council prior to
the reading. The enacting clause of all ordinances passed by the Council shall
be “Be it ordained by the Council of the City of Cleveland.” The enacting
clause of all ordinances submitted by the initiative shall be “Be it ordained
by the people of the City of Cleveland.”
(Effective May 6, 2014)
§ 34 Revision and Codification of Ordinances
   Ordinances may be revised, codified, rearranged and published in book form
under appropriate titles, chapters and sections and such revision and
codification may be made in one ordinance containing one or more subjects. The
publication of such revision and codification in book form as aforesaid shall
be held to be a sufficient publication of the ordinance or several ordinances
contained in such revision and codification and so published. Any such
publication of a revision or codification of ordinances in book form shall
contain a certificate of the President of Council and the Clerk of the
correctness of such revision, codification and publication and such book so
published shall be received in evidence in any court for the purpose of proving
the ordinance or ordinances therein contained, the same and for the same
purpose as the original book, ordinances, minutes or journals would be
received.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 35 Amending Ordinances and Resolutions
   No ordinance or resolution or section thereof shall be revised or amended,
unless the new ordinance or resolution contains the entire ordinance or
resolution or section revised or amended, and the original ordinance,
resolution, section or sections so amended shall be repealed.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 36 Emergency Measures
   All ordinances and resolutions shall be in effect from and after thirty (30)
days from the date of their passage by the Council except as otherwise provided
in this Charter. The Council may by a two-thirds vote of the members elected to
the Council, pass emergency measures to take effect at the time indicated in
the emergency measure. An emergency measure is an ordinance or resolution for
the immediate preservation of the public peace, property, health, or safety, or
providing for the usual daily operation of a Municipal department, in which the
emergency is set forth and defined in a preamble. Ordinances appropriating
money may be passed as emergency measures, but no measure making a grant,
renewal or extension of a franchise or other special privilege, or regulating
the rate to be charged for its services by any public utility, shall ever be so
passed.
(Effective November 4, 2008)
§ 37 Mayor’s Veto
   Any ordinance or resolution passed by the Council shall be signed by the
President or other presiding officer and presented forthwith to the Mayor by
the Clerk. If the Mayor approves such ordinance or resolution he shall sign it
within ten (10) days after its passage or adoption by the Council but if he
does not approve it, he shall return it to the Council with his objections
within said ten (10) days, or if the Council be not then in session, at the
next regular meeting thereof, which objections the Council shall cause to be
entered in full on its Journal. If the Mayor does not sign or veto an ordinance
or resolution after its passage or adoption, within the time specified, it
shall take effect in the same manner as if he had signed it. The Mayor may
approve or disapprove the whole or any item or part of any ordinance or
resolution appropriating money. When the Mayor refuses to sign an ordinance or
resolution or part thereof and returns it to the Council with his objections,
the Council shall, after the expiration of not less than one week, proceed to
reconsider it and, if upon reconsideration, the resolution or ordinance or part
or item thereof disapproved by the Mayor be approved by the vote of two-thirds
of all the members elected to the Council it shall take effect without the
signature of the Mayor. In all such cases the votes shall be taken by “yeas”
and “nays” and entered on the Journal.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 37-1 Limitation on Rate of Taxation for Current Operating Expenses
   The tax rate which may be levied without a vote of the people for the
current operating expenses of the City, including therein the levies for police
and fire pensions, is hereby limited to eight and thirty-five hundredths (8.35)
mills per dollar of assessed value upon property listed and assessed for
taxation according to value upon the duplicate of property in the City of
Cleveland; provided that said limitations may be exceeded for current operating
expenses in each of the years 1968, 1969, and 1970, by not more than five and
eight-tenths (5.8) mills. This limitation shall apply only to taxes levied
against property so listed and assessed.
(Effective November 21, 1967)
§ 37-2 Levy for Special Purposes of Improvements and Equipment
   Without prejudice to the use of other funds from taxes or other sources
available for such purposes the Council may levy in any year not to exceed two-
tenths (2/10ths) of a mill outside of the total levy limited by Section
37-1 but within the ten mill limitation, for the purpose only of specific
public improvements and equipment having an estimated useful life of five years
or longer including but not limited to those for police and fire, City
hospital, recreational, and garbage and waste collection purposes. No such levy
shall be made unless it includes a levy for the purpose of the equipment of the
police and fire forces of the City in an amount not less than one-half of the
total of such levy.
(Effective March 29, 1940)
§ 37-3 Levies for Debt Service
   The Council shall annually levy a sufficient sum to pay the interest,
Sinking Fund and retirement charges on all bonds and notes of the City of
Cleveland lawfully issued, and the expenses incident to the management of the
Sinking Fund, which entire levy shall be outside of limitations provided in
this Charter, but subject to limitations imposed by general law, and placed
before and in preference to all other levies. Amounts certified under the laws
of the State as necessary for such purpose shall not be subject to change by
Council.
(Effective March 29, 1940)
§ 37-4 Submission of Extra Levy to Vote
   The Council may at any time subsequent to May 15th and prior to September
15th in any year, declare by resolution, adopted by a vote of two-thirds of all
the members elected thereto, that the amount of taxes which may be raised
within the limitation of Sections
37-1 and
37-2 of this Charter will be insufficient to provide an adequate amount for the
necessary requirements of the City for current operating expenses, and other
expenses payable from the General Fund of the City, and such permanent
improvements and equipment as shall have an estimated useful life of five years
or more and that it is necessary to levy taxes in excess of such limitations,
in addition to the levies authorized and limited by Sections
37-1,
37-2, and
37-3 of this Charter, for any Municipal purpose or purposes specified in such
resolution. Such resolution shall specify the additional sum which it is
necessary to levy, the purpose or purposes thereof, and the additional rate
estimated to be required therefor and the percentages of votes to be required.
Such resolution shall be effective upon its adoption and shall be certified
within five (5) days thereafter to the election authorities, who shall place
such question upon the ballot at the next succeeding November election. If a
majority of those voting thereon, unless a higher percentage be prescribed by
Council, vote for the approval of such additional levy the Council shall
immediately make such levy or such part thereof as it finds necessary pursuant
to such approval and certify the same to the County Auditor to be placed on the
tax list and collected as other taxes, but no such levy shall be made for more
than one year.
   The authority of the Council to submit additional levies to a vote of the
people under authority of the constitution or laws of this State shall not be
deemed impaired or abridged by reason of any provision in this Charter
contained.
(Effective March 29, 1940)
§ 37-5 Severability of Sections
   If any provision of Sections
37-1,
37-2,
37-3 and
37-4 of this Charter shall be held unconstitutional or invalid or
unenforceable, such unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable provision shall
be considered severable from the remainder of said section, although contained
in sections containing other provisions and shall be excluded from this
Charter; and the fact that said provision shall be held to be unconstitutional,
invalid or unenforceable shall in nowise affect any other provision of this
Charter, although contained in the same section. It is hereby declared that all
of Sections
37-1,
37-2,
37-3 and
37-4 of this Charter, or parts of sections, are independent sections and parts
of sections, and that the remaining sections and parts of sections, and each
provision thereof, would have been adopted by the electors notwithstanding the
unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability of any other portion
thereof.
(Effective November 7, 1989)
§ 38 Mayor’s Estimate
   The fiscal year of the City shall begin on the first day of January. On or
before the fifteenth day of November in each year the Mayor shall prepare an
estimate of the expense of conducting the affairs of the City for the following
year and shall submit the estimate to Council no later than February 1 of the
following year. This estimate shall be compiled from detailed information
obtained from the various departments on uniform blanks prepared by the
Director of Finance, and shall set forth:
   (a)   An itemized estimate of the expense of conducting each department.
   (b)   Comparisons of the estimates with the corresponding items of
expenditure for the last two complete fiscal years and with the expenditures of
the current fiscal year plus an estimate of expenditures necessary to complete
the current fiscal year.
   (c)   Reasons for proposed increases or decreases in the items of
expenditure compared with the current fiscal year.
   (d)   A separate schedule for each department showing the things necessary
for the department to do during the year and which of any desirable things it
ought to do if possible.
   (e)   Items of payroll increases as either additional pay to present
employees, or pay for more employees.
   (f)   A statement from the Director of Finance of the total probable income
of the City from taxes for the period covered by the Mayor’s estimate.
   (g)   An itemization of all anticipated revenue from sources other than the
tax levy.
   (h)   The amounts required for interest on the City’s debt, for sinking
funds and for maturing serial bonds.
   (i)   The total amount of outstanding City debt with a schedule of
maturities of bond issues.
   (j)   Any other information that may be required by the Council.
   The Mayor shall submit the estimate prepared as set forth in this section to
the Council and shall make it available electronically on a City website and
electronically or in print to citizens who may call for it. Copies of the
estimate shall also be made available in print or electronically to the
newspapers of the City, and to the public library and each of its branches.
(Effective November 5, 2019)
§ 39 Appropriation Ordinance
   Upon receipt of the Mayor's estimate the Council shall at once prepare an
appropriation ordinance, in the manner as may be provided by ordinance or
resolution, using the Mayor's estimate as a basis. Provisions shall be made for
public hearings upon the appropriation ordinance before a committee of the
Council or before the entire Council sitting as a committee of the whole.
Following the public hearings and before the third reading and final passage,
the appropriation ordinance shall be published in the City Record with a
separate schedule setting forth the items asked for in the Mayor's estimate
which were refused or changed by the Council, and the reasons for the change or
refusal. The Council shall not pass the appropriation ordinance until seven (7)
days after its publication nor before the first Monday in January. Upon passage
of the appropriation ordinance by the Council it shall be published in the
manner provided for other ordinances.
(Effective November 5, 2019)
§ 40 Preliminary Appropriations
   After the beginning of the fiscal year, and before the annual appropriation
ordinance has been passed, the Council may make appropriations for the current
expenses of the City, chargeable to the appropriations of the year when passed,
to an amount sufficient to cover the necessary expenses of the various
departments, divisions and offices until the annual appropriation ordinance is
in force. No other liabilities shall be incurred by any officer or employee of
the City, except in accordance with the provisions of the annual appropriation
ordinance.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 41 Transfer of Appropriations
   Upon the written recommendation of the Mayor, the Council may at any time
transfer an unencumbered balance of an appropriation made for the use of one
department, division or purpose to any other department, division or purpose,
but no such transfer of revenues or earnings of any non-tax supported public
utility to any other purpose shall be made, except that at the close of the
fiscal year transfers may be made of the earnings of the transit system or of
any utility hereafter acquired by the City not in excess of the amount which
said utility would pay in the form of taxes available for the General Fund and
debt service of the City of Cleveland if privately owned and subject to the
terms of any indenture of mortgage affecting the transit system or other
utility hereafter acquired. Any provision of this Charter notwithstanding,
nothing in this Charter shall be construed to prohibit the use, transfer, or
expenditure of tax revenues for the operations, improvements or debt service of
any City- owned public utility.
(Effective November 6, 1990)
§ 42 Current Revenue
   Any accruing revenue of the City, not appropriated as hereinbefore provided,
and any balances at any time remaining after the purposes of the appropriation
shall have been satisfied or abandoned may from time to time be appropriated by
the Council to such uses as will not conflict with any uses for which
specifically such revenue accrued.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 43 Limitation on Appropriations
   No moneys shall be drawn from the treasury of the City, nor shall any
obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred, except pursuant to
appropriations made by the Council; and whenever an appropriation is so made
the Clerk shall forthwith give notice to the Director of Finance. At the end of
each year all unexpended balances of appropriations shall revert to the
respective funds from which the same were appropriated and shall then be
subject to future appropriation; but appropriations may be made in furtherance
of improvements or other objects or work of the City which will not be
completed within the current year.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 44 Use of Appropriations
   Moneys appropriated as hereinbefore provided shall not be used for other
purposes than those designated in the appropriation ordinance without authority
from the Council. The Mayor and the Director of Finance shall supervise all
departmental expenditures, and shall keep such expenditures within the
appropriations.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 45 Alienation of Water Front Lands
   The Council may submit to the electors in the manner provided in Section
200 for the submission of proposed amendments to the Charter, the question of
the proposed alienation, surrender or release of any rights of the City of
Cleveland in or to the territory now covered by the waters of Lake Erie within
the territorial limits of the City of Cleveland, or formerly covered thereby
but now or hereafter filled. When approved by a majority of the electors voting
upon such proposition, the alienation, surrender or release of such rights
shall be done by proper instrument executed in the name of the City of
Cleveland by the Mayor; provided, however, that, except pursuant to the
referendum provisions of this Charter, no such proposition shall be required to
be submitted to the vote of the electors in the case of granting of leases or
franchises in or to said territory or any part thereof or in the event that
such territory or any part thereof is conveyed to, or otherwise made available
for use by, a port authority originally created jointly by the City and the
County of Cuyahoga under authority of the laws of Ohio.
   Any and all proceedings designed to carry into execution the provisions of
Ordinance No. 37904-A, approved by the electors on November 2, 1915, and
Ordinance No. 47814, adopted by the electors on January 6, 1919, or amendatory
of or supplementary to said ordinances are hereby expressly authorized,
ratified, approved and confirmed.
(Effective June 3, 1968)
§ 46 Investigations by Council or Mayor
   The Council, the Mayor, or any person or committee authorized by either of
them, shall have power to inquire into the conduct of any department, office,
officer or employee of the City and to make investigation as to City affairs,
and for that purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, and compel
testimony, the production of books, papers, and other evidence. It shall be the
duty of the Mayor to designate a police officer to serve such subpoenas. The
Council shall provide by ordinance the penalty or penalties for contempt in
refusing to obey any such subpoena, or to produce such books, papers or other
evidence, and shall have the power to punish any such contempt in the manner
provided by ordinance.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 47 Audit and Examination
   The Council shall cause a continuous audit to be made of the books of
account, records and transactions of the administrative departments of the
City. Such audit, during each fiscal year, shall be made by one or more
certified public accountants, who, for three years next preceding, have held a
certificate issued by the State Board of Accountancy of Ohio or by a state
maintaining an equal standard of professional requirements, which entitles the
holder of such certificate to an Ohio certificate. The duties of the auditor or
auditors, so appointed, shall include the certification of all statements
required under Section
95 of this Charter. Such statements shall include a general balance sheet,
exhibiting the assets and liabilities of the City, supported by departmental
schedules, and schedules for each utility publicly owned or operated; summaries
of income and expenditures, supported by detailed schedules, and also
comparisons, in proper classification, with the last previous year. The report
of such auditor or auditors for each fiscal year shall be printed and a copy
thereof furnished to the Ohio State Bureau of Inspection and Supervision of
Public Offices, to the Mayor, to each member of the Council and to each citizen
who may apply therefor; and a condensed summary thereof shall be published in
the City Record.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 48 Publication of Ordinances and Resolutions
   Every ordinance or resolution upon its final passage shall be recorded in a
book kept for that purpose and shall be authenticated by the signature of the
presiding officer and Clerk of the Council. Every ordinance or resolution shall
be published at least once in the City Record within ten (10) days after its
final passage.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
CHAPTER 7 – INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM
§
49   Ordinances by Initiative Petition
§
50   Signing Petition
§
51   Filing Petition
§
52   Amending Petition
§
53   Insufficiency of Petition
§
54   Submitting Proposed Ordinances
§
55   Action on Proposed Ordinance
§
56   Ordinance Form Certification after Council Action
§
57   Ordinance Certification and Submission for Vote
§
58   Repealing Ordinances
§
59   The Referendum
§
60   Petition for Referendum
§
61   Petition for Referendum Text
§
62   Initiative Ordinances Subject to Referendum
§ 49 Ordinances by Initiative Petition
   Any proposed ordinance may be submitted to the Council by petition signed by
at least five thousand (5,000) qualified electors of the City. All petition
papers, circulated with respect to any proposed ordinance, shall be uniform in
character and shall contain the proposed ordinance in full, and have printed
thereon the names and addresses of at least five electors of the City who shall
be officially regarded as filing the petition and shall constitute a committee
of the petitioners for the purposes hereinafter named.
(Effective November 8, 1994)
§ 50 Signing Petition
   Each signer of a petition shall sign his or her name in ink or indelible
pencil, and shall place on the petition paper after the signer’s name his or
her place of residence by street and number, or by other description sufficient
to identify the place, and give the date when the signature was made. The
signatures to any petition paper need not all be appended to one paper but on
each separate paper the circulator shall indicate the number of signatures
contained on the petition, and shall sign a statement made under penalty of
election falsification that the circulator witnesses the affixing of every
signature, that all signers were to the best of the circulator’s knowledge and
belief qualified to sign, and that every signature is to the best of the
circulator’s knowledge and belief the signature of the person whose name it
purports to be.
(Effective November 4, 2008)
§ 51 Filing Petition
   All papers comprising a petition shall be assembled and filed with the Clerk
of the Council as one instrument by no later than 4:00 p.m. on a regular
business day of the office of the Clerk. Within ten (10) days from the filing
of a petition the Clerk shall ascertain whether it is signed by the required
number of qualified electors. Upon the completion of the Clerk’s examination
the Clerk shall endorse upon the petition a certificate of the result thereof.
(Effective November 4, 2008)
§ 52 Amending Petition
   If the Clerk’s certificate shows that the petition is insufficient he shall
at once notify each member of the committee of the petitioners, hereinbefore
provided for, and the petition may be amended at any time within fifteen (15)
days from the date of the Clerk’s certificate of examination, by filing with
the Clerk an additional petition paper or papers in the same manner as provided
for the original petition.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 53 Insufficiency of Petition
   Upon the filing of such an amendment the Clerk shall, within ten (10) days
thereafter, examine the amended petition and attach thereto his certificate of
the result. If still insufficient, and if no amendment shall have been filed,
the Clerk shall file the petition in his offices and shall notify each member
of the committee of that fact. The final finding of the insufficiency of a
petition shall not prejudice the filing of a new petition for the same purpose.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 54 Submitting Proposed Ordinances
   When the certificate of the Clerk shows the petition to be sufficient, he
shall submit the proposed ordinance to the Council at its next regular meeting
and the Council shall at once read and refer the same to an appropriate
committee, which may be the committee of the whole. Provision shall be made for
public hearings upon the proposed ordinance before the committee to which it is
referred. Thereafter the committee shall report the proposed ordinance to the
Council, with its recommendations thereon, not later than sixty days after the
date on which the proposed ordinance was submitted to the Council by the Clerk.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 55 Action on Proposed Ordinance
   Upon receiving the proposed ordinance from the committee, the Council shall
at once proceed to consider it and shall take final action thereon within
thirty (30) days from the date of such committee report. If the Council rejects
the proposed ordinance, or passes it in a form different from that set forth in
the petition, the committee of the petitioners may require that it be submitted
to a vote of the electors of the City in its original form, or that it be
submitted to a vote of the electors of the City with any proposed change,
addition or amendment, which was presented in writing either at a public
hearing before the committee to which such proposed ordinance was referred, or
during the consideration thereof by the Council.
(Effective November 8, 1994)
§ 56 Ordinance Form Certification after Council Action
   When an ordinance proposed by petition is to be submitted to a vote of the
electors of the City the committee of the petitioners shall certify that fact
and the proposed ordinance, in the form in which it is to be submitted to the
Clerk of the Council within ten (10) days after the final action on such
proposed ordinance by the Council.
(Effective November 8, 1994)
§ 57 Ordinance Certification and Submission for Vote
   Upon receipt of the certificate and certified copy of the proposed
ordinance, the Clerk shall certify the fact to the Council at its next regular
meeting. If an election is to be held not more than six months nor less than
sixty (60) days after the receipt of the Clerks certificate by the Council, the
proposed ordinance shall then be submitted to a vote of the electors of the
City. If no election is to be held within the time aforesaid, the Council may
provide for submitting the proposed ordinance to the electors of the City at a
special election to be held not sooner than sixty days after the receipt of the
Clerk’s certificate. If a supplemental petition, signed by five thousand
(5,000) qualified electors, in addition to those who signed the original
petition, be filed with the Clerk asking that the proposed ordinance be
submitted to the voters at a time indicated in such petition, the Council shall
provide for a special election at the time. The sufficiency of any such
supplemental petition shall be determined, and it may be amended in the manner
provided for original petitions for proposing ordinances to the Council. If no
other provision be made as to the time of submitting a proposed ordinance to a
vote of the electors of the City, it shall be submitted at the next election.
(Effective November 4, 2008)
§ 58 Repealing Ordinances
   Proposed ordinances for repealing any existing ordinance or ordinances in
whole or in part may be submitted to the Council as provided in the preceding
sections for initiating ordinances. Initiated ordinances adopted by the
electors of the City shall be published and may be amended or repealed by the
Council as in the case of other ordinances.
(Effective November 8, 1994)
§ 59 The Referendum
   No ordinance passed by the Council, unless it be an emergency measure, shall
go into effect until thirty (30) days after its final passage by the Council.
If at any time within said thirty (30) days, a petition signed by electors
equal in number to ten percent (10%) of the total vote cast at the last
preceding regular Municipal election of the City be filed with the Clerk of the
Council requesting that the ordinance, or any specified part thereof, be
repealed or submitted to a vote of the electors, it shall not become operative
until the steps indicated herein have been taken. The petition shall be
prepared and filed in the manner and form prescribed in the foregoing sections
of this Charter for an initiative petition for an ordinance.
(Effective November 4, 2008)
§ 60 Petition for Referendum
   When such a petition is filed with the Clerk of the Council he shall
determine the sufficiency thereof in the manner provided in this Charter for an
initiative petition for an ordinance. If the petition be found sufficient, or
be rendered sufficient by amendment as provided in Sections
52,
53 and
54 hereof, the Clerk shall certify that fact to the Council, which shall
proceed to reconsider the ordinance. If, upon such reconsideration, the
ordinance be not entirely repealed the Council shall provide for submitting it
to a vote of the electors of the City, and in so doing the Council shall be
governed by the provisions of Sections
57 and
66 hereof respecting the time of submission and manner of voting on ordinances
proposed to the Council by petition.
(Effective November 8, 1994)
§ 61 Petition for Referendum Text
   Referendum petitions need not contain the text of the ordinances, the repeal
of which is sought but they shall be subject in all other respects to the
requirements for petitions submitting proposed ordinances to the Council.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 62 Initiative Ordinances Subject to Referendum
   Ordinances submitted to the Council, by initiative petition and passed by
the Council without change, or passed in an amended form and not required to be
submitted to a vote of the electors of the City by the committee of the
petitioners, shall be subject to the referendum in the same manner as other
ordinances.
(Effective November 8, 1994)
CHAPTER 9 – CONFLICTING ORDINANCES
§
63   Greatest Election Vote to Prevail
§
64   Referendum on Emergency Measures
§
65   Preliminary Action Valid Prior to Referendum
§
66   Form of Ballots; Election Results
§ 63 Greatest Election Vote to Prevail
   If the provisions of two or more ordinances adopted or approved at the same
election conflict, the ordinance receiving the highest affirmative vote shall
prevail and the other or others shall be of no effect.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 64 Referendum on Emergency Measures
   Ordinances passed as emergency measures for the immediate preservation of
the public peace, property, health, or safety and providing for the refinancing
of bonds, notes or other securities of the City shall not be subject to
referendum. Otherwise, emergency measures shall be subject to referendum in
like manner as other ordinances, except that they shall go into effect at the
time indicated in the ordinances. If, when submitted to a vote of the electors
of the City, an emergency measure be not approved by a majority of those voting
thereon, it shall be considered repealed as regards any further action
thereunder; but the measure so repealed shall be deemed sufficient authority
for payment in accordance with the ordinance, of any expense incurred previous
to the referendum vote thereon.
(Effective November 4, 2008)
§ 65 Preliminary Action Valid Prior to Referendum
   In case a petition be filed requiring that a measure passed by the Council
providing for an expenditure of money, a bond issue, or a public improvement be
submitted to vote of the electors of the City all steps preliminary to such
actual expenditure, actual issuance of bonds, or actual execution of a contract
for such improvement, may be taken prior to the election.
(Effective November 8, 1994)
§ 66 Form of Ballots; Election Results
   Ordinances, or parts thereof, submitted to vote of the electors in
accordance with the initiative and referendum provisions of this Charter shall
be submitted by ballot title. There shall appear upon the official ballot a
ballot title, which may be distinct from the legal title of the proposed or
referred ordinances, and which shall be a clear, concise statement, without
argument or prejudice, descriptive of the substance of the ordinance, or part
thereof. The ballot title shall be prepared by the committee of petitioners if
for an initiated ordinance, and in all other cases by the Director of Law. The
ballots used in voting upon the ordinance, or part thereof, shall have below
the ballot title thereof the two following propositions, one above the other,
in the order indicated: “For the ordinance” and “Against the ordinance.” The
elector of the City shall record the elector’s vote for or against the
ordinance or part of an ordinance, if part only of an ordinance is submitted in
the manner prescribed by general law. Any number of ordinances or parts
thereof, may be voted upon at the same election and may be submitted on the
same ballot, but the ballot used for voting thereon shall be for that purpose
only. If a majority of the electors of the City voting on any ordinance,
submitted in accordance with the initiative provisions of this Charter, shall
vote in favor thereof, it shall thereupon become an ordinance of the City. If
an ordinance or part of an ordinance, submitted in accordance with the
referendum provisions of this Charter, be not approved by a majority of those
voting thereon, it shall be deemed repealed.
(Effective November 4, 2008)
CHAPTER 11 – THE EXECUTIVE
§
67   Executive and Administrative Powers
§
68   Term and Qualifications of Mayor
§
69   Salary of Mayor
§
70   Mayor’s Appointing Power
§
71   General Powers and Duties of Mayor
§
72   Mayor’s Right in Council
§
73   Vacancy in Office of Mayor; Acting Mayor
§
74   Residency Requirements; Officers and Employees
§
74-1   Residency Preference Points for Promotional Examinations
§
75   City Record
§
76   City Planning Commission
§
76-1   Directors and Staff
§
76-2   Powers and Duties of Commission
§
76-3   Mandatory Referral
§
76-4   Co-ordinating Board and Advisory Committee
§
76-5   Zoning Ordinances
§
76-6   Board of Zoning Appeals; Board of Building Standards and Building
Appeals
§
76-7   Port and Harbor Commission
§
76-8   Department of Port Control
§ 67 Executive and Administrative Powers
   The executive and administrative powers of the City shall be vested in the
Mayor, directors of departments and other administrative offices provided for
in this Charter or by ordinance.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 68 Term and Qualifications of Mayor
   The Mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the City. Except as
otherwise in this Charter provided, he shall be elected for a term of four
years, assume office on the first Monday in January next after his election,
and serve until his successor is elected and qualified. The Mayor holding
office when this amendment is adopted shall continue to hold such office until
the day next preceding the first Monday in January of the year 1982 and shall
serve until his successor is elected and qualified.
   The Mayor shall be an elector of the City and shall not hold any other
public office or employment, except that of notary public or member of the
State Militia, and shall not be interested in the profits or emoluments of any
contract job, work or service for the Municipality.
(Effective November 4, 1980)
§ 69 Salary of Mayor
   The salary of the Mayor shall be fixed by Council in an amount per annum
payable in twelve equal monthly installments.
(Effective October 20, 1953)
§ 70 Mayor’s Appointing Power
   The Mayor shall have power to appoint and remove directors of all
departments and officers and members of commissions not included within regular
departments. Officers appointed by the Mayor shall serve until removed by him
or until their successors are appointed and have qualified.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 71 General Powers and Duties of Mayor
   It shall be the duty of the Mayor to act as chief conservator of the peace
within the City; to supervise the administration of the affairs of the City; to
see that all ordinances of the City are enforced; to recommend to the Council
for adoption such measures as he may deem necessary or expedient; to keep the
Council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the City; to
prepare and submit to the Council such reports as may be required by that body,
and to exercise such powers and perform such duties as are conferred or
required by this Charter or by the laws of the State.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 72 Mayor’s Right in Council
   The Mayor and the directors of all departments established by the Charter,
or that may hereafter be established by ordinance, shall be entitled to seats
in the Council. Neither the Mayor nor the director of any department shall have
a vote in the Council, but the Mayor shall have the right to introduce
ordinances and to take part in the discussion of all matters coming before the
Council; and the directors of departments shall be entitled to take part in all
discussions in the Council relating to their respective departments. The
Council by ordinance or resolution may authorize other City officials to have
seats in Council.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 73 Vacancy in Office of Mayor; Acting Mayor
   If the office of Mayor is vacant by reason of non- election, death,
resignation, removal from office in any way except by recall election, removal
of residence from the City, or from any other cause whatsoever, and such
vacancy occurs more than one year before the next regular municipal election to
be held for the office of Mayor, such vacancy shall be filled by special
municipal elections. The aforesaid special municipal elections shall be held on
the first Tuesday after sixty days from the day on which the vacancy first
occurs, at which time the nonpartisan primary election shall be held, and on
the fifth Tuesday following the said nonpartisan primary election, at which
time the final special municipal election shall be held, and all the provisions
in this Charter contained as to nomination and election of candidates for Mayor
at regular municipal elections shall apply to the said special municipal
elections. The person so elected as Mayor at the said special municipal
elections shall assume the office immediately upon his election and
qualification and shall serve until his successor is elected and qualified.
During the existence of such vacancy in the office of Mayor, pending the time
the said vacancy is filled by special municipal elections, the duties of the
office of Mayor shall be discharged by the head of one of the departments
provided for in this Charter under the title of Acting Mayor; provided,
however, that if the vacancy occurs at a time when special municipal elections
are not authorized in this section, then the said head of one of the
departments shall succeed to the office of the Mayor and be Mayor until his
successor is elected and qualified. In either of the above cases the order of
succession as Acting Mayor or as Mayor shall be as follows: Director of Law,
Director of Finance and Director of Public Utilities.
   If the Mayor, or the person performing the duties of Mayor under the title
Acting Mayor be temporarily absent from the City, or becomes temporarily
disabled from any cause, his duties shall be performed during such absence or
disability by the head of one of the aforesaid departments in the above order,
and under the title of Acting Mayor.
(Effective November 4, 1980)
§ 74 Residency Requirements; Officers and Employees
   (a)   Except as in this Charter otherwise provided or except as otherwise
provided by a majority vote of the Council of the City of Cleveland, every
temporary or regular officer or employee of the City of Cleveland, including
members of all City boards and commissions established by the Charter or the
ordinances of Cleveland, whether in the classified or unclassified service of
the City of Cleveland, appointed after the effective date of this amendment,
shall, at the time of his appointment, or within six months thereafter, be or
become a bona fide resident of the City of Cleveland, and shall remain as such
during his term of office or while employed by the City of Cleveland.
   (b)   No person shall, in any way, falsify or misstate verbally or in
writing any application, paper, document or form, which relates to his
employment with the City, that he is a resident of the City of Cleveland, when
in fact he is not a bona fide resident of the City of Cleveland. Any officer or
employee of the City of Cleveland who is found to have supplied or furnished
such false or misleading information concerning his true residence or who fails
to become a resident as herein required, or who, being a resident or having
become a resident of the City, subsequently establishes a residence outside of
the City, shall, after hearing, according to law, be discharged from service
with the City.
   (c)   A person who is a bona fide resident of the City of Cleveland for at
least one year and desires to take an entrance level civil service examination,
as determined by the Civil Service Commission, at the time of filing his or her
application for examination, shall, if a passing grade is attained, as
determined by the civil service bulletin for such examination, have added to
his or her raw score ten (10) points.
   Notwithstanding anything in this Charter to the contrary, every veteran who
has served in the United States Armed Forces for a period of 180 consecutive
days, if he has received an honorable discharge or separation or a general
discharge under honorable conditions, shall receive an additional five (5)
points added to his raw score. The Civil Service Commission may grant
additional veterans preference points for servicemen having a service-connected
disability not to exceed ten (10) points.
   (d)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any officer or
employee on the payroll of the City of Cleveland on the effective date of this
section.
(Effective November 29, 1982; division (c) amended by the electors November 2,
1999)
§ 74-1 Residency Preference Points for Promotional Examinations
   A person who is a bona fide resident of the City of Cleveland for at least
one year from the date of filing of an application for a promotional civil
service examination, who receives a passing grade on that promotional
examination, shall have added to his or her raw score five (5) points.
(Effective March 6, 2012)
§ 75 City Record
   The City shall publish weekly a City Record which shall contain the
transactions and proceedings of the Council, the legal advertising of the City
and such other information relating to the affairs of the City as shall be
determined by ordinance. The City Record shall be published, distributed and
sold in such manner and on such terms as the Council may determine. No
unofficial advertisements shall be published in the City Record.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 76 City Planning Commission
   There shall be a City Planning Commission composed of seven (7) members. One
shall be a member of the Council of the City of Cleveland chosen by each
Council to serve during the term of such Council, and six members shall be
appointed by the Mayor, with the approval of Council, and may be removed by the
Mayor. Two alternate members shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the approval
of Council, and may be removed by the Mayor. The alternate members may serve in
place of a non-Council member of the City Planning Commission who is unable to
act or is self-disqualified because of personal interest, and shall then have
all the powers of the member and shall receive compensation for services as
determined by the Council. In the event of the absence of the one Council
member of the City Planning Commission, the Council President may appoint
another Council member to serve as a member pro tempore for purposes of that
City Planning Commission meeting. The term of the members, other than Council
members, shall be six (6) years, except that of the initial appointments of the
non-alternate members, the terms of two members shall be two (2) years, and the
terms of two members shall be four (4) years. Vacancies in the Commission shall
be filled in the same manner for the unexpired term. The Chairman of the
Commission shall be appointed annually by the Mayor from the members and may be
removed as Chairman at the Mayor’s pleasure.
(Effective November 3, 2009)
§ 76-1 Directors and Staff
   There shall be a Planning Director who shall be nominated by the Commission
and appointed by the Mayor at his discretion. He shall be ex-officio Secretary
of the City Planning Commission and shall serve until removed by the Mayor with
the concurrence of a majority of the Commission. Upon nomination of the
Planning Director the Commission shall appoint as its staff such technical and
office personnel and assistants as it may deem necessary within the
appropriation made available for such purpose. All such appointments, except
the Planning Director and his secretary, shall be made in conformity with the
civil service provisions of this Charter. Under the direction of the Commission
the Director shall supervise and control the planning staff.
(Effective November 3, 1942)
§ 76-2 Powers and Duties of Commission
   It shall be the function and duty of the Planning Commission to make and
adopt a general plan for the development and improvement of the City, and for
any area outside of the City which in the judgment of the Commission bears
relation to the planning of the City. No general plan or portions thereof or
amendments thereto shall be adopted by the Commission until after a public
hearing thereon. So much of the general plan as may be established or from time
to time amended by ordinance of Council shall constitute the official map of
the City of Cleveland. The Commission shall also make plans and proposals for
specific improvements and projects which it deems desirable for the City and
its surrounding area and recommend them to the appropriate authority. These
plans and proposals shall not become a part of the general plan until adopted
as such. The Commission shall have authority to call upon officers and
employees of other departments and divisions of the City of Cleveland for
assistance in City planning. On or before the 1st day of June in each year the
Commission shall recommend to the Mayor a capital improvement budget for the
following year and a comprehensive five-year capital improvement program. It
shall be the duty of the Commission to take the initiative in planning for the
City and surrounding area and it shall have full power to publish and
distribute at public expense copies of plans or reports and to promote public
interest in and understanding of general plans and of other recommendations or
proposals. It shall have authority to make such investigations, maps and
studies relating to the planning of the community as it may deem desirable. The
Planning Commission may recommend to the appropriate public authorities or
private agencies programs for the development and improvement of the community,
for the enactment of legislation pertaining thereto, for the building of public
structures and improvements and for the financing thereof. The Commission may
enter into agreement with other governmental or private agencies necessary or
desirable for carrying forward any of its purposes subject to the approval of
Council.
(Effective November 3, 1942)
§ 76-3 Mandatory Referral
   All ordinances or resolutions of Council, or acts or orders of any
administrative official or agency of the City of Cleveland which affect the
City plan or concern the plan, design, character, extent, location or use of
any public improvement or public property or change thereof, or concern zoning
or other regulations affecting or controlling the use or development of land or
otherwise come within the functions of the Planning Commission as set forth in
Section
76-1, before adoption and before they shall become legal or binding upon the
City, shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for report and
recommendation. Any matter so referred to the Planning Commission shall be
acted upon by the Planning Commission within thirty (30) days from the date of
referral, unless a longer time be allowed by Council. If the Commission shall
fail to act within the time aforesaid, it shall be deemed to have approved such
matter. Any provision of any ordinance, resolution or order disapproved by
formal action of the Planning Commission shall require a two-thirds vote of all
the members of Council for adoption of authorization. If any plan, design, or
other proposal concerns the character, extent, location or use of any public
improvement or public property or change thereof within the territorial limits
of the City of Cleveland but does not under the law or Charter provision
governing the same fall within the province of the Council or other official
agency of the City of Cleveland, then the submission to the Planning Commission
shall be by the State, County, district, school, township or other official,
board, commission or body having jurisdiction over such public improvement or
property, in accordance with the provisions of the general law of the State of
Ohio; and the City Planning Commission’s disapproval may be overruled not
earlier than one week after communicating to the Commission the reasons
therefor, by such official, or by such board, commission or body by a vote of
not less than two-thirds of its membership.
(Effective November 3, 1942)
§ 76-4 Co-ordinating Board and Advisory Committee
   There shall be a Co-ordinating Board composed of the Mayor, the directors of
the various City departments and representatives of such other public agencies
as the Commission shall invite, and an Advisory Committee appointed by the
Mayor on the recommendation of the Commission, which shall advise with the
Commission on matters pertaining to the planning and development of the
community.
(Effective November 3, 1942)
§ 76-5 Zoning Ordinances
   The Council shall by ordinance provide regulations and restrictions
governing the height, number of stories and size of buildings and other
structures, the percentage of lot that may be occupied, the density of
population, the size of yards, courts and open spaces, and the location and use
of buildings, structures and land for trade, industry, residence and other
purposes, and such other matters pertinent thereto as may be competent for this
Charter to authorize.
(Effective November 3, 1942)
§ 76-6 Board of Zoning Appeals; Board of Building Standards and Building
Appeals
   Within 30 days after this section becomes effective, there shall be
established a Board of Zoning Appeals which shall be constituted and shall have
jurisdiction as hereinafter provided. The members of the then existing Board of
Appeals shall remain in office as the Board of Zoning Appeals for the terms for
which such members were appointed, subject to the terms and conditions as to
tenure of office set forth in the Charter at the time of their appointment, and
shall retain jurisdiction of and dispose of all matters then pending before the
Board of Appeals.
   Within 30 days after this section becomes effective, there shall be
established a Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals which shall be
constituted and shall have jurisdiction as hereinafter provided.
   (a)   Board of Zoning Appeals. There shall be a Board of Zoning Appeals
composed of five (5) members appointed by the Mayor. The members of the Board
shall be appointed for a term of five years each. The Mayor may remove any
member for cause and vacancies shall be filled in the same manner for the
unexpired term. The Chairman of the Board shall be appointed annually by the
Mayor. Members of the Board shall receive such compensation as is fixed by
Council.
   Separate provision shall be made in the budget for the expenditures of the
Board and such expenditures shall not be included within the budget provided
for the Planning Commission. The planning staff shall furnish the necessary
technical advice and services required by the Board.
   (b)   Jurisdiction of Board of Zoning Appeals. It shall be the duty of the
Board of Zoning Appeals to hear and decide appeals made for exceptions to and
variations in the application of ordinances governing zoning in the City of
Cleveland in conformity with the purpose and intent thereof, and to hear and
decide all appeals made for exceptions to and variations in the application of
ordinances, or orders or regulations of administrative officials or agencies;
except such as are within the jurisdiction of the Board of Building Standards
and Building Appeals.
   (c)   Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals. There shall be a
Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals which shall consist of five
(5) members to be appointed by the Mayor for original terms of one, two, three,
four, and five years respectively, and thereafter for terms of five years each.
One of the members shall be a registered architect who shall have had at least
ten years’ experience as an architect; one shall be a registered professional
engineer who shall have had at least ten years’ experience as an engineer
engaged in the design of structural work in buildings; one shall be a
registered professional engineer who shall have had at least ten years’
experience as an engineer engaged in the design of mechanical equipment for
buildings; one shall be a builder who shall have had at least ten years’
experience in the construction, erection and alteration of buildings; and one
shall be a member of organized labor representing the building trades who shall
have had at least ten years’ experience in the supervision of the construction,
erection and alteration of buildings. Each year the Mayor shall designate one
of the members of the Board as Chairman of the Board for the calendar year.
   Vacancies shall be filled for an unexpired term in the manner in which the
original appointments are required to be made.
   Each member shall receive compensation for each day of services performed in
the amount set by the Council and based upon the accepted rate prevailing at
the time of appointment, which compensation per diem shall not be reduced or
increased during the term of appointment. Members shall attend the hearings and
executive sessions of the Board, and shall perform such other duties as may be
required by the Chairman; provided that an alternate may serve in place of a
member, as hereinafter set forth.
   There shall be an alternate for each member of the Board appointed in the
manner prescribed for members; such alternate may serve in place of the member
of corresponding qualifications whenever such member is unable to act or is
self-disqualified because of personal interest, and shall then have all the
powers of such member and shall receive compensation for services in the same
manner as provided for such member.
   Separate provisions shall be made in the budget for the expenditures of the
Board and such expenditures shall not be included in the budget for any other
City department or agency.
   The Board shall be provided with office space and all necessary office
equipment, and a hearing room, and such technical, clerical or stenographic
assistance as will be required for the proper performance of its duties.
   Any member and any alternate may be removed by the Mayor on proof of
official misconduct, or of negligence in official duties, or of conduct in any
manner connected with his official duties which tends to discredit his office,
or of mental or physical disability to perform his duties; but before removal
he shall receive a copy of the charges, and shall be entitled to a hearing
before the Mayor in person or by counsel, and the action of the Mayor shall be
final.
   (d)   Jurisdiction of the Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals.
The Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals shall have the power:
   To approve or disapprove materials, types of construction, appliances,
devices or appurtenances proposed for use pursuant to the Building Code of the
City of Cleveland.
   To make, amend, and repeal rules and regulations for carrying into effect
all provisions of the Building Code other than those relating to zoning and to
include in such rules and regulations provisions applying to specific
conditions and prescribing means and methods of practice to effectuate such
provisions.
   To hear and decide appeals from, and to review upon motion of any member of
the Board, any order, requirement, decision or determination of the
Commissioner of Building and Housing, or of any other administrative official
or agency of the City, relating to the location, design, materials,
construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use or occupancy, maintenance,
removal or demolition, of any building or other structure, or any appurtenance
connected or attached to such buildings or structures, regulated by the
Building Code of the City of Cleveland, and any rule or regulation or amendment
or repeals thereof made by said officials or agencies under the authority
conferred upon them by the Building Code of the City of Cleveland, by reversing
or affirming in whole or in part, or modifying such order, requirement,
decision or determination, or rule, regulation, amendment or repeals thereof as
in its opinion ought to be made in the premises, and to that end shall have the
power of the officer or agency relative to whose ruling the action is taken;
except that matters relating to zoning shall not come within the province or
jurisdiction of this Board. In taking such action, the Board of Building
Standards and Building Appeals may vary or modify the application of any
provision of the Building Code except provisions relating to zoning, to any
particular case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest
injustice, impose unnecessary hardship, or would be contrary to the intent and
purpose of the Building Code, or public interest.
   To review, upon the motion of any member of the Board, any rule, regulation
or decision of the Board; but no such review shall prejudice the rights of any
person who has in good faith acted thereon before it is reversed or modified.
   To exercise with respect to buildings situated in the City of Cleveland the
same powers as are exercised by the Board of Building Standards under the laws
of the State of Ohio to the extent that it is competent for this Charter so to
authorize the Board.
   To formulate and submit to the City Council, changes in and amendments to
the Building Code which the Board determines as desirable for the proper
regulation of buildings and structures and the equipment thereof and
appurtenances thereto in the City of Cleveland.
   To establish rules and regulations for its own procedure not inconsistent
with this section.
(Effective November 21, 1967)
§ 76-7 Port and Harbor Commission
   The Council may create a Port and Harbor Commission with such powers,
functions and duties with regard to the development and administration of a
harbor of the City of Cleveland, and warehouse and transportation facilities in
connection therewith, not inconsistent with the powers, functions and duties
vested in the City Planning Commission, as the Council may from time to time,
by ordinance prescribe.
(Effective November 3, 1942)
§ 76-8 Department of Port Control
   The administration and control of the activities in and about the harbor and
airplane landing fields of the City of Cleveland shall be vested in the
Department of Port Control unless and to the extent that such facilities are
conveyed to, or otherwise made available for use by, a port authority
originally created jointly by the City and the County of Cuyahoga under
authority of the laws of Ohio. No such facilities shall be conveyed to, or
otherwise made available for use by, such a port authority except upon such
terms and conditions as shall be approved by ordinance of the Council,
including such consideration as the Council shall determine therein to be
adequate. The Council shall have the authority to abolish the Department of
Port Control and the office of the Director of Port Control as and when and for
so long as all of the functions and duties of such Department and office are
assumed and discharged by such port authority.
   Subject to the foregoing provisions of this section, the Director of Port
Control, through the appropriate divisions of the Department of Port Control,
shall have charge of the administration and control of the harbor of the City
of Cleveland and the docks, wharves, warehouse and transportation facilities in
connection therewith, and of the management of the Municipally owned airport
facilities of the City of Cleveland; and he shall perform such other duties
consistent therewith as Council by ordinance may require.
(Effective June 3, 1968)
CHAPTER 13 – DEPARTMENTS AND DIVISIONS
§
77   Establishment and Discontinuance of Departments and Offices
§
78   Directors
§
79   Departmental Divisions
§
80   Board of Control
§
81   Advisory Boards
§
82   Reports
§ 77 Establishment and Discontinuance of Departments and Offices
   There shall be a Department of Law, a Department of Finance, a Department of
Public Utilities, and such other departments and offices as may be established
by ordinance, with the concurrence of the Board of Control. The Council may by
ordinance, with the concurrence of the Board of Control, discontinue any
department or office established by ordinance, and may prescribe, combine,
distribute or abolish the functions and duties of departments and offices; but,
except as otherwise provided in this Charter, no function or duty assigned by
this Charter to a particular department or office shall be abolished or
assigned to any other department or office. Departments and offices existing at
the time of the adoption of this section, and not specifically mentioned
therein, shall continue as though established thereby but subject to alteration
or discontinuance by ordinance in the manner provided herein.
(Effective June 3, 1968)
§ 78 Directors
   A director for each department shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall
serve until removed by the Mayor or until his successor is appointed and has
qualified. The director of each department shall have the supervision and
control of the department. He shall have power to prescribe rules and
regulations, not inconsistent with this Charter, for the conduct of the
officers and employees of his department; for the distribution and performance
of its business; and for the custody and preservation of the books, records,
papers and property under its control.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 79 Departmental Divisions
   The work of the several departments shall be distributed among such
divisions thereof as are established by this Charter or as may be established
by the Council by ordinance, with the concurrence of the Board of Control.
There shall be a commissioner or chief in charge of each division who shall be
appointed, and may be removed by the director of the department in conformity
with the civil service provisions of this Charter. Each commissioner shall,
with the approval of the director of his department, appoint all officers and
employees in his division and have supervision and control of its affairs.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 80 Board of Control
   The Mayor and the directors of the several departments, whether established
by this Charter or by ordinance, shall constitute a Board of Control. The Mayor
shall be ex-officio President of the Board. The vote of a majority of all
members of the Board shall be necessary to the adoption of any question, motion
or order. All votes shall be by “yeas” and “nays” and entered on the record.
All meetings of the Board shall be public, a record of its proceedings shall be
kept, and an abstract of its proceedings shall be printed in the City Record.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 81 Advisory Boards
   The director of a department, with the approval of the Mayor, may appoint a
board composed of citizens qualified to act in an advisory capacity to the
commission of any division under his supervision. The members of any such board
shall serve without compensation and their duty shall be to consult and advise
with the commissioner, but not to direct his conduct of the division. Any
recommendations of such board shall be in writing and become a part of the
records of the department. Stated public meetings of such board shall be called
by the commissioner for the consideration of the affairs of the division. The
commissioner of the division shall be chairman of such meetings.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 82 Reports
   The director of each department shall annually, on such date as may be fixed
by the Council, render to the Mayor a full report of the transactions of his
department for the year, and shall furnish to the Council or Mayor at any time,
such information relating to his department as either may require.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
CHAPTER 15 – DEPARTMENT OF LAW
§
83   Director of Law; Qualifications and Duties
§
84   Director as Prosecuting Attorney
§
85   Suits Affecting City
§
86   Legal Opinions
§
87   Application for Injunction
§
88   City Contracts and Easements
§
89   Mandamus
§
90   Taxpayer’s Suit
§
91   Time Limitation to Bring Action
§
92   Hearing, Judgment and Costs
§
93   Director as City Solicitor
§ 83 Director of Law; Qualifications and Duties
   The Director of Law shall be an attorney at law admitted to practice in the
State of Ohio. He shall be the legal advisor of and attorney and counsel for
the City, and for all officers and departments thereof in matters relating to
their official duties. He shall prosecute or defend all suits for and in behalf
of the City, and shall prepare all contracts, bonds and other instruments in
writing in which the City is concerned and shall endorse on each his approval
of the form and correctness thereof. No such bond, contract or instrument shall
become effective without such endorsement by the Director of Law thereon.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 84 Director as Prosecuting Attorney
   The Director of Law shall be the Prosecuting Attorney of the Municipal
Court. He may designate such number of assistant prosecutors as the Council by
ordinance may authorize. He shall prosecute all cases brought before such Court
and perform the same duties, so far as they are applicable thereto, as are
required of the Prosecuting Attorney of the County.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 85 Suits Affecting City
   When required to do so by resolution of the Council, the Director of Law
shall prosecute or defend for and in behalf of the City, all complaints, suits
and controversies in which the City is a party, and such other suits, matters
and controversies as he shall, by resolution or ordinance, be directed to
prosecute or defend.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 86 Legal Opinions
   The Council, the director of any department, or any officer or commission
not included within a department, may require the opinion of the Director of
Law upon any question of law involving their respective powers or duties.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 87 Application for Injunction
   The Director of Law shall apply, in the name of the City, to a court of
competent jurisdiction for an order of injunction to restrain the
misapplication of funds of the City, or the abuse of its corporate powers, or
the execution or performance of any contract made in behalf of the City in
contravention of law, or which was procured by fraud or corruption.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 88 City Contracts and Easements
   When an obligation or contract made on behalf of the City, granting a right
or easement, or creating a public duty, is being evaded or violated, the
Director of Law shall likewise apply for the forfeiture or the specific
performance thereof as the nature of the case requires.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 89 Mandamus
   In case any officer or commission fails to perform any duty required by law,
the Director of Law shall apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for a writ
of mandamus to compel the performance of such duty.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 90 Taxpayer’s Suit
   In case the Director of Law, upon written request of any taxpayer of the
City, fails to make any application provided for in the preceding three
sections, such taxpayer may institute suit or proceedings for such purpose in
his own name on behalf of the City. No such suit or proceeding shall be
entertained by any court until such request to the Director of Law shall first
have been made, nor until the taxpayer shall have given security for the costs
of the proceedings.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 91 Time Limitation to Bring Action
   No such action to enjoin the performance of a contract entered into, or the
payment of any bonds or notes issued by the City, shall be brought or
maintained unless commenced within one year from the date of such contract,
bonds or notes.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 92 Hearing, Judgment and Costs
   If the court hearing any such action be satisfied that the taxpayer had good
cause to believe his allegations were well founded, or that they are sufficient
in law, it shall make such order as the equity and justice of the case demand.
In such case the taxpayer shall be allowed his costs, and if judgment be
finally entered in his favor, he may be allowed as part of the costs a
reasonable compensation for his attorney.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 93 Director as City Solicitor
   In addition to the duties imposed upon the Director of Law by this Charter
or required of him by ordinance, he shall perform the duties which are imposed
upon City solicitors by the general law of the State, beyond the competence of
this Charter to alter or require.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
CHAPTER 17 – DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE
§
94   Director of Finance
§
95   Accounting Procedure
§
96   Monthly Financial Statement
§
97   Commissioner of Accounts
§
98   Special Audits
§
99   Division of Treasury
§
100   Duties
§
101   Division of Purchases and Supplies
§
102   Governing Regulations
§
103   Division of Assessments and Licenses
§
104   Accounts of Appropriations
§
105   Payment of Claims
§
106   Contracts Certified
§
107   Earmarked Funds
§
108   Authorization of Contracts
§
109   When Contracts Void
§
110   Sinking Fund
§
110-1   Civil Defense Expenditures
§ 94 Director of Finance
   The Director of Finance shall have charge of the Department of Finance and
the administration of the financial affairs of the City, including the keeping
and supervision of all accounts; the custody and disbursement of City funds and
moneys; the making and collection of special assessments; the issuance of
licenses; the collection of license fees; the control over expenditures; the
purchase, storage and distribution of supplies needed by the City; and such
other duties as the Council may by ordinance require.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 95 Accounting Procedure
   Accounts shall be kept by the Department of Finance showing the financial
transactions of all departments and offices of the City. The form of all such
accounts and the financial reports rendered to or by the Department of Finance,
shall be described by the Director of Finance. The accounts and the accounting
procedure of the City shall be adequate to record all cash receipts and
disbursements, all revenues accrued and liabilities incurred, and all
transactions affecting the acquisition, custody and disposition of values and
for making such reports of the financial transactions and conditions of the
City as may be required by law or ordinance.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 96 Monthly Financial Statement
   The Director of Finance shall prepare for submission to the Council at its
second meeting in each month a summary statement of revenues and expenses for
the preceding month, detailed as to appropriations and funds in such manner as
to show the exact financial condition of the City and of each department,
division and office thereof as of the last day of such month. Financial reports
shall also be prepared for each quarter and fiscal year and for such other
periods as may be required by the Council.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 97 Commissioner of Accounts
   There shall be in the Department of Finance a Division of Accounts at the
head of which there shall be a Commissioner of Accounts. The Commissioner of
Accounts shall be the chief accounting officer of the City. He shall, under the
supervision of the Director of Finance, install and maintain accounting
procedures in conformity with Section
95 of this Charter. He shall appoint all bookkeepers and other employees
charged with keeping books of financial account in all departments and offices
of the City; and, whenever practicable, such books and accounts shall be kept
in his office. He shall require that daily report be made to him by each
department and office showing the receipt of all moneys and the disposition
thereof.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 98 Special Audits
   Upon the death, resignation, removal or expiration of the term of any
officer of the City, the Commissioner of Accounts shall cause an audit and
investigation of the accounts of such officer to be made and shall report to
the Mayor. In case of death, resignation or removal of the Commissioner of
Accounts, the Mayor shall cause an audit to be made of his accounts. If, as a
result of any such audit, an officer be found indebted to the City, the
Commissioner of Accounts, or other person making such audit, shall immediately
give notice thereof to the Mayor and the Director of Law and the latter shall
forthwith proceed to collect such indebtedness.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 99 Division of Treasury
   There shall be in the Department of Finance a Division of the Treasury which
shall be in charge of the City Treasurer, who shall be the custodian of all
public money of the city and all other public money coming into his hands as
City Treasurer. The City Treasurer shall keep and preserve such moneys in the
place or places determined by ordinance or by the provisions of any law
applicable thereto.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 100 Duties
   Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the City Treasurer shall,
under the supervision of the Director of Finance, collect, receive and disburse
all public money of the City upon warrant issued by the Commissioner of
Accounts; and he shall also receive and disburse all other public money, coming
into his hands as City Treasurer, in pursuance of such regulations as may be
prescribed by the authorities having lawful control over such funds.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 101 Division of Purchases and Supplies
   There shall be in the Department of Finance a Division of Purchases and
Supplies. The Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies shall make all purchases
for the City in the manner provided by ordinance, and shall, under such
regulations as may be provided by ordinance and by direction of the Board of
Control, sell all property, real and personal, of the City not needed for
public use or that may have become unsuitable for use or that may have been
condemned as useless by the director of a department. He shall have charge of
such store rooms and warehouses of the City as the Council may by ordinance
provide.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 102 Governing Regulations
   The Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies shall sell any City-owned
property under such rules and regulations as the Council shall establish;
provided, however, that before making any purchase, said Commissioner shall
give opportunity for competition under such rules and regulations as the
Council shall establish. Supplies required by any department may be furnished
upon requisition from the stores under the control of the Commissioner of
Purchases and Supplies, and whenever so furnished shall be paid for by the
department furnished therewith by warrant made payable to the credit of the
store’s account of the Division of Purchases and Supplies. The Commissioner of
Purchases and Supplies shall not furnish any supplies to any department unless
there be to the credit of such department an available appropriation balance,
in excess of all unpaid obligations sufficient to pay for such supplies.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 103 Division of Assessments and Licenses
   There shall be in the Department of Finance a Division of Assessments and
Licenses. The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses shall have charge of the
preparation and certification of all special assessments for public
improvements; the mailing of notices of such assessments to property owners and
all other duties connected therewith; the collection of such assessments as are
payable directly to the city and the preparation and certification of all
unpaid assessments to the County Auditor for collection. He shall issue all
licenses and collect all fees therefor and shall pay the same to the City
Treasurer in the manner provided by ordinance.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 104 Accounts of Appropriations
   Accounts shall be kept for each item of appropriation made by the Council
and every warrant on the Treasury shall state specifically against which of
such items the warrant is drawn. Each such account shall show in detail the
appropriations made thereto by the Council, the amount drawn thereon, the
unpaid obligations charged against it, and the unencumbered balance to the
credit thereof.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 105 Payment of Claims
   No claim against the City shall be paid unless it be evidenced by a voucher
approved by the head of the department or office for which the indebtedness was
incurred; and each such director or officer and his surety shall be liable to
the City for all loss or damage sustained by the City by reason of his
negligent or corrupt approval of any such claim. The Commissioner of Accounts
shall examine all payrolls, bills and other claims and demands against the City
and shall issue no warrant for payment unless he finds that the claim is in
proper form, correctly computed and duly approved; that it is justly and
legally due and payable; that an appropriation has been made therefor which has
not been exhausted, or that the payment has been otherwise legally authorized;
and that there is money in the City Treasury to make payment. He may
investigate any claim and for that purpose may summon before him any officer,
agent, or employee in any department, any claimant or other person, and examine
him upon oath or affirmation relative thereto, which oath or affirmation he may
administer. If the Commissioner of Accounts issues a warrant on the Treasury
authorizing payment of any item for which no appropriation has been made or for
the payment of which there is not a sufficient balance in the proper
appropriation, or which is otherwise contrary to law or ordinance, he and his
sureties shall be individually liable to the City for the amount thereof.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 106 Contracts Certified
   No contract, agreement, or other obligation, involving the expenditure of
money, shall be entered into, nor shall any ordinance, resolution, or order for
the expenditure of money be passed by the Council, or be authorized by any
officer of the City, unless the Director of Finance first certifies to the
Council or to the proper officer, as the case may be, that the money required
for such contract, agreement, obligation, or expenditure, is in the Treasury,
to the credit of the fund from which it is to be drawn, and not appropriated
for any other purpose, which certificate shall be filed and immediately
recorded. The sum so certified shall not thereafter be considered
unappropriated until the City is discharged from the contract, agreement or
obligation.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 107 Earmarked Funds
   All moneys actually in the Treasury to the credit of the fund from which
they are to be drawn, and all moneys applicable to the payment of the
obligation or appropriation involved, that are anticipated to come into the
Treasury before the maturity of such contract, agreement or obligation, from
taxes or assessments, fees, charges, accounts and bills receivable or other
credits in process of collection; and all moneys applicable to the payment of
such obligation or appropriation, which are to be paid into the Treasury prior
to the maturity thereof, arising from the sale or lease of lands or other
property, and moneys applicable to the payment of such obligation or
appropriation, which are to be paid into the Treasury prior to the maturity
thereof, arising from the sale or lease of lands or other property, and moneys
to be derived from lawfully authorized bonds sold and in process of delivery
shall for the purposes of such certificate, be deemed in the Treasury to the
credit of the appropriate fund and subject to such certification.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 108 Authorization of Contracts
   (a)   All contracts involving any expenditure in excess of fifty thousand
dollars ($50,000.00) shall first be authorized and directed by ordinance of
Council, provided that the Council may increase the expenditure limit contained
in this section above fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) by passage of an
ordinance receiving a two-thirds affirmative vote of the Council. Except as
provided in divisions (b) and (c) of this section, when so authorized and
directed, the director of the department involved shall make a written contract
with the lowest and best bidder after advertisement once a week for two
consecutive weeks in the City Record.
   (b)   When authorized by ordinance passed by the Council and in accordance
with the applicable laws, competitive bidding and advertisement are not
required for the City to enter into contracts for the purchase of supplies,
services, materials and equipment through employment of cooperative purchase
arrangements with other governmental agencies.
   (c)   When authorized by ordinance passed by the Council, competitive
bidding and advertisement are not required for the City to enter into contracts
for any purpose for which contracts may be awarded by a municipal corporation
without advertisement or competitive bidding under the general laws of the
State of Ohio.
   (d)   There shall be no splitting of orders to avoid the effect of this
section, and any contract made contrary to or in evasion of the provisions of
this section shall be illegal and void.
(Effective November 4, 2008)
§ 109 When Contracts Void
   All contracts, agreements, or other obligations entered into and all
ordinances passed, resolutions and orders adopted, contrary to the provisions
of the preceding sections, shall be void, and no person whatever shall have any
claim or demand against the City thereunder, nor shall the Council, or any
officer of the City, waive or qualify the limits fixed by any ordinance,
resolution or order, as provided in Section
106, or fasten upon the City any liability whatever, in excess of such limits,
or release or relieve any party from an exact compliance with his contract
under such ordinance, resolution, or order.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 110 Sinking Fund
   The Sinking Fund Commission shall consist of the Mayor, the Director of
Finance, and the President of the Council. The Mayor shall be the President,
and the Director of Finance shall be the Secretary, of the Commission. The
Commission shall manage and control the Sinking Fund in the manner provided by
general law or by ordinance.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 110-1 Civil Defense Expenditures
   That based upon the currently available scientific and medical information
which overwhelmingly demonstrates that there is no realistic, practical and
effective protection against the effects of a nuclear or thermonuclear attack
directed at civilian population centers, such as Cleveland, and that the only
alternative to any civil defense measures is the eventual elimination of
nuclear or thermonuclear weapons, the appropriation and/or expenditure of
public funds by the City of Cleveland for any civil defense preparedness
measures against nuclear or thermonuclear attack, including, but not limited
to, plans, programs, studies and the acquisition, purchase or lease of
buildings, equipment, supplies or services used or to be used in connection
with such civil defense measures, are hereby declared to be wasteful and
unlawful expenditures of public funds and not in the public interest and any
such appropriation and/or expenditure for such civil defense measures is hereby
forever prohibited.
(Effective November 2, 1982)
CHAPTER 19 – DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC UTILITIES
§
111   General Powers and Duties
§
112   Fixation of Utility Rates
§
113   Accounts of Publicly Owned Utilities
§ 111 General Powers and Duties
   The Director of Public Utilities shall manage and supervise all non-tax
supported public utility undertakings of the City, including all Municipal
water, lighting, heating, power and transmission enterprises, but excluding
mass transportation enterprises, and such other utilities now owned or
hereafter acquired by the City of Cleveland as may be placed under any
management and supervision other than that of the Director of Public Utilities.
(Effective November 17, 1942)
§ 112 Fixation of Utility Rates
   Rates for the service or products of all non-tax supported public utilities,
owned and operated by the City, which are managed and supervised by the
Director of Public Utilities, shall be fixed by the Board of Control, subject,
however, to approval by Council.
(Effective November 17, 1942)
§ 113 Accounts of Publicly Owned Utilities
   Accounts shall be kept for each public utility owned or operated by the City
distinct from other City accounts and in such manner as to show the complete
financial results of such City ownership, or ownership and operation, including
all assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. These accounts shall show the
actual costs to the City of each public utility owned; the cost of all
extensions, additions and improvements; all expenses of maintenance; the amount
set aside for Sinking Fund purposes, and, in the case of City operation, all
operation expenses of every description. They shall show as nearly as possible
the value of any service furnished to or rendered by any such public utility by
or to any other City or governmental department. They shall also show a proper
allowance for depreciation, insurance, interest on the investment, and
estimates of the amount of taxes that would be chargeable against the property
if privately owned. The Director of Public Utilities shall, for the utilities
under his jurisdiction, annually cause to be made and printed for public
information a report showing the financial results of such City ownership, or
ownership and operation, which report shall give the information specified in
this section and such other information as the Council shall deem expedient.
(Effective November 17, 1942)
CHAPTER 21 – TRANSIT SYSTEM OPERATION
   Note: Sections 113-1 to 113-8, Transit System Operation, were repealed by
the electors on November 4, 1975.
CHAPTER 23 – PUBLIC HEALTH
§
114   General Provisions
§ 114 General Provisions
   The City shall, through such officer or officers as the Council may provide
by ordinance, in accordance with the provisions of Section
77 of this Charter, enforce all laws and ordinances relating to health, and
such officer or officers shall perform all the duties and may exercise all the
powers provided by general law, relative to the public health, to be performed
and exercised in municipalities by health officers; provided that regulations
affecting the public health, additional to those established by general law and
for the violation of which penalties are imposed, shall be enacted by the
Council and enforced as provided in this section.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
CHAPTER 25 – POLICE AND FIRE SERVICE
§
115   General Provisions
§
115-1   Office of Professional Standards
§
115-2   Civilian Police Review Board
§
115-3   Board's Powers and Duties
§
115-4   Investigation and Disposition of Complaints
§
115-5   Community Police Commission
§
116   Police Force; Control by Chief
§
117   Special Policemen
§
118   Fire Force; Control by Chief
§
119   Suspension of Police and Firemen
§
119-1   Discipline of Police
§
120   Suspension of Fire Chief
§
121   Appeal to Civil Service Commission
§
122   Classification of Police and Fire Service
§
123   Relief of Policemen and Firemen
§ 115 General Provisions
   The City shall maintain a Police Force and Fire Force, and the Mayor shall
be executive head of both forces. If these Forces are or shall be placed in a
department in accordance with the provisions of Section
77 of this Charter, the director of this department shall be their executive
head under the direction of the Mayor.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 115-1 Office of Professional Standards
   There will be within and report to the Civilian Police Review Board an
Office of Professional Standards, consisting of investigators appointed by the
Board. The Board may appoint the Office's Administrator, in conformity with the
Charter's civil-service provisions. The Office's Administrator may not be a
current or former Cleveland police officer or Division of Police employee.
   The Office of Professional Standards will not be under the direction and
control of the executive head of the police force and the Chief of Police, and
will report to the Board. The Chief, police force, and executive head of the
police force must provide all assistance that the Board and Office of
Professional Standards request to enable the Board and Office to carry out
their duties. This includes prompt production of all information and records
requested, in no case in more than 30 days.
(Effective November 2, 2021)
§ 115-2 Civilian Police Review Board
   The Civilian Police Review Board shall consist of nine members who represent
Cleveland's diverse communities. The Mayor will appoint five members. Council
will appoint four members. The Mayor and Council must fill vacancies within 60
days of when they arise. No more than one Board member may be a resident of the
same police district, unless the City establishes fewer than nine districts. At
least two members should be attorneys with experience representing victims of
police misconduct or criminally prosecuting police misconduct. At least one
Board member should, where reasonably feasible, be between the ages of 18 and
30 at the time of appointment. No Board member may be employed currently as a
law-enforcement officer and no member may be a current or former employee of
the Cleveland Division of Police. Vacancies during a term will be filled in the
same manner as original appointments for the unexpired term. Within 30 days of
any Board vacancy, including vacancies caused by the end of a term, the City
must post an announcement of any vacancy and a request for applications to fill
any vacancy. Members must be chosen from among the applicants.
   Board members holding the office as of this Section's effective date may
continue in office for the remainder of their terms, and those and previous
terms will count toward term limits established in this section. Board members'
terms of office will be four years. No member may serve for more than two four-
year terms when the second term begins less than four years after the end of
the first term. But a person may be eligible for appointment four years after
the end date of the second term. Time spent fulfilling an unexpired term of two
years or less will not be considered part of the two consecutive terms.
   The Mayor may remove any Board member, upon notice and hearing, for
malfeasance, misfeasance, nonfeasance, or gross neglect of duty.
   All Board members must participate in initial and annual training on topics
relevant to Board duties.
   Board members will receive compensation as Council must establish.
   The Board and its Office of Professional Standards will have its own budget
separate from the Department of Public Safety's budget. The Board and its
Office of Professional Standards must receive a budget totaling at least 1.0%
of the budget allocated to the police force. The Professional Standards
Administrator will oversee the budget on behalf of, and with guidance from, the
Board.
   The Board will designate annually one of its members to serve as chair and
one to serve as vice chair. No person will serve more than two consecutive one-
year terms in each position, but, except as further provided, may be eligible
for appointment two years after the end date of the second term. A person may
be eligible to serve in one of the positions for up to two consecutive one-year
terms consecutive to service in the other position, but then may not serve in
either position for two years after the end date of the term for the second
position even if service in the first or second position was less than two
years.
   The Board shall appoint personnel as its staff as it deems necessary.
(Effective November 2, 2021)
§ 115-3 Board's Powers and Duties
   The Civilian Police Review Board will receive, cause investigation of, and
recommend resolution of complaints filed with it, or on its own complaint based
on information that comes to its attention, alleging misconduct by Cleveland
police officers or Division of Police employees, when such misconduct is
directed toward any person who is not a police officer or Division of Police
employee. The misconduct alleged may include, but need not be limited to, the
use of excessive or deadly force. The Board will perform such other duties not
inconsistent with this Charter's other provisions, as the executive head of the
police force may request.
   It is not a proper consideration for the Board and its Office of
Professional Standards to choose not to investigate particular allegations of
police officer or Division of Police employee misconduct based on the fact or
belief that another investigative agency, including the Division of Police's
Office of Internal Affairs, or that some other non-federal law-enforcement
agency, is investigating, or has already investigated and concluded that no
misconduct or something less serious than the misconduct a complainant alleged
took place. The Board and its Office of Professional Standards must never defer
to the Division of Police or outside, non-federal law-enforcement authorities
in investigating allegations of police misconduct and must act independently,
consistent with their mission of exercising civilian control and accountability
over the police force.
   To carry out its functions, the Board or any person authorized by it may
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers, and
other evidence, and for that purpose may issue subpoenas or attachments, to be
signed by the Board's chair, which will be served and executed by any officer
authorized to serve subpoenas and other processes. The Council will provide by
ordinance the penalty or penalties for contempt in refusing to obey any such
subpoenas or to produce such books, papers, and other evidence. If the Council
does not do so, the Board may establish such penalties.
   The Board will make rules providing for its procedure and review of
complaints.
(Effective November 2, 2021)
§ 115-4 Investigation and Disposition of Complaints
   Without interference from the Chief of Police or executive head of the
police force, and with the full cooperation of both, the Office of Professional
Standards must cause, for the Board's benefit, a full and complete
investigation to be made of each complaint. The investigation need not be
confined to matters set forth in the complaint and may expand based upon facts
and allegations uncovered in the investigation. Upon an investigation's
completion, the administrator will prepare a report and submit the report to
the Board for its review and disposition.
   Before recommending action on a complaint or determining that a complaint
warrants no action, the Board may hold a hearing, under its rules. Any decision
or deliberation about whether to act or not act on a complaint must take place
in an open meeting.
   If the Board decides that the facts found in an investigation suggest that
the executive head of the police force and Chief of Police should promulgate or
amend policies, rules, and regulations, the Board should submit its
recommendation and reasoning to the executive head of the police force and
Chief, with a copy to the Community Police Commission, and must notify the
complainant that it has done so.
   If the Board decides that discipline should be imposed on the officers or
employees under the Chief of Police's management and control, the Board will
submit its fact findings and recommendation to the Chief. The Chief and
executive head of the police force must presume to be correct and defer to the
Board's fact findings and recommendations, absent affirmative proof by clear-
and-convincing evidence that the findings and recommendations are clearly
erroneous. Absent such proof, within ten days after receiving the Board's fact
findings and recommendation - the Chief or executive head of the police must
impose at least the minimum discipline that the Board has recommended.
   If the Chief or executive head of the police force believes that clear-and-
convincing evidence exists that would justify disregarding or modifying the
Board's fact finding and disciplinary recommendations, within ten days after
receiving the Board's fact findings and recommendation, the Chief or executive
head of the police force must notify the Board in writing of any refusal or
lesser, alternative discipline to be imposed, detailing the reasons and
providing the Board with the clear-and-convincing evidence justifying the
decision. Precedents, patterns or practices, and discipline predating this
Section's effective date cannot constitute clear-and-convincing evidence
justifying any decision by the Chief or executive head of the police force to
impose lesser discipline than what the Board recommends, or no discipline.
   If the Board then does not agree with the Chief's or executive head of the
police force's refusal or alternative discipline, the Board, notwithstanding
any provisions of Section
119 of this Charter to the contrary, may, in its discretion, overrule the Chief
or executive head of the police force, and order either of them to discipline
the officer or employee, up to and including termination. The Chief or
executive head of the police force must then comply. Regardless of whether the
Board orders the officer or employee's suspension for ten working days or less,
the Board shall forthwith certify in writing the fact, together with the cause
of the discipline, to the executive head of the police force, who will proceed
as may be required under Charter Section
119, but consistent with this Section.
   The Board must promptly notify complainants of the status, progress, and
disposition of their complaints. If the Board determines that the complaint
warrants no action, the Board shall so notify the complainant. The Board will
ensure, through the Department of Law as appropriate, that complainants'
viewpoints are heard in any arbitration process following discipline.
   Termination will be the presumed discipline for racist, sexist, anti-LGBTQ+,
anti-immigrant, national-origin-based, or otherwise bigoted conduct, slurs, or
language used in the course and scope of employment, or, if the officer or
Division of Police employee's language is on a matter of public concern, where
that officer or Division of Police employee's interest in commenting on matters
of public concern does not outweigh the City's interests, as an employer, in
promoting the efficiency of the public services it performs through its
employees. The pertinent considerations for weighing these interests include
whether the language (1) impairs discipline by superiors or harmony among co-
workers, (2) has a detrimental impact on close working relationships for which
personal loyalty and confidence are necessary, (3) impedes the performance of
the officer or employee's duties or interferes with the regular operation of
the enterprise, or (4) undermines the City or Division of Police's mission.
   In assessing the first consideration, City officials must consider the
possibility that inaction by the City could be seen as an endorsement of the
speech and impair future discipline of similar derogatory statements. In
assessing the second consideration, City officials must consider whether the
language is reasonably likely to have a detrimental impact on close working
relationships within the police force or undermine trust. In assessing the
fourth consideration, City officials must consider the need for the City to
preserve the appearance of impartiality, the role and responsibilities of the
officer or employee, and, when the role is public facing, whether the danger to
successful functioning of the Division of Police will increase. This includes
making a reasonable prediction about whether the language, when known to the
public, would harm the Division of Police's mission; or undermine the
community's respect, trust, or perception that the police enforce the law
fairly, even-handedly, and without bias.
   Notwithstanding the above provisions, consistent with Charter Section
115-5, the Community Police Commission, at its discretion, has the authority to
make the final decision for the City about whether to impose officer discipline
where it was not imposed, or to increase discipline when the Commission deems
it insufficient. The Chief, executive head of the police force, and the Board
must notify complainants of their right to seek ultimate review by that
Commission.
   Nothing in this Section may be interpreted as depriving city employees of
due process.
   The Chief, the executive head of the police force, the Board, and Community
Police Commission must timely and consistently notify complainants about, and
afford complainants, the right to be heard in every step of the disciplinary
process, without limitation, from investigation, and through hearings, reviews
and internal appeals, arbitrations, and court proceedings. Complainants cannot
be excluded from being informed about or from being heard during these
processes, and have a right to intervene.
   The Board, complainants, and any City taxpayer may take legal action to
enforce all terms in all Charter sections related to the Board. The Board may
opt, if it deems the Director of Law to have a conflict of interest, to engage
outside counsel at the Department of Law's expense.
(Effective November 2, 2021)
§ 115-5 Community Police Commission
   (a)   Voter findings. The voters of the City of Cleveland find, based on
continuing, serial instances of police misconduct, that there is a need to
      i.   significantly strengthen civilian oversight of the police force, and
to hold the police force more accountable;
      ii.   strengthen the police reform initiated by, but grossly insufficient
in, the Consent Decree in United States of America v. City of Cleveland, U.S.
District Court for the Northern District of Ohio Case No. 1:15-cv-2046;
      iii.   institutionalize cultural change within the Division of Police;
and
      iv.   reform the arbitration process by which unelected arbitrators who
do not reflect the values, concerns, or diversity of the community - and who
themselves often do not live in the community and therefore do not personally
bear the burden of any problematic police practices - routinely undermine
police accountability by reducing or reversing disciplinary decisions.
   (b)   Commission. The Community Police Commission ("Commission") is
permanently established as an independent municipal commission, with an
executive director nominated by the Commission and appointed by the Mayor.
   (c)   Commission membership, eligibility, and appointment categories. The
Commission will consist of 13 persons broadly representative of the racial,
social, economic, and cultural interests of the community, including those of
the racial-minority, immigrant/refugee, LGBTQ+, youth, faith, business, and
other communities, to reflect the overall demographics of Cleveland residents.
At least two Commission members must represent community organizations focused
on civil-rights issues. At least one Commission member must be, represent, or
be knowledgeable of, as applicable,
      i.   the issues of those who are limited-English speakers, homeless, or
who have mental-illness and substance-abuse disorders;
      ii.   those who have been directly impacted by police violence, or be a
family member of a person who has been killed by police;
      iii.   those who have been incarcerated and exonerated where police were
involved in the wrongful conviction or incarceration;
      iv.   gun-violence survivors or be a family member of a person killed by
gun violence;
      v.   an attorney with experience representing victims of police
misconduct or criminally prosecuting police misconduct.
   A single Commission member may fulfill more than one of the above
categories. Where feasible, the Mayor will seek to appoint at least one member
between the age of 18 to 30 at the time of appointment.
   With the exception of no more than three police-association representatives,
described below, no member may have served within the five years before
appointment as a law-enforcement officer, have ever been an employee of the
City's Division of Police or Department of Public Safety, or otherwise have
been a City employee within the previous year. The Mayor may appoint no more
than three representatives of police associations, including racial-or-ethnic-
minority police-labor associations, or these associations' successors
recognized by the City. These police-association representatives must have a
background relevant to police-community relations and demonstrated connection
to their respective associations' membership, and no representative may have a
record of police misconduct (whether adjudicated or not), or career records or
personal history meriting designation or disclosure under Brady v. United
States or Giglio v. United States and their caselaw progeny.
   (d)   Appointment process and vacancies. The Mayor will appoint 13 members,
with the approval of Council by majority vote, for four-year terms, following
an open and fair application process.
   Three of the members the Mayor appoints will be nominated by Council and,
when vacancies arise, the Mayor may designate categories from Subsection (c)
above for nomination by Council.
   The Mayor must fill Commission vacancies within 60 days of when they occur.
At least 30 days before the process begins, the City must solicit
recommendations for membership from community organizations who have interest
in police oversight, and post applications prominently on the City's website,
City Council website, and through local print, television, radio, and digital
media. For appointment of the first Commission after this Section's effective
date, the Mayor will divide the appointees into two classes. The first class of
seven will have four-year terms and, for the first term only, the second class
of six will have a two-year term. After that, all classes will have four-year
terms so that approximately half of Commission members are appointed every two
years. No Commission member may serve more than four, full, four-year terms.
   (e)   Removal.
      i.   Non-police-association-representative members. The Mayor may remove
any Commission member for malfeasance, misfeasance, nonfeasance, or gross
neglect of duty, but must afford any non-police-association-representative
Commission member an opportunity for a public hearing before the Mayor, within
30 days after the Mayor has given such member written charges, with a copy
filed with the Clerk of Council. An accused non-police-association-
representative member will be permitted to respond to the charges in person or
through counsel, and have the right to subpoena and present evidence, including
documents and witnesses. Removal by the Mayor will be final unless not later
than the third meeting of Council after the removal, Council disapproves the
removal by an affirmative, two-thirds (2/3) vote of the members elected to
Council. There will be no requirement that there be three readings of a
resolution to reject the Mayor's removal of the member.
      ii.   Police-association-representative members. The Mayor may remove any
police-association-representative member with or without cause. Likewise, by a
simple majority vote of only non-police-association-representative members, the
Commission may remove any police-association-representative member, with or
without cause. Consistent opposition to police accountability and the
Commission's mission and duties should cause such removal.
   (f)   Vacancies. Vacancies during a term will be filled in the same manner
as the original agreed selection process for the unexpired term. Within 30 days
of any vacancy on the Commission, including vacancies caused by the end of a
term, the City will post an announcement of any vacancy and a request for
applications, widely disseminating the information. The Mayor must choose from
among the applicants without delay.
   (g)   Chair. The Commission will select its own chair from among its members
by a majority vote, using, at its discretion, a run-off process or rank-order
voting should there be more than two candidates for the position.
   (h)   Duties and Authority of the Commission. The Commission will respond to
community needs and concerns regarding regulation of the City's police force
and community-police relations through duties including, but not limited to,
the following:
      i.   Serving as the final City authority on whether the discipline of
police officers imposed or not imposed by the Chief of Police, executive head
of the police force, or Civilian Police Review Board is sufficient, with the
discretionary authority, with due process afforded to a subject officer, to
order that the Chief and executive head of the police force increase
discipline; and to order that they impose discipline where none was imposed.
The Commission may, at its discretion, and upon notice, hold evidentiary
hearings to review individual officer discipline following any proceedings and
decisions by the Chief of Police, executive head of the police force, and, as
applicable, the Civilian Police Review Board. Any order by the Commission to
increase or impose discipline will be final and the chief and executive head of
the police force must follow it.
      ii.   Ordering the Chief of Police to decrease discipline of police
officers only in circumstances in which the Commission determines that the
officer is facing retaliation for protected activity or for whistleblowing
about misconduct within the Division of Police. With this exception, nothing in
this Section will be construed as conferring a right by any officer to appeal
that officer's discipline to the Commission.
      iii.   Interviewing and recommending candidates for police commander and
inspector general to the Mayor.
      iv.   Compelling, through administrative subpoenas signed by the
Commission's chair or Executive Director, the attendance of witnesses and the
production of evidence, including, but not limited to, from within the City,
that the Commission deems necessary for the performance of its duties. The
Council may provide by rule the penalty or penalties for contempt in refusing
to obey such subpoenas, and the Commission must do so if the Council has not.
      v.   Having final authority over establishing the policies, applications,
and examinations by which new police recruits must be sought out and recruited
and screened, including screening for bias.
      vi.   Establishing bias-screening and training for existing police
officers.
      vii.   Having final authority over police policies, procedures, and
training regimens.
      viii.   Auditing and verifying police-officer training.
      ix.   Soliciting, gathering, compiling, organizing, maintaining, and
generally updating information on individual police officers whose career
records or personal history merit designation or disclosure even reasonably
arguably advisable under Brady v. United States or Giglio v. United States and
those cases' progeny; ensuring that the Division of Police and municipal,
county, state, and federal prosecutors disclose such information at the
beginning of the discovery process in all criminal and civil cases in which
such officers could be witnesses or are parties; making such information
readily publicly accessible on the City's website; and publicizing and devising
means of public accountability for failures in the Division of Police, by the
Chief of Police, by the Department of Law, by the Cuyahoga County Prosecuting
Attorney, or others to track, identify, maintain, organize, and disclose such
information. The Commission must undertake this duty as to all current police
officers, including information predating this Section's effective date.
      x.   Directing the Civilian Police Review Board to independently
investigate the conduct of every police officer against whom a lawsuit has been
threatened or filed, or for whom the City has paid a settlement to obtain a
liability release, or against whom there has been a court judgment for alleged
misconduct.
      xi.   Proposing and advocating for legislation or regulations to Council,
the State of Ohio, and other legislative and regulatory authorities, and
offering views on the City's, Mayor's, Chief of Police, and Department of
Public Safety's legislative agendas consistent with the purposes of this
section.
      xii.   Engaging in community outreach to obtain the perspectives of
community members, police organizations, and Division of Police employees on
police-community relations, police policies and practices, the police-
accountability system, and other matters consistent with the purposes of this
section.
      xiii.   Maintaining connection and collaboration with representatives of
disenfranchised communities and with other community groups throughout the
City, the Community Relations Board, police-district committees, and similarly
arranged councils consistent with the purposes of this section.
      xiv.   Providing Division of Police, Office of Professional Standards
(OPS), Civilian Police Review Board (CPRB), Internal Affairs (IA), and other
City law-enforcement and police-accountability entities with community feedback
received through the Commission's public-outreach activities.
      xv.   Providing technical assistance to the Division of Police, OPS, IA,
CPRB, and other City law-enforcement and police-accountability entities,
consistent with the purposes of this section.
      xvi.   Exercising independent judgment and offering critical analysis in
the performance of their duties without interference or non-cooperation from
any person, group, or organization including the Chief of Police, the Director
of Public Safety, the Mayor, the executive head of the police force, other
Division of Police employees, and other city officials. City employees who
violate this provision may be subject to dismissal, discipline, or censure
consistent with city and state laws.
      xvii.   Requesting and timely receiving, without the need for making a
formal public-records request, from other City departments and offices
including the Division of Police and Director of Public Safety, information
relevant to the Commission's duties that must be disclosed if requested under
the Ohio Public Records Act.
      xviii.   Reviewing policy, data, and records to advise the Mayor, the
Director of Public Safety, the Chief, the Council, the Director of Law, OPS,
the CPRB, and others on policing issues including, but not limited to, police-
community relations, police accountability including OPS and CPRB operations,
bias-free policing, search and seizure, officer training, police use-of-force
policy, data collection and retention, and implementation of other initiatives,
programs, and activities intended to support constitutional policing and
continuous improvement of policing.
      xix.   Periodically publishing and distributing factual material,
reports, recommendations, and notices as the Commission deems important within
its purview as established above.
      xx.   Performing audits and broad investigations into investigative
processes, including audits for quality assurance and adherence to policy and
procedure of closed investigations and closed discipline cases of police
officers and Division of Police employees.
      xxi.   Identifying and proposing opportunities for systemic improvements
in all aspects of police accountability, including, but not limited to,
officer-complaint intakes; handling; investigations; use of alternate
resolutions like supervisory coaching; mediation; or ordered training; timely
notifications to complainants about investigative progress and results;
timelines for investigation; discipline; disciplinary appeals; and Brady/
Giglio-list protocols.
      xxii.   Accessing un-redacted complaints against officers and unredacted
files of all closed investigations, except for information required to be
withheld from persons who are not members of criminal-justice agencies under
the Ohio Public Records Act or the Ohio Personal Information Systems Act, as
they may be amended.
      xxiii.   Consistent with federal and state law, protecting from
disclosure confidential, non-public records to which the Commission has been
provided access.
      xxiv.   Engaging outside legal services, at Department of Law expense,
when the Commission determines, in its discretion, that there is a conflict of
interest between the Commission's mission and representation from the city's
Department of Law.
      xxv.   Eliciting public comment on police policy issues.
      xxvi.   Making grants to community-based violence-prevention,
restorative-justice, and mediation programs to reduce the need for police
activity.
      xxvii.   Adopting and amending rules for the Commission's procedures,
including selecting leadership and any additional articles sufficient for
efficient and effective execution of its duties.
      xxviii.   Exercising, without limitation, other duties consistent with
the Commission's broad purposes of exercising stronger civilian control and
accountability over the Division of Police, that are consistent with the
Charter.
   (i)   Full Cooperation by the Chief of Police, Division of Police, and
Executive Head of the Police Force Required. The Chief of Police, all Division
of Police employees, and the executive head of the police force must fully
cooperate with the Commission in performing all of its duties. Failure to do so
is a terminable offense and the Commission may seek injunctive relief for
failures.
   (j)   Compensation for Commissioners. The Council must establish annual
compensation for Commissioners of no less than $7,200, adjusted annually by the
Consumer Price Index, and reimburse reasonable Commission-related business
expenses.
   (k)   Executive Director and Staff. The Commission will nominate its
Executive Director to be appointed by the Mayor. The Executive Director will be
exempt within the Unclassified Civil Service and may not have ever been a
Division of Police employee. The Mayor may only recommend the Executive
Director's removal for just cause, subject to confirmation by a vote of 2/
3 majority of the Commission. The Commission may also directly initiate removal
with or without cause, with a 2/3 majority required for removal. The Executive
Director will have at least one assistant and an additional minimum support
staff of three classified, non-competitive positions. With support from the
Department of Human Resources, the Executive Director will determine
appropriate classifications and job descriptions based on operational needs.
All such appointments, except one assistant, will be made in conformity with
civil-service rules. No Commission employee may have ever been a Division of
Police employee.
   (l)   Duties of the Executive Director. Under the Commission's direction,
the Executive Director will have the authority and responsibility to:
      i.   Oversee and manage the functions of the Office of the Commission to
advance the Commission's mission and perform other public duties as the
Commission may prescribe.
      ii.   Hire, supervise, and discharge employees of the Office of the
Commission. Employees of the Office of the Commission will collectively have
the requisite credentials, skills, and abilities to help fulfill the
Commission's duties set forth in this section.
      iii.   Execute, administer, modify, and enforce such agreements and
instruments as the Executive Director may deem necessary to implement programs
and carry out the Commission's duties; apply for grants and donations for
Commission programs; and solicit and use volunteer services.
      iv.   Represent, together with Commissioners, the Commission in providing
testimony and expertise to other city departments and offices, commissions, and
other organizations regarding issues of constitutional policing.
      v.   Create an annual budget and advocate for operational resources. The
City will provide additional staff and resources not outlined in this section
that it deems sufficient to enable the Commission to perform its duties.
      vi.   Manage the preparation of the Commission's proposed budget, and
submit an annual budget request to the Mayor. The Mayor and Council will
appropriate the Office of the Commission's budget in a budget-control level
independent of any other City department. The Director of Finance may review
the budget request for lawfulness and reasonableness and make recommendations
for improvement to the draft budget. No person in the executive branch will
exercise discretionary authority to make changes to the proposed budget to
which the Commission does not agree. Commissioners and the Executive Director
may advocate for resources directly to Council members or the Council during
the budget process and throughout the year.
      vii.   Authorize necessary expenditures, and enter into contracts for
professional and other services in accordance with the adopted budget, develop
and manage programs, and undertake authorized activities.
      viii.   Serve as Secretary of the Commission and of any advisory
committee or subcommittee the Commission may create.
      ix.   Regarding regulation of the City's police force and community-
police relations: maintain contacts with all community groups concerned with
constitutional policing, social justice, and public safety, including police
associations; report to the Commission regarding these groups' activities; and
serve as a source of accurate and reliable data on issues in the field of
community policing, law enforcement, social justice, and racial justice.
      x.   Implement the Commission's decisions and, on the Commission's
direction, work in cooperation with other City departments, on improvement of
law-enforcement services and police accountability; work to remove inequalities
that may be related to minority-group or other status related to law
enforcement and related matters; conduct educational activities, institutes,
meetings, and prepare reading materials, that will lead to better community-
police relations.
      xi.   Exercise such other and further authority and duties as this
Section prescribes.
   (m)   Budget. The Commission's annual budget may not be less than
$1,000,000, adjusted annually under the federally established Consumer Price
Index (CPI), unless the Commission itself requests a lower budget. Council must
increase the Commission's budget by the greater of the CPI or the percentage of
increases in the Division of Police's budget. In addition to the amount above
(as it may be adjusted), the Commission will receive a budget for its
grantmaking to community-based violence-prevention, restorative-justice, and
mediation programs that is at least 0.5% of the amount budgeted for the
Division of Police.
   (n)   Open Meetings and Public Comment. Commission meetings will be open to
the public, consistent with the Open Meetings Act. The Commission will afford
reasonable opportunity for public comment at its meetings.
   (o)   This Section Controls. Where conflicts exist, this Charter Section
supersedes and controls over any previously adopted provisions in the Charter,
Cleveland Codified Ordinances, or collective-bargaining agreements.
   (p)   Consent Decree modification. Upon the effective date of this Section
and other police-reform-related Charter sections amended or adopted with it,
the Director of Law will move the U.S. District Court to modify the federal
Consent Decree in United States v. City of Cleveland to incorporate the amended
and new sections and ensure that the voters' intentions are given full effect.
If the Director of Law does not file such a motion within 30 days after this
Section is adopted, then any City taxpayer is authorized and has standing to do
so without making further demand upon the Director of Law as may otherwise be
required by the Charter or Ohio law. Until the Decree is modified to
incorporate the amended and new sections, the Commission will prioritize
fulfilling duties required under the Decree over the additional duties this
Section establishes.
(Effective November 2, 2021)
§ 116 Police Force; Control by Chief
   The Police Force shall consist of a Chief, three Deputy Chiefs of Police,
eleven Commanders of Police, and such other officers, patrolmen and employees
as may be provided by ordinance or resolution of the Council. The Mayor may
appoint a fourth Deputy Chief of Police to protect the people from homeland
security threats and a twelfth Commander of Police for community policing. In
case of riot or like emergency the Mayor may appoint additional patrolmen and
officers for temporary service who need not be in the classified service. The
Chief of Police, the Deputy Chiefs of Police, and the Commanders of Police
shall be appointed by the Mayor from the division of police or they may be
persons appointed from outside the division who shall have had training and
experience in law enforcement and they shall serve at the pleasure of the
Mayor; provided, however, that the Mayor shall appoint to the positions of
Deputy Chief of Police and Commander of Police from among persons recommended
by the Chief of Police with the concurrence of the executive head of the police
force if such executive head be other than the Mayor. The Council may, by
ordinance, direct the Mayor to make appointments of minorities to the positions
of Deputy Chief of Police and Commander of Police. Upon the termination of
their service as Chief of Police, Deputy Chief of Police, or Commander of
Police they shall, if appointed from the division of police, revert to the
civil service status held by them at the time of their appointment, in so far
as it is competent for this charter so to provide. The Chief of Police shall
have exclusive control of the stationing and transfer of patrolmen and other
officers and employees constituting the Police Force, under such rules and
regulations as may be established by the Mayor or by the director of the
department to whom the Chief of Police may be immediately responsible.
(Effective November 2, 2004)
§ 117 Special Policemen
   No person shall act as a special policeman, special detective or other
special police officer for any purpose whatsoever, except upon written
authority from the Mayor or from the director of the department of which the
Police Force may be a part. Such authority shall be exercised only under the
direction and control of the Chief of Police and for a specified time, not to
exceed six months.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 118 Fire Force; Control by Chief
   The Fire Force shall consist of a Chief and such other officers, firemen and
employees as may be provided by ordinance or resolution of the Council. In case
of riot, conflagration, or like emergency the Mayor may appoint additional
firemen and officers for temporary service who need not be in the classified
service. The Fire Chief shall have exclusive control of the stationing and
transfer of all firemen and other officers and employees constituting the Fire
Force under such rules and regulations as may be established by the Mayor or by
the director of the department of which the said Fire Chief may be immediately
responsible.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 119 Suspension of Police and Firemen
   The Chief of Police and Fire Chief shall have the exclusive right to suspend
any of the officers or employees who are in the classified service and are
under their respective management and control, for incompetence, gross neglect
of duty, gross immorality, habitual drunkenness, failure to obey orders given
by the proper authority, or for any other just and reasonable cause. Prior to
suspending any officer or employee of the police force, the Chief of Police
shall ascertain whether a complaint on file with the Police Review Board
relates to the conduct of the officer or employee in question. If so, the Chief
of Police shall not suspend the officer or employee unless the Police Review
Board concurs with the Chief’s decision, in accordance with Section
115-4 of this Charter.
   If the Chief of Police or the Chief of Fire suspends an officer or employee
under his control for a period not to exceed ten (10) working days, the Chief’s
decision shall be final.
   If the Chief of Police or Chief of Fire suspends any officer or employee
under his control for more than ten (10) working days, the Chief concerned
shall forthwith in writing certify the fact, together with the cause for the
suspension, to the director of the department to whom he may be responsible, or
if there be no such director then to the Mayor, who within five days from the
receipt of such certificate shall, either personally or through a hearing
officer appointed by the Director or the Mayor, hold a hearing into the cause
of the suspension in accordance with the requirements of due process of law and
render judgment thereon, which judgment, if the charge be sustained, may be
suspension, reduction in rank, or dismissal and such judgment shall be final,
except as otherwise hereinafter provided. If a hearing officer is used, and the
Mayor or the Director of the department to whom the Chief may be responsible
shall promptly upon receipt of the hearing officer’s report and recommendations
review the report and recommendations of the hearing officer and render a
decision. The Director or the Mayor shall cause a copy of the written
certification of suspension by the Chief and the cause giving rise to such
suspension, the hearing officer’s report and recommendations, and the decision
of the Mayor or the Director to be filed with the Civil Service Commission. The
Director or a hearing officer in any such hearing shall have the same power to
administer oaths and secure the attendance of witnesses and the production of
books and papers, as is conferred upon the Mayor, or the Council or a committee
thereof by this Charter.
(Effective August 8, 1988)
§ 119-1 Discipline of Police.
   The Chief of Police will have the exclusive right to discipline, including
suspend, demote, or terminate any of the officers or employees who are in the
classified service and are under their respective management and control, for
incompetence, gross neglect of duty, gross immorality, habitual drunkenness,
failure to obey orders given by the proper authority, malfeasance, misfeasance,
nonfeasance, or for any other just and reasonable cause, subject to the higher
authority of the Civilian Police Review Board and the Community Police
Commission established in the Charter. Before disciplining any officer or
employee of the police force, the Chief of Police must ascertain whether a
complaint on file with the Civilian Police Review Board relates to the conduct
of the officer or employee in question. If so, the Chief of Police must not
discipline the officer or employee unless the Civilian Police Review Board
concurs with the Chief's decision, in accordance with Section
115-4 of the Charter.
   If the Chief of Police suspends an officer or employee under his control for
no more than 10 working days, the Chief's decision shall be final, subject to
the higher authority of the Civilian Police Review Board and Community Police
Commission as specified in the Charter.
   If the Chief of Police demotes, terminates, or suspends for more than 10
working days any officer or employee under his control, the Chief must
forthwith in writing certify the fact, together with the cause for the
suspension, to the director of the department to whom he may be responsible, or
if there be no such director then to the Mayor, who within five days from the
receipt of such certificate shall, either personally or through a hearing
officer appointed by the Director or the Mayor, hold a hearing into the cause
of the suspension in accordance with the requirements of due process of law and
render judgment. This judgment, if the charge is sustained, may be suspension,
reduction in rank, or termination, and such judgment will be final, except as
otherwise provided in this Section and subject to the review and higher
authority of the Civilian Police Review Board and Community Police Commission
specified in the Charter. If a hearing officer is used, the Mayor or the
Director of the department to whom the Chief may be responsible, upon receiving
the hearing officer's report and recommendations, must promptly review the
report and recommendations of the hearing officer and render a decision. The
Director or the Mayor will cause to be filed with the Civil Service Commission
a copy of the written certification of discipline by the Chief and the cause
giving rise to such suspension, the hearing officer's report and
recommendations, and the decision of the Mayor or the Director. The Director or
a hearing officer in any such hearing shall have the same power to administer
oaths and secure the attendance of witnesses and the production of books and
papers, as this otherwise Charter confers upon the Mayor, the Council, or a
Council committee.
   The provisions of this section also apply to the Chief of Police's power to
suspend employees and officers of the police force under Section
119 of this Charter.
(Effective November 2, 2021)
§ 120 Suspension of Fire Chief
   The Mayor shall have the exclusive right to suspend the Fire Chief for
incompetence, gross neglect of duty, gross immorality, habitual drunkenness,
failure to obey orders given by the proper authority, or for any other just and
reasonable cause. If such Chief be so suspended, the Mayor shall forwith
certify the fact, together with the cause of such suspension, to the Civil
Service Commission, who within five (5) days from the date of the receipt of
such notice shall proceed to hear such charges and render judgment thereon,
which judgment shall be final.
(Effective November 6, 1951)
§ 121 Appeal to Civil Service Commission
   Any person in the classified service, who is suspended for more than three
(3) days, demoted, or dismissed from the service of the City, may file a
written appeal from the decision to the Civil Service Commission within ten
days from and after the date of the suspension, demotion, or dismissal. The
director of the department involved, upon notice from the Commission of the
appeal, shall transmit to the Commission a copy of the charges and proceedings.
The Commission shall set the appeal for hearing within thirty days from and
after the filing of the same with the Commission, and may affirm, disaffirm or
modify the judgment of the director, and the judgment of the Commission in the
matter shall be final.
(Effective November 4, 2008)
§ 122 Classification of Police and Fire Service
   The director of the department immediately in charge thereof or the Mayor,
shall classify the police and fire service of the City, in conformity with the
ordinance of the Council concerning the number of persons to be employed
therein, and shall make rules for the regulation and discipline of such service
except as hereinbefore provided.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 123 Relief of Policemen and Firemen
   The Council may provide by general ordinance for the relief, out of the
police or fire funds, of members of the police and fire service temporarily or
permanently disabled in the discharge of their duties. Nothing herein shall
impair, restrict, or repeal any provision of general law authorizing the
levying of taxes to provide for firemen, policemen and sanitary police pension
funds, and to create and perpetuate boards of trustees for the administration
of such funds.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
CHAPTER 27 – CIVIL SERVICE
§
124   Civil Service Commission; Appointment, Term and Removal
§
125   Officers of Commission; Salaries
§
126   Division into Classified and Unclassified Service
§
127   Enactment of Civil Service Rules
§
128   Required Provisions of Rules
§
129   Civil Service Tests
§
130   Eligible Lists; Temporary Appointments
§
131   Appointments
§
131-1   Employees Hired Without Test before August 6, 2008
§
132   Limitation on Appointment and Transfer
§
133   Promotions Wherever Practicable
§
134   Eligible Lists Open to the Public
§
135   List of Persons in Classified Service
§
136   Standard of Efficiency
§
137   Investigations by Commission
§
138   Fraud Upon Civil Service Provisions
§
139   Political Assessments Prohibited
§
140   Tenure; Political Activity Prohibited
§
141   Violations and Penalties
§
142   Present Civil Service Employees – Repealed
§ 124 Civil Service Commission; Appointment, Term and Removal
   The Mayor shall appoint five electors of the City as Civil Service
Commissioners to serve for terms of six years. The Mayor shall designate one of
said commissioners as the Secretary of said Commission.
   No member of the Commission shall hold any other public office or employment
except that of notary public or member of the State militia. Members of the
existing Civil Service Commission shall continue in office as though appointed
in accordance with the provisions of this section and, as their terms expire,
their places shall be filled by the Mayor for terms of six years. Not more than
three members of the Civil Service Commission shall be members of the same
political party. The Mayor shall fill any vacancy in the Commission for the
unexpired term. A member of the Civil Service Commission may be removed by the
Mayor for neglect of duty, incapacity, incompetency, or malfeasance in office,
but only after opportunity has been given for a public hearing before the
Mayor, to be held at least ten days after written charges have been made and
notice thereof been given to the accused member. Such member shall be heard in
person or by counsel; and such removal shall be final.
(Effective November 21, 1967)
§ 125 Officers of Commission; Salaries
   The Civil Service Commission shall designate one of its members as President
and shall appoint a Chief Examiner and such other officers and employees as may
be necessary. The salaries of the Commission shall be determined by the Council
and a sufficient fund shall be appropriated each year to carry out the civil
service provisions of this Charter. The salaries of the Chief Examiner and
other subordinates shall be fixed by the Commission.
(Effective November 21, 1967)
§ 126 Division into Classified and Unclassified Service
   The civil service of the City is hereby divided into the unclassified and
classified service.
   1.   The unclassified service shall include:
      (a)   All officers elected by the people.
      (b)   All directors and assistant directors of departments.
      (c)   The Clerk of Council.
      (d)   The Chief of Police, four Deputy Chiefs of Police, and twelve
Commanders of Police.
      (e)   The members of all boards or commissions appointed by the Mayor and
of advisory boards appointed by the director of a department.
      (f)   The secretary to the mayor and one secretary for each director of a
department.
      (g)   Executive Assistants to the Mayor and Special Assistants to the
Mayor, provided, however, that there shall be no restrictions as to their
duties or assignments.
      (h)   Temporary employees for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days and
seasonal employees for a period not to exceed one hundred and eighty (180)
days.
      (i)   Students enrolled in a recognized educational institution and in a
course of training in preparation for an administrative or professional career
in the public service and employed upon the recommendation of the official in
charge of personnel administration as student aides for training purposes
without limitation as to assignment or duties.
      (j)   School crossing guards.
      (k)   Members of the auxiliary police force.
   2.   The classified service shall comprise all positions not specifically
included by this charter in the unclassified service. There shall be in the
classified service three classes to be known as the competitive class, the
noncompetitive class and the general labor class.
      (a)   The competitive class shall include all positions and employment
for which it is practicable to determine the merit and fitness of applicants by
competitive tests.
      (b)   The noncompetitive class shall include all positions requiring
specialized training, or skills requiring certifications or licensure, and
qualifications of a scientific, business, managerial, professional or
educational character, as may be determined by the Commission. The fitness of
applicants in the non- competitive class shall be based on the applicant’s
knowledge, skills and abilities relative to the qualifications for the
position.
      (c)   The general labor class shall include semi-skilled and unskilled
labor positions for which it is impractical to give competitive tests. The
positions shall be filled from a registration list established and maintained
by the Commission. The Commission shall register applicants for positions in
the general labor class either continuously or at times as there are vacancies
to be filled, provided, however, that no registration may be accepted until
public notice of the intention to so accept registrations shall be made by the
Commission. Priority of registration shall determine an applicant’s place on
the registration list, provided the applicant meets required standards as to
age, citizenship, physical fitness and residence as established by the
Commission.
(Effective November 4, 2008)
§ 127 Enactment of Civil Service Rules
   The Civil Service Commission shall make, promulgate, and when necessary may
amend, rules for the appointment, promotion, transfer, lay-off, reinstatement,
suspension and removal of City officials and employees in the classified
service. Before any such rules or amendments shall become effective they shall
be printed and an opportunity given for a public hearing thereon to be held
after reasonable notice thereof has been given by the Commission. The
Commission shall report its proceedings to the Mayor upon his request, and
shall make a report to the Mayor at the beginning of each fiscal year.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 128 Required Provisions of Rules
   The rules of the Civil Service Commission shall among other things, provide:
   (a)   For standardized classifications in the classified service of the
City, including officers and employees of the Civil Service Commission and the
determination of regular status.
   (b)   For open competitive tests to ascertain the merit and fitness of all
applicants for appointments in the competitive class.
   (c)   For public notice in the City Record or otherwise of the time and
place of all competitive tests.
   (d)   For establishing eligible lists from competitive tests. The lists will
consist of the names of successful candidates in the order of their standing.
   (e)   For the rejection of candidates or those eligible who fail to comply
with reasonable requirements as to moral, psychological, or physical character,
or who have attempted deception or fraud in connection with any application or
test for a position in the classified service.
   (f)   For the certification to the appointing authority, from the
appropriate eligible list from a competitive test to fill a vacancy in the
competitive class, of the ten (10) persons standing highest on the list, or of
the person or persons on the list when it contains ten (10) names or less,
except when the list is a promotional list in which case Charter Section
133 applies.
   (g)   For employment without test, in the absence of an eligible list, but
the employment shall not continue after the establishment of an eligible list
for the classification.
   (h)   For temporary employment for periods not to exceed ninety (90) days.
   (i)   For qualifications required for positions in the noncompetitive class.
   (j)   For promotion based on competitive tests and records of efficiency,
character, conduct and seniority.
   (k)   For the period of probation for each classification, which period
shall begin upon appointment and shall not continue beyond six (6) months and
for removal or demotion if the service during the probationary period is
unsatisfactory.
   (l)   For transfer from a position to a similar position and for
reinstatement on the eligible list within one (1) year of persons who, without
fault or delinquency on their part, are separated from the service or reduced
in position.
   (m)   For suspension, by the appointing authority, for purposes of
discipline, for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days at any one (1) time.
   (n)   For discharge or demotion in rank or compensation, only after the
person has been presented with the reasons specifically stated in writing and
has been given an opportunity to be heard in his or her own defense. The
reasons for the discharge or demotion and any reply in writing by the employee
shall be filed with the Commission.
   (o)   For investigating and keeping a record of the efficiency of officers
and employees in the classification service, and for requiring markings and
reports relative to officers and employees in the classification service from
appointing officers.
   (p)   For the publication of the rules and amendments in the City Record.
   The Commission shall adopt other rules, not inconsistent with the provisions
of this section as may be necessary and proper for the enforcement of the civil
service system, and to provide for the procedure of the Commission.
(Effective November 5, 2019)
§ 129 Civil Service Tests
   Tests required by the Civil Service Commission shall be practical and shall
relate to matters which fairly measure the relative fitness of the candidates
to discharge the duties of the positions to which they seek appointment. No
question in any such test shall relate to political or religious opinion,
affiliation or service; and no appointment, transfer, lay-off, promotion,
reduction, suspension, or removal shall be affected or influenced by such
opinion, affiliations or service.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 130 Eligible Lists; Temporary Appointments
   Eligible lists created by the Commission shall remain in force not longer
than two years. In the absence of an appropriate eligible list, any place may
be filled temporarily, without test, for the period limited by the civil
service rules, but not exceeding one year. During such period the Commission
shall hold the necessary tests for filling any such place permanently. With the
consent of the Commission, persons may be temporarily employed for transitory
work without test, but no such employment shall continue for more than sixty
days, or be renewed.
(Effective November 4, 2008)
§ 131 Appointments
   When any position in the classified service, except the general labor class,
is to be filled, the appointing authority shall notify the Commission of the
fact and the Commission shall certify to the authority the names and addresses
of the ten candidates standing highest on the eligible list for the class or
grade to which that position belongs. The appointing authority shall appoint to
that position one of the ten persons whose names are certified. When the
eligible list contains less than ten names, those names shall be certified,
from which the appointing authority may appoint one for that position. A person
certified from the eligible list more than four times to the same appointing
authority for a position of the same or similar classification may be omitted
from future certification, but certification for a temporary appointment shall
not be counted as one of the certifications.
   When any position in the general labor class is to be filled, the appointing
authority shall notify the Commission of that fact, and the number to be
appointed whereupon the Commission shall certify to the appointing officer the
names and addresses of twice the number of candidates required to fill the
position or positions in the order of their standing on the appropriate
eligible list. The appointing officer shall, without restriction as to order,
appoint to the position or positions from among the candidates so certified.
The name of a person, not selected for appointment, whose standing on the
eligible list is above the names of the last person appointed from that
certification, shall not be again certified, except upon request, to the same
appointing officer. The name of a person not selected for appointment, after
being certified to two separate appointing officers shall not again, except
upon request of an appointing officer, be certified, but certification for a
temporary appointment shall not be counted as one of the certifications.
   All original and promotional appointments shall be for a probationary period
of not to exceed six months to be fixed by the rules of the Commission, and no
appointment or promotion shall be deemed finally made until the appointee has
satisfactorily served his or her probationary period. At the end of the
probationary period, the appointing officer shall transmit to the Commission a
record of the employee's service certifying that the service has been
satisfactory or unsatisfactory and if the service is unsatisfactory, the
employee may, with the approval of the Commission, be removed or reduced
without restriction; but dismissal or reduction may be made during that period,
as is provided for in Section
121 of the Charter.
   When no eligible list for a position exists, or when the eligible list has
become exhausted and until a new list can be created, names may be certified
from the eligible list most nearly appropriate to the position to be filled.
(Effective November 3, 2015)
§ 131-1 Employees Hired Without Test before August 6, 2008
   Employees in the classified service who were hired in their current position
on or before August 6, 2008 and who serve in that position for 90 consecutive
days or longer without test by the Commission, who meet the qualifications for
that position, and who have an employment record that is satisfactory shall
become regular employees in that position without test. Any employee who
becomes a regular employee in his or her position under this section is not
eligible to apply for any other position in the classified service without test
and compliance with all other provisions of the laws of the City of Cleveland
and rules promulgated by the Commission.
(Effective November 4, 2008)
§ 132 Limitation on Appointment and Transfer
   No person shall be appointed or employed in the service of the City under
any title not appropriate to the duties to be performed, and no person shall be
transferred to or assigned to perform any duties of a position subject to
competitive test unless he shall have been appointed to the position from which
the transfer is made as a result of competitive test equivalent to that
required for the position to be filled.
(Effective November 8, 1938)
§ 133 Promotions Wherever Practicable
   Wherever practicable, vacancies shall be filled by promotion. Any
advancement in rank or increase in salary beyond the limits fixed for the grade
shall constitute a promotion. Lists shall be created and promotions made
therefrom of candidates in the same manner as in original appointments, except
that the Commission shall certify the names and addresses of the three
candidates standing highest on the eligible list for the class or grade to
which the promotional position belongs and the appointing authority shall
appoint one of the three persons whose names are certified; and provided,
however, that less than three shall constitute an eligible list, and the
appointing authority shall appoint from the eligible list.
(Effective November 3, 2015)
§ 134 Eligible Lists Open to the Public
   The lists of eligibles based upon tests held by the Civil Service
Commission, with the respective grades of candidates, shall be open to public
inspection. Any person appointed from an eligible list laid off for lack of
work or appropriation shall be placed at the head of such eligible list and
shall be eligible for reappointment for the period of eligibility provided by
the rules of the Commission.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 135 List of Persons in Classified Service
   The Civil Service Commission shall maintain a list of all persons in the
classified service, showing in connection with each name the position held, the
date and character of each appointment and every subsequent change in status.
Each appointing officer shall promptly transmit to the Commission all
information required for the establishment and maintenance of such list. The
Treasurer shall not pay, nor shall the Commissioner of Accounts issue a voucher
for the payment of, any salary or compensation to any person holding a position
in the classified service unless the payroll or account of such salary or
compensation shall bear the certificate of the Civil Service Commission that
the persons named therein have been appointed or employed and are performing
service in accordance with the civil service provisions of this Charter and the
rules established thereunder. Any sums paid contrary to the provisions of this
section may be recovered from any officer paying or authorizing the payment
thereof and from the surety on his official bond.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 136 Standard of Efficiency
   The official in charge of personnel administration pursuant to appointment
by the Mayor shall establish standards of efficiency and conduct for the
officers and employees in the classified service. It shall be his duty to adopt
and administer a plan for the equitable and periodic measurement of such
conduct and efficiency. It shall also be his duty to maintain complete records
of such measurements which shall be used in determining eligibility for
increases in rates of compensation; by appointing officers and the Civil
Service Commission for assistance in determining the order of layoff and in
disciplinary actions; by the Civil Service Commission for assistance in
determining eligibility for promotion; and by other officers, as needed, for
the betterment of the public service.
(Effective November 6, 1951)
§ 137 Investigations by Commission
   The Civil Service Commission may make investigations concerning the facts in
respect to the execution of the civil service provisions of this Charter and of
the rules established thereunder, and concerning the general condition of the
civil service of the City or any branch thereof. Written charges of misconduct
or inefficiency against any officer or employee in the classified service may
be filed with the Civil Service Commission by any person. The Commission shall
investigate such charges and report its findings to the authority responsible
for the appointment of the officer or employee against whom the charges have
been made. Each member of the Commission or any person whom the Commission may
appoint to make any investigation authorized or required by this section, shall
have power to subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses and the
production of books and papers pertinent to the investigation and to administer
oaths to such witnesses.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 138 Fraud Upon Civil Service Provisions
   No person shall willfully or corruptly make any false statement,
certificate, mark, grading or report in regard to any test or appointment held
or made under the civil service provisions of this Charter, or in any manner
commit or attempt to commit any fraud upon the impartial execution of any such
provisions or of the civil service rules and regulations.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 139 Political Assessments Prohibited
   No person in the administrative service of the City shall directly or
indirectly give, solicit or receive, or be in any manner concerned in giving,
soliciting or receiving any assessment, subscription or contribution for any
political party or purpose whatever. No person shall orally or by letter
solicit or be in any manner concerned in soliciting any assessment,
subscription or contribution for any political party or purpose from any person
holding a position in the administrative service. No person shall use or
promise to use his influence or official authority to secure any appointment or
prospective appointment to any position in the service of the city as a reward
or return for personal or partisan political service. No person shall take part
in preparing any political assessment, subscription or contribution with the
intent that it shall be sent or presented to or collected from any person in
the administrative service of the City; and no person shall knowingly send or
present, directly or indirectly in person or otherwise any political
assessment, subscription or contribution to, or request in payment by, any
person in such service.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 140 Tenure; Political Activity Prohibited
   No person about to be appointed to any position in the administrative
service of the City shall sign or execute a resignation, dated or undated, in
advance of such appointment. No person in the service of the city shall
discharge, suspend, lay off, reduce in grade or in any manner change the
official rank or compensation of any person in such service, or promise or
threaten to do so, for withholding or neglecting to make any contribution of
money or service or any valuable thing for any political purpose. No person in
the service of the City shall use his official authority to influence or coerce
the political action of any person or body, or to interfere with any nomination
or election to public office. No person in the classified service of the City
shall act as an officer of a political organization or take part in a political
campaign, or serve as a member of a committee of any such organization, or
circulate or seek signatures to any petition provided for by primary or
election laws, or act as a worker in favor of or in opposition to any candidate
for public office.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 141 Violations and Penalties
   It shall be the duty of the Civil Service Commission to supervise the
execution of the foregoing civil service provisions of this Charter and the
rules made thereunder, and it shall be the duty of persons in the service of
the City to comply with such rules and to aid in their enforcement. Any person
who, by himself or in cooperation with one or more persons, willfully or
corruptly deceives or obstructs any person in respect to his right to take part
in any test for admission to the service of the City; or willfully or corruptly
marks, grades or reports upon the test or proper standing of any person tested
for appointment in the civil service, or aids in so doing; or willfully or
corruptly makes any false representations as to the results of such tests or
concerning the person so tested; or willfully or corruptly furnishes to any
person special or secret information for the purpose of either improving or
injuring the prospects or chances of any person so tested or to be tested, or
to be appointed, employed or promoted; or willfully impersonates any other
person or permits or aids, in any manner, any persons to impersonate him in
connection with any test, registration, application or appointment, or request
to be tested or registered; or who makes known or assists in making known to
any applicant for test, in advance of such test, any question to be asked on
such test; or willfully or through culpable negligence violates any of the
civil service provisions of this Charter, or any of the rules of the Commission
made in pursuance thereof, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof before the Municipal Court shall be fined not less than
fifty ($50.00) dollars nor more than one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars, or
imprisoned not more than six months, or both. If such person be an applicant
for competitive test he shall be excluded therefrom; if he be an eligible his
name shall be removed from the eligible list; and if he be an officer or
employee of the City he shall immediately forfeit his office or employment.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 142 Present Civil Service Employees – Repealed
   Note: This section was repealed by the electors on November 7, 1989.
CHAPTER 29 – MERIT SYSTEM FOR TRANSIT EMPLOYEES
§
142-1   Separate Merit System by Transit Board – Repealed
§ 142-1 Separate Merit System by Transit Board– Repealed
   Note: This section was repealed by the electors on November 7, 1989.
CHAPTER 31 – IMPROVEMENTS AND ASSESSMENTS
§
143   Local Improvements
§
144   Methods of Special Assessments
§
145   Preliminary Resolution
§
146   Plans of Proposed Improvements
§
147   Notices Served
§
148   Board of Revision of Assessments
§
149   Claims
§
150   Final Assessment
§
151   Special Assessments
§
152   Determination of Damages
§
153   Assessment After Completion
§
154   Time Limit in Damage Claims
§
155   Work to be Done
§
156   Lands Unallotted or Not on Duplicate
§
157   Interest on Assessment Bonds
§
158   Limitations on Assessments
§
159   City’s Portion of Cost
§
160   Replacing Existing Improvements
§
161   Subsequent Improvements
§
162   Rebates and Supplementary Assessments
§
163   Sewer, Water and Other Connections
§
164   Sidewalks, Curbings and Gutters
§
165   Enforcement and Costs
§
166   Assessment Bonds
§
167   Public Improvements
§
168   Alterations or Modifications in Contract
§
169   Plat of Subdivision
§
170   Fee Shall Vest in City
§
171   Platting Commissioner
§
172   Effect of Platting
§
173   Duty to Keep Streets Open, in Repair and Free from Nuisance
§
174   Alteration of Streets
§
175   Dedication of Streets
§
176   Street Vacation or Change of Name
§ 143 Local Improvements
   The Council shall have power by ordinance to provide for the construction,
reconstruction, repair and maintenance by contract or directly by the
employment of labor, of all things in the nature of local improvements, and to
provide for the payment of any part of the cost of any such improvement by
levying and collecting special assessments upon abutting, adjacent and
contiguous or other specially benefitted property. The amount assessed against
the property specifically benefitted to pay for such local improvements shall
not exceed the amount of benefits accruing to such property.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 144 Methods of Special Assessments
   Special assessments upon the property deemed benefitted by a public
improvement shall be by any one of the following methods:
   (a)   By a percentage of the tax value of the property assessed.
   (b)   In proportion to the benefits which may result from the improvement.
   (c)   By the foot frontage of the property bounding or abutting upon the
improvement.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 145 Preliminary Resolution
   When it is deemed necessary to make a public improvement to be paid for in
whole or in part by special assessment, the Council shall declare the necessity
therefor, by resolution, and such resolution shall state the method of
assessment, the mode of payment, and the number of annual installments. Such
resolution shall be certified to the Director of Finance, who shall thereupon
proceed to make an assessment report, in accordance with the method of
assessment provided in the resolution, which report shall be filed with Council
and shall show the lots and lands assessed, and the amount of the assessment as
to each, and the number of installments not exceeding ten (10), in which such
assessments shall be paid.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 146 Plans of Proposed Improvements
   At the time of the passage of the resolution hereinbefore provided there
shall be on file in such office as the Council may designate by ordinance in
accordance with the provisions hereof, plans, specifications, estimates, and
profiles of the proposed improvements, giving all information necessary; and
such plans, specifications, estimates and profiles, shall be open to the
inspection of all interested persons. Until such time as the Council may make
the aforesaid designation the place of the said filing shall be the one in use
at the time of the adoption of this section.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 147 Notices Served
   Upon the filing of the assessment report, the Director of Finance shall
cause written notice to be served upon the owner of each lot or parcel of land
to be assessed, or otherwise affected, or upon the persons in whose names the
same may be assessed for taxation upon the tax duplicate. Said notice shall be
served as is provided for service of summons in civil actions; and as to all
nonresidents and persons who cannot be found, publication of such notice shall
be made at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. Said
notice shall contain a statement of the character of the proposed improvement,
the fact that the assessment report has been filed with the Council, the rate
of such assessment, the number of installments, and shall state a time and
place when complaints and claims will be heard before the Board of Revision of
Assessments.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 148 Board of Revision of Assessments
   The Board of Revision of Assessments shall consist of the Director of Law,
the Director of Finance, and the President of the Council. The Director of Law
shall be the President of the Board, and the Director of Finance shall be the
Secretary thereof. It shall meet weekly at a time and place provided by its
rules, and shall hear all claims and objections as to the character of all
improvements to be paid for in part or in whole by special assessments, the
necessity therefor, and the equity of the assessments as provided in the
assessment report. A majority of those constituting the Board of Revision of
Assessments shall have power to determine all complaints and objections
submitted to it, and as to each improvement the Board shall, after such
hearing, amend, equalize, and adjust the assessment report, and shall report
its findings as to the necessity for the improvements and any amendment it
directs in the assessments, the estimates of benefits and allowance of damages
to the Council.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 149 Claims
   An owner of a lot or of land bounding and abutting upon a proposed
improvement, claiming that he will sustain damage by reason of the improvement,
shall present such claim to the Board of Revision of Assessments within two
weeks after the service of notice or the completion of the publication
hereinbefore provided. Such claim shall be in writing and shall set forth the
amount of damages claimed, with a general description of the property with
respect to which it is claimed the damage will accrue, and shall be filed with
the Director of Finance. Any owner who fails to do so shall be deemed to have
waived such damages, and shall be barred from filing a claim or receiving
damages therefor. This provision shall apply to all damage which will obviously
result from the improvement, but shall not deprive the owner of his right to
recover damages arising, without his fault, from acts of the City or of its
agents. If, subsequent to the filing of such claim, the owner sells the
property, or any part thereof, the right of damages, if any, shall follow the
ownership of the land without other transference of the claim. The Board of
Revision of Assessments shall report to the Council all such claims for damages
filed with it.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 150 Final Assessment
   Whenever the Board of Revision of Assessments shall have made its final
report to the Council as to any improvement, the Council, if it determines that
the improvement shall proceed, shall pass an ordinance levying the assessment
as reported by the Board of Revision of Assessments and directing that the
improvement proceed. In such ordinance it shall be sufficient to describe the
lots and lands abutting upon the improvement and to be assessed therefor, as
all the lots and lands bounding and abutting upon such improvement between and
including the termini of the improvement; and in describing lands which do not
abut it shall be sufficient to describe the lots by their appropriate lot
numbers, and the lands by metes and bounds; and this rule of description shall
apply in all proceedings in which lots and lands are to be charged with special
assessments.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 151 Special Assessments
   Special assessments shall be payable by the owners of the property assessed
at the time stipulated in the ordinance, and shall be a lien from the date of
assessment upon the respective lots and parcels of land assessed, enforceable
in the manner provided by general law.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 152 Determination of Damages
   At the time of the passage of the ordinance determining to proceed with the
improvement as hereinbefore provided, the Council shall determine whether the
claims for damages so filed shall be allowed and paid or shall be judicially
inquired into before commencing or after the completion of the proposed
improvement. If it decides that the damages shall be assessed before commencing
the improvement, the Director of Law shall then make a written application to
the Court of Common Pleas, or a judge thereof in vacation, or to the Probate
Court, or to the Court of Insolvency, for the summoning of a jury to determine
such damage, and the judge shall direct that a jury be summoned as is provided
for the appropriation of property, and fix the time and place for inquiry into,
and assessment of such damages, which inquiry and assessment shall be confined
to such claims.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 153 Assessment After Completion
   When the Council determines to assess the damages after the completion of
the improvement for which the claim for damages has been filed as hereinbefore
provided, the Director of Law shall within ten (10) days after the completion
of the improvement make written application as hereinbefore provided in the
case of the ascertainment of damages before the improvement was made, and the
same proceedings shall be had as provided in the next preceding section.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 154 Time Limit in Damage Claims
   No person who claims damages arising from any cause shall commence a suit
therefor against the City until he shall have filed a claim for such damages
with the Director of Finance and sixty (60) days shall have elapsed thereafter.
This provision shall not apply to any application for an injunction or other
proceeding to which it may be necessary for such applicant to resort in case of
urgent necessity.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 155 Work to be Done
   When the Council shall have passed an ordinance directing that an
improvement be made, to be paid for in whole or in part by special assessments,
the Mayor shall through the appropriate department or office, either directly
by the employment of labor or by entering into a contract therefor, as may be
determined by the Council, cause the improvement to be made.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 156 Lands Unallotted or Not on Duplicate
   When special assessments are levied by the percentage of tax value of the
property assessed or by the foot frontage of the property bounding and abutting
upon the improvement, and there are lands subject to such assessment which are
not assessed for taxation, the Director of Finance shall fix, for the purpose
of such assessments, the value of such lots as they stand and of such lands at
such depths as the Director of Finance considers a fair average of the depth of
lots in the neighborhood, so that it will be a fair average of the assessed
value of other lots in the neighborhood. Where lands are not subdivided into
lots, but are assessed for taxation, the Director of Finance shall fix the
value and the depth in the same manner; but the above rule shall not apply in
making a special assessment according to benefits.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 157 Interest on Assessment Bonds
   When bonds or notes are issued in anticipation of the collection of
assessments, the interest thereon shall be treated as part of the cost of the
improvement of which assessments may be made.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 158 Limitations on Assessments
   The Council shall limit all assessments to the special benefits conferred
upon the property assessed, and in no case shall there be levied on any lot or
parcel of land any assessments for any or all purposes within a period of five
years in excess of thirty-three and one- third percent (33-1/3%) of the actual
value thereof after the improvement is made. Assessments levied for the
construction of main sewers shall not exceed that sum that, in the opinion of
the Council, would be required to construct an ordinary street sewer or drain
of sufficient capacity to drain or sewer the lots or lands to be assessed for
such improvement, nor shall any lots or lands be assessed that do not need
local drainage, or which are provided therewith.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 159 City’s Portion of Cost
   The City shall pay such part of the cost and expense of improvements for
which special assessments are levied as the Council deems just, which part
shall not be less than one-fiftieth (1/50) of all such cost and expense; and in
addition thereto the City shall pay the cost of intersections. The Council may
provide for the payment of the City’s portion of all such improvements by the
issuance of bonds or notes therefor and may levy taxes, in addition to all
other taxes authorized by law, to pay such bonds or notes and the interest
thereon.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 160 Replacing Existing Improvements
   The Council may provide in whole or in part the cost of replacing any
existing local improvement by levying special assessments as hereinbefore
provided, but any assessment for such replacement in less than fifteen years
from the date of a prior assessment for the improvement to be replaced shall be
limited to a sum not in excess of fifty percent of the cost of such
replacement.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 161 Subsequent Improvements
   Every ordinance providing for an improvement to be paid for in whole or in
part by special assessments shall contain an estimate of the life of the
proposed improvement by the appropriate department or office under the
direction of the Mayor. Any assessment thereafter made for replacing such
improvement within such estimated period of life shall be limited to a sum not
in excess of fifty percent (50%) of the cost of such replacement. Assessments
for replacements at or after the expiration of such estimated period of life
shall be subject to no limitation except as provided for assessments for
original improvements.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 162 Rebates and Supplementary Assessments
   Upon the completion of any improvement the Director of Finance shall rebate
to the then owner of the property which shall have been assessed to pay for
such improvement any surplus or excess remaining unexpended for the purpose for
which such assessment was made, and in the event of there being a deficit in
the fund provided for the making of any such improvement the Director of
Finance shall report to the Council a supplementary assessment within the
limitation hereinbefore provided, which supplementary assessment shall be made
by ordinance of the Council and certified for collection as is provided in the
case of original assessments.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 163 Sewer, Water and Other Connections
   The Mayor, or Director or head of an appropriate department or office under
the direction of the Mayor, shall have authority to compel the making of sewer,
water, and gas and other connections whenever in view of contemplated street
improvements or as a sanitary regulation, such connections should in his
judgment be constructed. Written notice of such determination shall be given to
the owner or each lot or parcel of land to which connections are to be made,
which notice shall state the number and character of connections required. Such
notice shall be served by a person, designated by the Mayor or by the director
or head of an appropriate department or office under the direction of the
Mayor, in the manner provided for the service of summons in civil actions.
Nonresidents of the City, or persons who cannot be found, may be served by one
publication of such notice in the newspaper of general circulation in the City.
The notice shall state the time within which such connections shall be
constructed and, if they be not constructed, within said time, the work may be
done by the City and the cost thereof, together with a penalty of five percent
(5%), assessed against the lots and lands for which the connections are made.
Said assessments shall be certified and collected in the same manner as other
assessments for street improvements.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 164 Sidewalks, Curbings and Gutters
   The Council may by resolution declare that certain specified sidewalks,
curbings or gutters shall be constructed or repaired. Upon the passage of such
resolution the Director of Finance shall cause written notice of the passage
thereof to be served upon the owner, or agent of the owner, of each parcel of
land abutting upon such sidewalks, curbings or gutters who may be a resident of
the City, in the manner provided by law for the service of summons in civil
actions. A copy of the notice, with the time and manner of service endorsed
thereon, signed by the person serving it, shall be returned to the office of
the Director of Finance and there filed and preserved. For the purpose of such
service, if the owner of any such property be not a resident of the City, any
person charged with the collection of rent or the payment of taxes upon such
property, or having control thereof in any way, shall be regarded as the agent
of the owner, and service upon such person shall have like force and effect as
though personal service were made on the owner thereof. If it appear in any
such return that the owner is a nonresident, or that neither such owner or
agent could be found, one publication of a copy of the resolution in a
newspaper of general circulation in the City shall be deemed sufficient notice
to such owner.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 165 Enforcement and Costs
   If sidewalks, curbings, or gutters are not constructed or repaired within
fifteen (15) days from the service of the notice provided for in the preceding
section, or the completion of the publication thereof, the City may proceed
through the appropriate department or office either by direct employment of
labor, or by contract, to carry out the said construction or repair at the
expense of the owner, as is the case of other improvements, and all such
expense shall be reported by the Director of Finance to the Council. The
Council shall thereupon by ordinance assess the cost and expense thereof upon
the owner or owners of all the property bounding or abutting thereon, and such
assessment shall be collected in the same manner as other assessments with a
penalty of five percent (5%) and interest for failure to pay at the time fixed
by the assessment resolution.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 166 Assessment Bonds
   The Council may at any time borrow money and authorize the issuance of notes
or bonds therefor in anticipation of the collection of assessments, levied for
the purpose of paying the cost of constructing or repairing sidewalks, curbings
and gutters which are to be or have been constructed by the City, upon the
failure of the owners of the property to construct or repair the same pursuant
to notice as hereinbefore provided.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 167 Public Improvements
   Public improvements of all kinds may be made by the appropriate department,
either by direct employment of the necessary labor and the purchase of the
necessary supplies and materials, with separate accounting as to each
improvement so made, or by contract duly let to the lowest responsible bidder
after competitive bidding, either for a gross price, or upon a unit basis for
the improvement, or by contract containing a guaranteed maximum and stipulating
that the City shall pay within such maximum the cost of labor and materials,
plus a fixed percentage of profit to the contractor. Public improvements may
also be made by combining the design professional contract with the public
improvement contract, in a manner similar to a design-build or engineer,
procure, construct (EPC) contract, and be awarded on the basis of the best
proposal, taking into consideration the engineering and design, the
construction method(s), the proposed design and construction costs, the total
life-cycle costs, the qualifications of the proposed design professional and
the construction firm(s), and the other objectives of the project.
   The Council shall by ordinance determine by which of the foregoing methods
any improvement shall be made. Contracts may provide a bonus per day for
completion of the contract prior to a specified date, and liquidated damages to
the City to be exacted in like sum for every day of delay beyond a specified
date.
(Effective November 4, 2008)
§ 168 Alterations or Modifications in Contract
   When in the prosecution of any work or improvement under contract it becomes
necessary, in the opinion of the director of the appropriate department, to
make alterations or modifications in such contracts, such alterations or
modifications shall be made only when authorized by the Council upon the
written recommendations of such director, countersigned by the Mayor. No such
alterations shall be valid unless the price to be paid for the work or
material, or both, under the altered or modified contract, shall have been
agreed upon in writing and signed by the contractor and such director prior to
such authorization by the Council.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 169 Plat of Subdivision
   A proprietor of lots or grounds within the City, who subdivides or lays them
out for sale, shall cause to be made an accurate map, or plat of such
subdivision, describing with certainty all grounds laid out, or granted for
streets, alleys, ways, commons, or other public uses. Lots sold or intended for
sale shall be numbered by progressive numbers, or described by the squares in
which situated, and the precise length and width shall be given of each lot
sold or intended for sale. Such map or plat shall be subscribed by the
proprietor, or his agent duly authorized in writing, acknowledged before an
officer authorized to take the acknowledgment of deeds, who shall certify the
acknowledgment of the instrument, and recorded in the office of the County
Recorder.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 170 Fee Shall Vest in City
   The map or plat so recorded shall thereupon be a sufficient conveyance to
vest in the City the fee of the parcel or parcels of land designated or
intended for streets, alleys, ways, commons, or other public uses, to be held
in the corporate name in trust to and for the uses and purposes in the
instrument set forth, expressed, designated or intended.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 171 Platting Commissioner
   The Council shall, by ordinance, designate the director of a department, or
some other administrative officer of the City, as Platting Commissioner. The
Platting Commissioner shall provide regulations governing the platting of all
lands so as to require all streets and alleys to be of proper width, and to be
coterminous with adjoining streets and alleys, and otherwise to conform with
regulations prescribed by the City Planning Commission. Such regulations may
also require that sewers and other public improvements shall be of such nature
as to conform to the plan of the City and be adequate to the future needs of
the City and of the newly platted territory. Whenever the Council shall deem it
expedient to plat any portion of territory within the City limits, in which the
necessary or convenient streets or alleys have not already been accepted by the
City so as to become public streets, or when any person plats any land within
the corporate limits, or within three miles thereof, the Platting Commissioner
shall, if such plats are in accordance with the rules as prescribed by him,
endorse his written approval thereon. No plat subdividing lands within the
corporate limits, or within three miles thereof, shall be entitled to record in
the Recorder’s office of the County without such written approval so endorsed
thereon.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 172 Effect of Platting
   No streets or alleys, except those laid down on such plat and bearing the
approval of the Platting Commissioner, as hereinbefore provided, shall
subsequently in any way be accepted as public streets, or alleys, by the City,
nor shall any public funds be expended in the repair or improvement of streets
and alleys subsequently laid out and not on such plat. This restriction shall
not apply to a street or alley laid out by the City, nor to streets, alleys, or
public grounds laid out on a plat by or with the approval of the Platting
Commissioner.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 173 Duty to Keep Streets Open, in Repair and Free from Nuisance
   The Council shall provide for the care, supervision, control and improvement
of public highways, streets, avenues, alleys, sidewalks, public grounds,
bridges, aqueducts, and viaducts, within the City, and shall cause them to be
kept open, in repair and free from nuisance.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 174 Alteration of Streets
   When it deems it necessary the Council may cause any street, alley, or
public highway to be opened, straightened, altered, diverted, narrowed,
widened, or vacated.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 175 Dedication of Streets
   No street or alley dedicated to public use by the proprietor of ground in
the City shall be deemed a public street or alley, or under the care or control
of the Council, unless the dedication be accepted and confirmed by ordinance
passed for such purpose, or unless the provisions hereof relating to
subdivisions shall have been complied with.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 176 Street Vacation or Change of Name
   The Council in vacating any street, or part of street, or changing the name
of any street may include in one ordinance the change of name or the vacation
or narrowing of more than one street, avenue, or alley, but before vacating any
street or part thereof, or narrowing any street, the Council shall first pass a
resolution declaring its intention so to do. The Director of Finance shall
cause notice of such resolution to be served in the manner that service of
summons is required to be made in civil actions upon all persons whose property
abuts upon the portion of the street affected by the proposed vacation or
narrowing, and by publication once in one newspaper of general circulation in
the City as to all the persons who cannot be personally served. Said notice
shall state the time and place at which objections can be heard before the
Board of Revision of Assessments. Upon the report by the Board of Revision of
Assessments, approving the proposed vacation or narrowing, the Council may by
ordinance declare such vacation or narrowing, and such order of the Council
vacating or narrowing a street or alley which has been dedicated to public use
by the proprietor, shall, to the extent to which it is vacated or narrowed,
operate as a revocation of the acceptance thereof by the Council, but the right
of way and easement therein of any lot owner shall not be impaired thereby.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
CHAPTER 33 – APPROPRIATION OF PROPERTY
§
177   Appropriation
§
178   Declaratory Resolution
§
179   Notice
§
180   Further Proceedings
§ 177 Appropriation
   Property within the corporate limits of the City may be appropriated for any
public or Municipal purpose, and subject only to the limitations imposed by the
Constitution of the State, such appropriation shall be made as herein provided.
By such appropriation the City may acquire a fee simple title or any less
estate, easement or use. Appropriation of property located outside the
corporate limits of the City, shall be made according to the requirements of
and as provided by general law.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 178 Declaratory Resolution
   When it is deemed necessary to appropriate property the Council shall adopt
a resolution declaring such intent, defining the purpose of the appropriation,
setting forth a pertinent description of the property, and the estate or
interest therein described to be appropriated.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 179 Notice
   Immediately upon the adoption of such resolution, for which but one reading
shall be necessary, the Director of Finance shall cause written notice thereof
to be given to the owner, person in possession thereof, or having an interest
of record in, every piece of land sought to be appropriated, or to his
authorized agent, and such notice shall be served by a person designated for
the purpose, and return made in the manner provided by law for the service and
return of summons in civil actions. If such owner, person, or agent, cannot be
found, notice shall be given by publication once a week for three consecutive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the City, and the Council may
thereafter pass an ordinance directing such appropriation to proceed.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 180 Further Proceedings
   Upon the passage of such ordinance the Director of Law shall make
application to the Court of Common Pleas, or to a judge thereof in vacation, to
the Probate Court, or to the Insolvency Court of Cuyahoga County, which
application shall describe as correctly as possible the land or other property
to be appropriated, the interest or estate therein to be taken, the object for
which the land is desired, and the name of the owner of each lot or parcel
thereof, and all the subsequent proceedings with regard thereto shall be in the
manner provided by general law for the appropriation of property by municipal
corporations in this State.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
CHAPTER 35 – FRANCHISES
§
181   Grants
§
182   Renewals
§
183   Termination Provisions
§
184   Valuation
§
185   Extensions
§
186   Passage of Franchise Ordinances
§
187   Certified Copies of Grants and Other Documents
§
188   Grant Nonexclusive; Maximum Time Limit
§
189   Consents
§
190   Control and Regulation by Council
§ 181 Grants
   The Council may by ordinance grant permission to any individual, company or
corporation to construct and operate a public utility in the streets and public
grounds of the City. It may prescribe in the ordinance the kind and quality of
service or product to be furnished, the rate or rates to be charged therefore,
the manner in which the streets and public grounds shall be used and occupied,
and any other terms and conditions conducive to the public interest.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 182 Renewals
   The Council may, by ordinance, renew any grant for the construction or
operation of any utility, at its expiration, upon such terms as may be
conducive to the public interest.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 183 Termination Provisions
   All such grants and renewals thereof shall reserve to the City the right to
terminate the same and to purchase all the property of the utility in the
streets and highways in the City and elsewhere, as may be provided in the
ordinance making the grant or renewal, used in or useful for the operation of
the utility, at a price either fixed in the ordinance, or to be fixed in the
manner provided by the ordinance making the grant or renewal of the grant.
Nothing in such ordinance shall prevent the City from acquiring the property of
any such utility by condemnation proceedings or in any other lawful mode; but
all such methods of acquisition shall be alternative to the power to purchase,
reserved in the grant or renewal as hereinbefore provided. Upon the acquisition
by the City of the property of any utility, by purchase, condemnation or
otherwise, all grants or renewals shall at once terminate.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 184 Valuation
   No ordinance making such grant or renewal shall be valid unless it shall
expressly provide therein that the price to be paid by the City for the
property that may be acquired by it from such utility, by purchase,
condemnation or otherwise, shall exclude all value of such grant or renewal.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 185 Extensions
   The Council may, by ordinance, grant to any individual, company or
corporation operating a public utility, the right to extend the appliances and
service of such utility. All such extensions shall become a part of the
aggregate property of the utility, and shall be subject to all the obligations
and reserved rights in favor of the City applicable to the property of the
utility by virtue of the ordinance providing for its construction and
operation. The right to use and maintain any such extension shall expire with
the original grant of the utility to which the extension was made or any
renewal thereof.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 186 Passage of Franchise Ordinances
   No ordinance making, amending or renewing a grant to construct or operate a
public utility or to extend the appliances or service thereof, shall be adopted
by the Council until adequate public hearings shall have been held on such
ordinance, and until at least one week after its publication in the City Record
in final form.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 187 Certified Copies of Grants and Other Documents
   Every public utility, and every owner of a public utility grant, shall file
with the City certified copies of all such grants owned or claimed, or under
which any such utility is operated within the City. Certified copies of all
public utility grants, and of all amendments, renewals and extensions thereof,
made subsequent to the taking effect of this section shall be filed with the
City by the grantee within ten days after acceptance thereof. No grant to
construct or operate a public utility shall be transferable except with the
approval of the Council expressed by ordinance; and certified copies of all
transfers, mortgages, and other documents affecting the title or use of public
utilities shall be filed with the City within ten days after their execution.
The certified copies of grants and other documents required by this section to
be filed with the City shall be filed and preserved as a public record in such
office thereof as the Council may by ordinance provide.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 188 Grant Nonexclusive; Maximum Time Limit
   No right or rights to construct, maintain, or operate any public utility in
the City of Cleveland shall be exclusive; nor shall such right or rights be
granted for a longer period than twenty-five years.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 189 Consents
   No consent of the owner of property abutting on any highway or public ground
shall be required for the construction, extension, maintenance, or operation of
any public utility by original grant or renewal, unless such public utility is
of such a character that its construction or operation is an additional burden
upon the rights of the property owners in such highways or public ground.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 190 Control and Regulation by Council
   The Council shall at all times control the distribution of space in, over,
under or across all streets or public grounds and occupied by public utility
fixtures. All rights granted for the construction and operation of public
utilities shall be subject to the continuing right of the Council to require
such reconstruction, relocation, change or discontinuance of the appliances
used by the utility in the streets, alleys, avenues, and highways, of the City,
as shall in the opinion of the Council be necessary in the public interest.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
CHAPTER 37 – OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
§
191   Compensation of Officers and Employees
§
192   Official Bond
§
193   Continuation in Office
§
194   Oath of Office
§
195   Financial Interest in Contracts
§
196   Hours of Labor
§
197   Employment Contracts
§
198   Minimum Wage – Repealed
§
198-1   Annual Rate of Pay to Be Paid Members of Fire Division – Repealed
§
198-2   Annual Rate of Pay to Be Paid Members of Police Division – Repealed
§
199   Continuance of Contracts; Miscellaneous Provisions – Repealed
§
199-1   Daylight Savings Time – Repealed
§ 191 Compensation of Officers and Employees
   The salary or compensation of all officers and employees in the unclassified
service of the City shall be fixed by ordinance, or as may be provided by
ordinance. The salary or compensation of all other officers and employees shall
be fixed by the appointing authority in accordance with ability, fitness and
seniority within the limits set forth in the Council’s salary or compensation
schedule for which provision is hereinafter made. The Council shall by
ordinance establish a schedule of compensation for officers and employees in
the classified service, which schedule shall provide for like compensation for
like services and shall provide minimum and maximum rates (which may be
identical) of salary or compensation for each grade and classification of
positions determined by the Civil Service Commission under Section
126 of this Charter. Only in the case of employees in those classifications for
which the Council provided in 1979 a schedule of compensation in accordance
with prevailing wages paid in the building and construction trades, the
schedule established by the Council shall be in accordance with the prevailing
rates of salary or compensation for such services. For the guidance of Council
in determining the foregoing schedule the Civil Service Commission shall
prepare salary or compensation schedules, and the Mayor or any director may,
and when required by Council shall, prepare suggested salary or compensation
schedules.
   The salary of any officer or member of a board or commission in the
unclassified service of the City shall not be increased or diminished during
the term for which he was elected or appointed. Salaries and compensation fixed
at the time this section takes effect shall continue in force until otherwise
fixed as provided in this section. All fees pertaining to any office shall be
paid into the City Treasury.
(Effective February 17, 1981)
§ 192 Official Bond
   The Mayor, the Director of Finance, the Commissioner of Accounts, the City
Treasurer, and such other officers or employees as the Council may require so
to do, shall give bonds in such amount and with such surety as may be approved
by the Council. The premium on such bonds may be paid by the City.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 193 Continuation in Office
   All persons holding administrative office, excepting the office of City
Manager, at the time provisions of this Charter take effect, shall continue in
office and in the performance of their duties until provisions shall have been
made in accordance therewith for the performance of such duties or the
discontinuance of such office. The directors of all departments, whether
created by charter or by ordinance, shall continue in office and in the
performance of their duties until their successors are appointed by the Mayor,
as provided in this Charter, and until their successors have qualified. The
powers which are conferred and the duties which are imposed upon any officer,
commission, board or department of the City under the laws of the State shall,
if such office or department is abolished by this Charter, be thereafter
exercised and discharged by the officer, board or department upon whom or upon
which are imposed corresponding functions, powers and duties hereunder.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 194 Oath of Office
   Every officer of the City shall, before entering upon the duties of his
office take and subscribe to an oath or affirmation, to be filed and kept in
the office of the Clerk of the Council, that he will in all respects faithfully
discharge the duties of his office.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 195 Financial Interest in Contracts
   No officer or employee of the City shall have a financial interest in a
contract with the City, if the financial interest in that contract is unlawful
under general laws applicable to officers and employees of the City. Any
willful violation of this section shall constitute malfeasance in office, and
any officer or employee found guilty thereof shall thereby forfeit his office
or position. Any violation of this section with the knowledge, expressed or
implied, of the person or corporation contracting with the City shall render
the contract involved voidable by the Mayor or the Council.
(Effective November 3, 1987)
§ 196 Hours of Labor
   Except in case of extraordinary emergencies, not to exceed eight hours shall
constitute a day’s work and not to exceed forty-eight hours a week’s work, for
any City employee of the City of Cleveland in the classified service thereof,
and for any workmen engaged in any public work carried on or aided by the
Municipality whether done by contract or otherwise. The Council shall by
ordinance, provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this section.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 197 Employment Contracts
   Every contract for public work entered into by the City of Cleveland shall
contain, and no contract shall be entered into unless it contains the following
stipulations: The contractor hereby agrees that all persons employed by him
shall be paid wages which are not less than are paid by the City of Cleveland
for similar or like work; but if said City has not established a rate of wages
for any particular class of work to be performed under the terms of this
contract, then said employees shall be paid wages not less than are generally
paid therefor by others employing union labor in said City.
   The contractor hereby further agrees that in the employment of labor,
skilled or unskilled, under the contract there shall be no discrimination
exercised against any citizen because of race, color, religion or national
origin; and that any violation hereof shall be deemed a material breach of said
contract.
(Effective November 7, 1989)
§ 198 Minimum Wage – Repealed
   Note: This section was repealed by the electors on November 7, 1989.
§ 198-1 Annual Rate of Pay to Be Paid Members of Fire Division – Repealed
   Note: This section was repealed by the electors on April 26, 1977.
§ 198-2 Annual Rate of Pay to Be Paid Members of Police Division – Repealed
   Note: This section was repealed by the electors on April 26, 1977.
§ 199 Continuance of Contracts; Miscellaneous Provisions – Repealed
   Note: This section was repealed by the electors on November 7, 1989.
§ 199-1 Daylight Savings Time – Repealed
   Note: This section was repealed by the electors on November 7, 1989.
CHAPTER 39 – AMENDMENTS AND CHARTER REVIEW
§
200   General Provisions
§
200-1   Charter Review Commission
§
201   Severability Clause
§
202   Effective Date
§ 200 General Provisions
   Proposed amendments to this Charter may be submitted to the electors of the
City by a two- thirds vote of the members of Council, and upon petition signed
by ten percent of the electors of the City, setting forth any such proposed
amendment, prepared and filed with the Council, through its Clerk in the manner
and form prescribed in this Charter for the preparation and filing with the
Clerk of an initiative petition for an ordinance, such proposed amendment shall
be submitted to the electors of the City by the Council. The percentage
aforesaid shall be based upon the total vote cast at the last preceding general
Municipal election. The ordinance providing for the submission of any such
proposed amendment shall require that such proposed amendment be submitted to
the electors at the next regular Municipal election if one shall occur not less
than sixty days nor more than one hundred and twenty days after its passage;
otherwise it shall provide for the submission of the proposed amendment at a
special election to be called and held within the time aforesaid. When ten (10)
days and two regular meetings of the Council have passed after the filing of a
petition fulfilling the requirements of this section, then the Council shall
forthwith provide the ordinance for the submission to the electors of the
proposed amendment to this Charter. The Clerk of the Council shall transmit to
the election authorities prescribed by general law a duly authenticated copy of
such ordinance forthwith upon its passage, and not less than thirty days prior
to such election the Clerk of the Council shall either mail a copy of the
proposed amendment to each elector whose name appears upon the registration
books of the last regular or general election held in the City or pursuant to
laws passed by general assembly notice of the proposed amendments may be given
by newspaper advertising. If such proposed amendment is approved by a majority
of the electors voting thereon it shall become a part of the Charter of the
City at the time fixed in the amendment; and if no time is fixed therein, then
it shall become a part of the Charter upon its approval by the electors.
Proposed amendments to this Charter may be submitted to the electors by ballot
title, which shall be clear, concise statements, without argument, descriptive
of the substance of such proposed amendments. If conflicting proposed
amendments to this Charter shall be approved at the same election, the one
receiving the highest number of affirmative votes shall be the amendment to the
Charter.
(Effective October 8, 1971)
§ 200-1 Charter Review Commission
   Not later than the first day of February in the year 2018 and of each
succeeding tenth year thereafter, the Council shall provide for the selection
of a Charter Review Commission and shall appropriate adequate funds for a
comprehensive review of the existing Charter provisions.
   The Charter Review Commission shall consist of fifteen electors of the City
of Cleveland appointed or elected in the manner prescribed by ordinance.
   Within thirty days after selection the members shall meet, choose a Chairman
and Secretary, and adopt rules to govern the procedure of the Commission. The
Commission may employ necessary assistants and professional services as it
deems necessary, within the funds appropriated for this purpose.
   Not later than one year after its organization the Charter Review Commission
shall report to the Council proposed amendments to the Charter as the
Commission determines to be necessary or desirable and a statement of the
reasons for submitting the proposed amendments to the electors; or that no
changes in the Charter are required or desired.
   Upon receipt of the report of the Charter Review Commission setting forth
any proposed amendment or amendments to the Charter, the Council shall
determine by ordinance whether the proposed amendment or amendments shall be
submitted to the electors of the City of Cleveland in the manner provided and
governed by the provisions of Section
200 and in conformity with Section
9 of Article XVIII, of the Ohio Constitution.
(Effective May 4, 2010)
§ 201 Severability Clause
   If any section or part of a section of this amendment proves to be invalid
or unconstitutional, the same shall not be held to invalidate or impair the
validity, force or effect of any other section or part of a section of this
amendment, unless it clearly appears that such other section or part of a
section is wholly or necessarily dependent for its operation upon the section
or part of a section so held unconstitutional or invalid.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
§ 202 Effective Date
   For the purpose of nominating and electing officers the provisions of this
Charter shall be in effect for any regular Municipal election held not less
than eighty days from and after their approval by the electors of City. For all
other purposes this Charter shall be in effect on the first Monday following
the first election of officers thereunder, on which day Section
3 to
183, both inclusive, of the existing Charter of the City of Cleveland shall be
deemed repealed. All members of the Council elected in accordance with the
existing provisions of the Charter of the City of Cleveland shall continue to
hold such office for the full term for which they were elected.
   If, however, the provisions of this Charter are approved at an election held
in an even numbered year or at an election held in an odd numbered year on a
day which is later than eighty days before the regular Municipal election of
that year, the foregoing provisions in this section as to the time the
provisions of this Charter shall take effect shall be held for naught and the
following provisions shall apply, namely: The provisions of this Charter shall
be in effect for all purposes on the first Monday following their approval by
the electors of the City and Sections
3 to
183, both inclusive, of the existing Charter of the City of Cleveland shall be
deemed repealed on that day, except for the purpose of nominating and electing
members of Council the provisions of this Charter shall be in effect for any
regular Municipal election held not less than eighty days from and after their
approval by the electors of the City and except that meanwhile candidates for
Council may be nominated and elected, and members of Council may be recalled
and persons may be chosen to fill vacancies in Council, all in accordance with
the existing provisions of the Charter of the City of Cleveland. Members of
Council elected in accordance with the existing provisions of the Charter of
the City of Cleveland shall continue to hold such office for the full term for
which they were elected.
(Effective November 9, 1931)
CHAPTER 40
§
203   Traffic Law Photo-Monitoring Devices
§ 203 Traffic Law Photo-Monitoring Devices
   (a)   The City, including its various Boards, agencies and departments,
shall not use any traffic law photo-monitoring device for the enforcement of a
qualified traffic law violation, unless a law enforcement officer is present at
the location of the device and personally issues the ticket to the alleged
violator at the time and location of the violation.
   (b)   Definitions. As used in this Section
203:
      (1)   "Law enforcement officer" means any law enforcement officer
employed by the City or any other political jurisdiction in Ohio, including the
State. The City may from time to time and in its discretion, by ordinance or
resolution, designate which City employees are, "law enforcement officers" for
purposes of this Section
203.
      (2)   "Qualified law traffic violation" means a violation of any of the
following: (1) any state or local law relating to complying with a traffic
control signal or a railroad crossing sign or signal; or (2) any state or local
law limiting the speed of a motor vehicle.
      (3)   "Ticket" means any traffic ticket, citation, summons, or other
notice of liability (whether civil or criminal) issued in response to an
alleged qualified traffic law violation detected by a traffic law photo-
monitoring device.
      (4)   "Traffic law photo-monitoring device" means an electronic system
consisting of a photographic, video, or electronic camera and a means of
sensing the presence of a motor vehicle that automatically produces
photographs, videotape, or digital images of the vehicle, its license plate or
its operator.
   (c)   Any ordinance enacted prior to the passage of this Amendment that
contravenes any of the foregoing is void. After the enactment of this
Amendment, the City shall not enact or enforce any ordinance that contravenes
any of the foregoing. In the event that any provision of this Section
203 is found to be unconstitutional or impermissibly in conflict with state or
federal law, only such provision found to be unconstitutional or impermissible
will be stricken, and the remainder of Section
203 will remain in full force and effect.
(Effective November 4, 2014)
PART ONE: ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
Title I: General Provisions
   Chapter
101   Codified Ordinances
   Chapter
103   Boundaries and Wards
   Chapter
105   Official Standards
   Chapter
106   Democracy Day
   Chapter
107   Military Spending and Related Tax Revenues for Military Purposes
   Chapter
109   Domestic Partnership Registry
   Chapter
110   Campaign Finance Regulation
   Chapter
110A   Circulation of Initiative or Referendum Petition Regulation
Title III: Legislative
   Chapter
111   Council
   Chapter
113   Clerk of Council
   Chapter
115   City Record and Printing
Title V: Administrative Organization
   Chapter
121   Departments Generally
   Chapter
123   Office of Mayor
   Chapter
125   Department of Law
   Chapter
127   Department of Finance
   Chapter
129   Department of Public Utilities
   Chapter
131   Department of Public Works
   Chapter
133   Department of Parks and Recreation
   Chapter
135   Department of Public Safety
   Chapter
137   Department of Community Development
   Chapter
138   Department of Building and Housing
   Chapter
139   Department of Port Control
   Chapter
141   Department of Public Health
   Chapter
143   Department of Human Resources
   Chapter
144   Department of Development
   Chapter
145   Department on Aging
   Chapter
147   Department of Consumer Affairs
   Chapter
148   Department of Innovation and Technology
Title VII: Judicial
   Chapter
149   Municipal Court
Title IX: Boards and Commissions
   Chapter
151   Boards and Commissions Generally
   Chapter
153   Port and Harbor Commission
   Chapter
154   City Audit Committee
   Chapter
155   Moral Claims Commission
   Chapter
157   Community Relations Board
   Chapter
159   Consumers Council Advisory Board
   Chapter
160   Housing Advisory Board
   Chapter
161   Landmarks Commission
   Chapter
162   Cleveland Commission on Black Women and Girls
   Chapter
163   Urban Forestry Commission
   Chapter
165   Boxing and Wrestling Commission
   Chapter
167   City Records Commission
   Chapter
169   Civil Service Commission
   Chapter
170   Tax Abatement Commission
Title XI: Employment and Compensation
   Chapter
171   Employment Provisions
   Chapter
173   Compensation
Title XIII: Fiscal Management
   Chapter
177   Bonds and Notes
   Chapter
178   Deposit and Investment of City Funds
   Chapter
179   Sinking Fund
Title XV: Purchases and Contracts
   Chapter
181   Purchases and Supplies
   Chapter
183   Real Estate Transactions
   Chapter
185   Construction and Improvement Contracts
   Chapter
186   Public Art
   Chapter
187   Cleveland Area Business Code
   Chapter
187A   Local Producer, Local-Food Purchaser, and Sustainable Business
Preference Code
   Chapter
188   Fannie M. Lewis Cleveland Resident Employment Law
   Chapter
189   Cleveland Fair Employment Law
   Chapter
190   Wage Theft and Payroll Fraud Prevention
   Chapter
190A   Community Benefits Agreements
Title XVII: Taxation
   Chapter
191   Municipal Income Tax
   Chapter
192   2016 Municipal Income Tax
   Chapter
193   Transient Occupancy Tax
   Chapter
195   Admissions Tax
   Chapter
196   Parking Occupancy Tax
   Chapter
197   Motor Vehicle License Tax
   Chapter
198   Motor Vehicle Lessor Tax
   Chapter
199   Tax on Coin Operated Amusement Devices
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
101   Codified Ordinances
   Chapter
103   Boundaries and Wards
   Chapter
105   Official Standards
   Chapter
106   Democracy Day
   Chapter
107   Military Spending and Related Tax Revenues for Military Purposes
   Chapter
109   Domestic Partnership Registry
   Chapter
110   Campaign Finance Regulation
   Chapter
110A   Circulation of Initiative or Referendum Petition Regulation
CHAPTER 101 – CODIFIED ORDINANCES
101.01   Designation; Citation; Headings
101.02   General Definitions
101.021   Open Public Meetings and Hearings
101.03   Rules of Construction
101.04   Revivor; Effect of Amendment or Repeal
101.05   Construction of Section References
101.06   Conflicting Provisions
101.07   Determination of Legislative Intent
101.08   Severability
101.99   General Penalty
   Note: The legislative history of this chapter, except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 63410-A, passed
September 22, 1924.
Charter reference:
   Codification in book form, Charter §
34
Statutory reference:
   See sectional histories for similar State law
   Codification in book form, RC 731.23
   Imprisonment until fine and costs are paid, RC 1905.30, 2947.20
§ 101.01 Designation; Citation; Headings
   (a)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the City of
Cleveland as revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered and consolidated into
component codes, titles, chapters and sections shall be known and designated as
the Codified Ordinances of Cleveland, Ohio, 1976, for which designation
“Codified Ordinances” may be substituted. Code, title, chapter and section
headings do not constitute any part of the law as contained in the Codified
Ordinances.
(RC 1.01)
   (b)   All references to codes, titles, chapters and sections are to such
components of the Codified Ordinances unless otherwise specified. Any component
code may be referred to and cited by its name, such as the “Administrative
Code”. Sections may be referred to and cited by the designation “Section”
followed by the number, such as “Section
101.01”.
§ 101.02 General Definitions
   As used in the Codified Ordinances, unless another definition is provided or
the context otherwise requires:
   (a)   "And" may be read "or", and "or" may be read "and", if the sense
requires it.
(RC 1.02(F))
   (b)   "Another" when used to designate the owner of property which is the
subject of an offense, includes not only natural persons but also every other
owner of property.
(RC 1.02(B))
   (c)   "Bond" includes an undertaking and "undertaking" includes a bond.
(RC 1.02(D), (E))
   (d)   "Council" means the legislative authority of the City of Cleveland.
   (e)   "County" means Cuyahoga County, Ohio.
   (f)   "Keeper" or "proprietor" includes all persons, whether acting by
themselves or as a servant, agent or employee.
   (g)   "Land" or "real estate" includes rights and easements of an
incorporeal nature.
(RC 701.01(E))
   (h)   "Municipality" or "City" means the City of Cleveland, Ohio.
   (i)   "Oath" includes affirmation and "swear" includes affirm.
(RC 1.59(B))
   (j)   "Owner", when applied to property, includes any part owner, joint
owner or tenant in common of the whole or part of such property.
   (k)   "Person" includes an individual, corporation, business trust, estate,
trust, partnership and association.
(RC 1.59(C))
   (l)   "Premises", as applied to property, includes land and buildings.
   (m)   "Property" means real and personal property. "Personal property"
includes all property except real property. "Real property" includes lands,
tenements and hereditaments.
(RC 1.59(E))
   (n)   "Public authority" includes boards of education: the City of
Cleveland, Cuyahoga County, State of Ohio, or Federal government, its officers
or an agency thereof; or any duly authorized public official.
   (o)   "Public place" includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school
yard, body of water or watercourse, public conveyance, or any other place for
the sale of merchandise, public accommodation or amusement.
   (p)   "Registered mail" includes certified mail and "certified mail"
includes registered mail.
(RC 1.02(G))
   (q)   "Sexual orientation" means a person's actual or perceived
homosexuality, bisexuality or heterosexuality, by orientation or practice, by
and between consenting adults.
   (r)   "Sidewalk" means that portion of the street between the curb line and
the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
   (s)   "Street" includes alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, roads, highways,
viaducts and all other public thoroughfares within the City of Cleveland.
   (t)   "Tenant" or "occupant", as applied to premises, includes any person
holding a written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part
of such premises, alone or with others.
   (u)   "This State" or "the State" means the State of Ohio.
(RC 1.59(G))
   (v)   "Whoever" includes all persons, natural and artificial; partners;
principals, agents, and employees; and all officials, public or private.
(RC 1.02(A))
   (w)   "Written" or "in writing" includes any representation of words,
letters, symbols or figures. This provision does not affect any law relating to
signatures.
(Ord. No. 979-15. Passed 9-21-15, eff. 9-23-15)
§ 101.021 Open Public Meetings and Hearings
   (a)   Definitions. As used in this section:
      (1)   "Council" shall have the same meaning as defined in Section
101.02.
      (2)   "Electronically" means by way of electronic equipment or devices,
including but not limited to, live-streaming by means of internet, local radio,
television, cable public access channels; call in information for a
teleconference; or by means of any other similar electronic technology.
      (3)   "Open to the public" means that a public meeting, or hearing
conducted in-person, virtually, or any combination thereof, to which the public
has access to the deliberations and official actions of the public body in-
person, virtually, electronically, or any combination thereof.
      (4)   "Public body" shall have the same meaning as defined in RC 121.22.
      (5)   "Virtually" means by way of teleconference, video conference, or
any other similar electronic technology.
   (b)   Attendance. Each public body may permit its members to attend its
public meetings or hearings in-person, virtually, or a combination of the two.
The following shall apply if any or all of the members are permitted to attend
virtually:
      (1)   Each member attending virtually shall be considered present as if
the member is in-person at the public meeting or hearing, shall be permitted to
vote, and shall be counted for purposes of determining whether a quorum is
present at the public meeting or hearing;
      (2)   Any vote on a resolution, ordinance or formal action of any kind
cast by a member attending virtually shall have the same effect as if member is
in-person at the public meeting or hearing; and
      (3)   The public body shall ensure that the public can observe and hear
the discussions and deliberations of all the members of the public body,
whether members are attending in-person or virtually.
   (c)   Open to the Public. Each public body shall determine the method by
which its meetings, or hearings are open to the public. For public hearings
conducted virtually, the public body must also establish a means, through the
use of electronic equipment that is widely available to the general public, to
communicate with witnesses and to receive documentary testimony and physical
evidence.
   (d)   Notice to the Public. Each public body shall provide at least twelve
(12) hours' prior notification of the time, place, agenda items, and the manner
by which the meeting or hearing will be held.
(Ord. No. 560-2021. Passed 7-14-21, eff. 7-16-21)
§ 101.03 Rules of Construction
   (a)   Common and Technical Usage. Words and phrases shall be read in context
and construed according to the rules of grammar and common usage. Words and
phrases that have acquired a technical or particular meaning, whether by
legislative definition or otherwise, shall be construed accordingly.
(RC 1.42)
   (b)   Singular and Plural; Gender; Tense. As used in the Codified
Ordinances, unless the context otherwise requires:
      (1)   The singular includes the plural, and the plural includes the
singular.
      (2)   Words of one gender include the other genders.
      (3)   Words in the present tense include the future.
(RC 1.43)
   (c)   Calendar; Computation of Time.
      (1)   Definitions.
         A.   "Week" means seven (7) consecutive days.
         B.   "Year" means twelve (12) consecutive months.
(RC 1.44)
      (2)   If a number of months is to be computed by counting the months from
a particular day, the period ends on the same numerical day in the concluding
month as the day of the month from which the computation is begun, unless there
are not that many days in the concluding month, in which case the period ends
on the last day of that month.
(RC 1.45)
      (3)   The time within which an act is required by law to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first and including the last day, except that when
the last day falls on Sunday or a legal holiday, then the act may be done on
the next succeeding day which is not a Sunday or a legal holiday. When a public
office, in which an act required by law is to be performed, is closed to the
public for the entire day which constitutes the last day for doing such act or
before its usual closing time on such day, then such act may be performed on
the next succeeding day which is not a Sunday or a legal holiday. If any legal
holiday falls on Sunday, the next succeeding day is a legal holiday.
(RC 1.14)
      (4)   When legislation is to take effect or become operative from and
after a day named, no part of that day shall be included. If priority of legal
rights depends upon the order of events on the same day, such priority shall be
determined by the times in the day at which they respectively occurred.
(RC 1.15)
      (5)   In all cases where the law requires any act to be done in a
reasonable time or reasonable notice to be given, such reasonable time or
notice means such time only as may be necessary for the prompt performance of
such duty or compliance with such notice.
   (d)   Authority. When the law requires an act to be done which may by law as
well be done by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be
construed to include all such acts when done by an authorized agent.
   (e)   Joint Authority. All words purporting to give joint authority to three
(3) or more municipal officers or other persons shall be construed as giving
such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it shall
be otherwise expressly declared in the law giving the authority or inconsistent
with State statute or Charter provisions.
   (f)   Exceptions. The rules of construction shall not apply to any law which
shall contain any express provision excluding such construction, or when the
subject matter or context of such law may be repugnant thereto.
(Ord. No. 979-15. Passed 9-21-15, eff. 9-23-15)
§ 101.04 Revivor; Effect of Amendment or Repeal
   (a)   The repeal of a repealing ordinance does not revive the ordinance
originally repealed nor impair the effect of any saving clause therein.
(RC 1.57)
   (b)   An ordinance which is re-enacted or amended is intended to be a
continuation of the prior ordinance and not a new enactment, so far as it is
the same as the prior ordinance.
(RC 1.54)
   (c)   The re-enactment, amendment or repeal of an ordinance does not, except
as provided in subsection (d) hereof:
      (1)   Affect the prior operation of the ordinance or any prior action
taken thereunder;
      (2)   Affect any validation, cure, right, privilege, obligation or
liability previously acquired, accrued, accorded or incurred thereunder;
      (3)   Affect any violation thereof or penalty, forfeiture or punishment
incurred in respect thereto, prior to the amendment or repeal;
      (4)   Affect any investigation, proceeding or remedy in respect of any
such privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment; and
the investigation, proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or
enforced, and the penalty, forfeiture or punishment imposed, as if the
ordinance had not been repealed or amended.
   (d)   If the penalty, forfeiture or punishment for any offense is reduced by
a re-enactment or amendment of an ordinance, the penalty, forfeiture or
punishment, if not already imposed, shall be imposed according to the ordinance
as amended
(RC 1.58)
§ 101.05 Construction of Section References
   (a)   A reference to any portion of the Codified Ordinances applies to all
re-enactments or amendments thereof.
(RC 1.55)
   (b)   If a section refers to a series of numbers or letters, the first and
the last numbers or letters are included.
(RC 1.56)
   (c)   (1)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation
of a series of sections or an inclusive group of sections, or of divisions or
subdivisions of a section, such reference shall be construed to mean a
violation of any section, division or subdivision included in such reference.
      (2)   References in the Codified Ordinances to action taken or authorized
under designated sections of the Codified Ordinances include, in every case,
action taken or authorized under the applicable legislative provision which is
superseded by the Codified Ordinances.
(RC 1.23; Ord. No. 979-15. Passed 9-21-15, eff. 9-23-15)
§ 101.06 Conflicting Provisions
   (a)   If there is a conflict between figures and words in expressing a
number, the words govern.
(RC 1.46)
   (b)   If a general provision conflicts with a special or local provision,
they shall be construed, if possible, so that effect is given to both. If the
conflict between the provisions is irreconcilable, the special or local
provision prevails as an exception to the general provision, unless the general
provision is the later adoption and the manifest intent is that the general
provision prevail.
(RC 1.51)
   (c)   (1)   If ordinances enacted at different meetings of Council are
irreconcilable, the ordinance latest in date of enactment prevails.
      (2)   If amendments to the same ordinance are enacted at different
meetings of Council, one (1) amendment without reference to another, the
amendments are to be harmonized, if possible, so that effect may be given to
each. If the amendments are substantively irreconcilable, the latest in date of
enactment prevails. The fact that a later amendment restates language deleted
by an earlier amendment, or fails to include language inserted by an earlier
amendment, does not of itself make the amendments irreconcilable. Amendments
are irreconcilable only when changes made by each cannot reasonably be put into
simultaneous operation.
(RC 1.52)
§ 101.07 Determination of Legislative Intent
   (a)   In enacting an ordinance, it is presumed that:
      (1)   Compliance with the constitutions of the State of Ohio and of the
United States is intended;
      (2)   The entire ordinance is intended to be effective;
      (3)   A just and reasonable result is intended;
      (4)   A result feasible of execution is intended.
(RC 1.47)
   (b)   An ordinance is presumed to be prospective in its operation unless
expressly made retrospective.
(RC 1.48)
   (c)   If an ordinance is ambiguous, the court, in determining the intention
of Council may consider among other matters:
      (1)   The object sought to be attained;
      (2)   The circumstances under which the ordinance was enacted;
      (3)   The legislative history;
      (4)   The common law or former legislative provisions, including laws
upon the same or similar subjects;
      (5)   The consequences of a particular construction;
      (6)   The administrative construction of the ordinance.
(RC 1.49)
§ 101.08 Severability
   If any provision of a section of the Codified Ordinances or the application
thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not
affect the other provisions or applications of the section or related sections
which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to
this end the provisions are severable.
(RC 1.50)
§ 101.99 General Penalty
   Whenever, in the Codified Ordinances or in any ordinance of the City of
Cleveland, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an
offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever the doing of any act is required or the
failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is
otherwise provided, whoever violates any such provision is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). A
separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a
violation continues or occurs.
CHAPTER 103 – BOUNDARIES AND WARDS
103.001   Boundaries of City of Cleveland
103.002   Division into Wards
103.01   Ward One
103.02   Ward Two
103.03   Ward Three
103.04   Ward Four
103.05   Ward Five
103.06   Ward Six
103.07   Ward Seven
103.08   Ward Eight
103.09   Ward Nine
103.10   Ward Ten
103.11   Ward Eleven
103.12   Ward Twelve
103.13   Ward Thirteen
103.14   Ward Fourteen
103.15   Ward Fifteen
103.16   Ward Sixteen – Repealed
103.17   Ward Seventeen – Repealed
103.18   Ward Eighteen – Repealed
103.19   Ward Nineteen – Repealed
103.20   Ward Twenty – Repealed
103.21   Ward Twenty-One – Repealed
103.22 to 103.33   Reserved
   Note: The legislative history of this chapter, except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 63410-A, passed
September 22, 1924.
Charter reference:
   Redivision into wards; reapportionment, Charter §§
25,
25-1
Statutory reference:
   Division into wards, RC 731.06
§ 103.001 Boundaries of City of Cleveland
   The boundaries of the City of Cleveland are hereby established as follows:
   Beginning on the southerly shore of Lake Erie at a point distant 150 feet
easterly at right angles from the westerly line of original East Cleveland
Township lot No. 360; thence southerly parallel with and distant 150 feet
easterly at right angles from the westerly line of said original lot No. 360 to
the northerly line of the Lake Shore and Michigan Southern Railway right-of-way
line; thence northeasterly along said northerly right-of-way line of the L.S. &
M.S. Ry. to the westerly line of original lot No. 354; thence northerly along
the westerly line of original lots Nos. 354 and 351 to a point which is distant
southeasterly 700 feet measured at right angles from the center line of the
Lake Shore Blvd.; thence northeasterly and parallel with said center line of
the Lake Shore Blvd. and distant 700 feet at right angles from the center line
thereof to the westerly line of E. 136th St. south of McElhattan Ave. N.E., as
said E. 136th St. is laid out in subdivision of Henry C. Wick, which is
recorded in Volume 28, page 16, of Cuyahoga County Records of Maps; thence
northerly along the westerly line of E. 136th St. south of McElhattan Ave. N.E.
and along said westerly line of E. 136th St. produced northerly to a point due
west from the most southerly corner of lands, now or formerly owned by Joseph
Parks, which lie northerly of Florence St.; thence east 25 feet to the westerly
line of E. 136th St. north of McElhattan Ave. N.E.; thence northerly along the
westerly line of E. 136th St. north of McElhattan Ave. N.E. and along the
westerly line of Henry C. Wick’s subdivision to the northerly line of said
Wick’s subdivision; thence easterly along the northerly line of said Wick’s
subdivision to the westerly line of E. 140th St.; thence northerly along the
westerly line of E. 140th St. south of Westropp Ave. N.E. and northwesterly
along a line which was the westerly line of Adams Ave. north of Westropp Ave.
N.E. prior to its vacation by the village of Collinwood by Ordinance No. 1260,
to the southerly line of the Lake Shore Blvd. N.E.; thence southwesterly along
the southerly line of the Lake Shore Blvd. N.E. to an intersection with the
westerly line of lands owned by the City of Cleveland produced southerly;
thence northwesterly following said westerly line of lands of the City of
Cleveland produced and along said westerly line of lands of the City of
Cleveland to the waters of Lake Erie; thence northeasterly along the shore of
Lake Erie to the easterly line of E. 185th St.; thence southerly along the
easterly line of E. 185th St. to the northerly line of original lot No. 13 in
Tract 17 of Euclid Township; thence easterly along the northerly line of said
original lot No. 13 to the westerly line of E. 200th St. (Cut Rd.); thence
southerly along the westerly line of E. 200th St. to an angle in said E. 200th
St.; thence southeasterly along the westerly line of said E. 200th St. to an
angle in said E. 200th St. at the north line of Tract 14 of Euclid Township;
thence southerly along the westerly line of E. 200th St. and along said
westerly line before said street was diverted, to the northerly line of St.
Clair Ave. N.E.; thence southwesterly along the northerly line of St. Clair
Ave. N.E. to a point where the westerly line of lands conveyed to Wm. Keck by
deed dated Feb. 26, 1877, and recorded in Volume 273, page 321, and by a deed
dated July 11, 1877, and recorded in Volume 280, page 336, of Cuyahoga County
Records, if produced would intersect said St. Clair Ave. N.E.; thence southerly
along said westerly line produced and along said westerly line of lands so
conveyed to Wm. Keck to the center of Euclid Creek; then southeasterly along
the center of Euclid Creek to the northerly line of the right-of-way of the
N.Y.C. & St. L. Ry. Co.; thence southwesterly along the northerly line of the
right-of-way of the N.Y.C. & St. L. Ry. Co. to a point which is at right angles
with the southerly line of N.Y.C. & St. L. Ry. Co. right-of-way line at a point
where the Euclid Railroad Company’s southwesterly line intersects said
southerly right-of-way line of the N.Y.C. & St. L. Ry. Co.; thence
southeasterly at right angles to said southerly right-of-way line to the point
of intersection of said southerly right-of-way line of the N.Y.C. & St. L. Ry.
Co. with the southwesterly line of the Euclid Railway Company; thence
southeasterly and following said southwesterly line of lands of the Euclid
Railroad Company, to the easterly line of original Euclid Township lot No. 50
in Gore tract; thence southerly along said easterly line of said original lot
No. 50 to the northwesterly line of lands conveyed to John Marzel, Jr., by deed
recorded in Volume 338, page 34 of Cuyahoga County Deed Records; thence
southwesterly and following the northwesterly line of said lands so conveyed to
said John Marzel, Jr., to the most westerly corner of lands so conveyed to said
John Marzel, Jr., in Green Rd.; thence westerly in Green Rd.; to the most
westerly corner of lands conveyed to Daniel R. Huling by deed recorded in
Volume 1295, page 414 of Cuyahoga County Deed Records; thence southeasterly and
southerly and following the westerly line of said lands so conveyed to said
Daniel R. Huling to a point where a line parallel with Euclid Ave., and distant
southerly 1500 feet, right angle measurement from the center line thereof,
intersects said westerly line of said Huling’s land; thence southwesterly and
following a line which is parallel to Euclid Ave., and is distant southerly
1500 feet, right angle measurement from the center line thereof, to its
intersection with the south line of original lot No. 10 in tract No. 10; thence
westerly along the south line of said original lot No. 10 to the southwesterly
corner of said original lot No. 10; thence north along the west line of
original Lot No. 10 to the center line of Euclid Ave.; thence northeasterly
along the center line of Euclid Ave. to the center line of Ivanhoe Rd. N.E.;
thence northwesterly along the center line of Ivanhoe Rd. N.E. to the southerly
right-of-way line of the New York, Chicago & St. Louis Railroad; thence
southwesterly along the southerly right-of-way line of the N.Y.C. & St. L. Ry.
Company to the southerly line of original lot No. 43; thence westerly along the
southerly line of original lots Nos. 43, 2 and 359 to the northeasterly corner
of original lot No. 365; thence southerly along the easterly line of original
lots Nos. 365 and 373 to the southeasterly corner of said original lot No. 373;
thence westerly along the southerly line of original lot No. 373 to the
northeasterly corner of original lot No. 380; thence southerly along the
easterly line of original lots Nos. 380 and 388 to the northwesterly corner of
original lot No. 397; thence easterly along the northerly line of original lot
No. 397 to the northeasterly corner of said original lot No. 397; thence
southerly along the easterly line of original lot No. 397 to the southeasterly
corner of said original lot No. 397; thence westerly along the southerly line
of original lot No. 397 to the easterly line of Walton’s subdivision as
recorded in Volume 14, page 12 of Cuyahoga County records of Maps; thence
southerly and southwesterly along the easterly and southeasterly line of said
Walton’s subdivision to the intersection thereof with the easterly line of
original lot No. 404; thence southerly along the easterly line of original lot
No. 404 to the southeasterly corner of said original lot No. 404; thence
westerly along the southerly line of said original lot No. 404 to the
northeasterly corner of original lot No. 411; thence southerly along the
easterly line of original lot No. 411, to a point about 530.18 feet northerly
of the southeasterly corner of said original lot No. 411, said point being the
southwesterly corner of Cleveland Heights Village; thence south 73 degrees 12
minutes 50 seconds, east along the southerly line of said Cleveland Heights
Village to the intersection of said southerly line with the extension northerly
of the easterly line of a ten acre parcel of land in original lot No. 421, now
or formerly owned by A.F. Ditz; thence southerly along Ditz’s easterly line
produced and along Ditz’s easterly line to the center line of Woodland Ave.
S.E.; thence easterly along the center line of Woodland Ave. S.E. to the
easterly line of original lot No. 422; thence southerly along the easterly line
of original lots Nos. 422, 430 and 438 to the northwest corner of original lot
No. 41; thence easterly along the northerly line of said original lot No. 41 to
the northeast corner of Palmer and Boyer subdivision as recorded in Volume 30,
page 14 of Cuyahoga County Map Records; thence southerly along said easterly
line of the Palmer and Boyer subdivision to the southwesterly corner of sublot
No. 124 in Palmer and Burnett’s subdivision as recorded in Volume 34, page 5,
of Cuyahoga County Map Records; thence easterly along the southerly line of
said sublot No. 124 and the southerly line of sublot No. 7 in Palmer and
Burnett’s subdivision to the southeast corner of said sublot No. 7; thence
southerly along the easterly line of Palmer and Burnett’s subdivision about
9.12 feet; thence easterly to a point in the easterly line of the Van Sweringen
subdivision No. 19, which point is 302.97 feet northerly from the center line
of Kinsman Rd.; thence southerly along the easterly line of the Van Sweringen
subdivision No. 19 to the center line of Kinsman Rd; thence westerly along the
center line of Kinsman Rd. about 37.32 feet to the east line of 40 acres of
land, now or formerly owned by the estate of John Feig; thence southerly along
said east line of said Feig’s land, which is the west line of premises now, or
formerly owned by Elizabeth L. Hamlin, to the south line of original lot No.
52; thence westerly along the south line of original lot No. 52 to the east
line of premises, now, or formerly owned by O.P. Van Sweringen; thence
southerly along the east line of said Van Sweringen’s land to the southeast
corner thereof; thence continuing southerly along the division line between
premises, now, or formerly owned by Fred Axel and George F. Mills to the north
line of original lot No. 72; thence west along the said north line of original
lot No. 72 to the northwest corner of land, now, or formerly owned by the Cyrus
Realty Co.; thence south along the west line of the said Cyrus Realty Company’s
property to the southwest corner thereof; thence east along the south line of
Cyrus Realty Company’s property to the northwest corner of premises, now, or
formerly owned by E. Cortlett; thence south along the west line of said
premises, now, or formerly owned by E. Cortlett to the north line of premises
now, or formerly owned by Ellen Fitzsimmons; thence west along the northerly
line of premises of said Fitzsimmons to the east line of original lot No. 71;
thence south on the east line of original lot No. 71 to the southeast corner
thereof; thence west along the south line of said original lot No. 71 to the
east line of original lot No. 470; thence south along the east line of original
lot No. 470 to the southeast corner thereof; thence westerly along the
southerly line of original lots Nos. 470, 469, 468, 467 and 466 to the
northeasterly corner of original lot No. 473; thence southerly along the
easterly line of said original lot No. 473 to the southeasterly corner of said
original lot No. 473; thence westerly along the southerly line of original lots
Nos. 473, 472 and 471 to the southwesterly corner of said original lot No. 471;
thence northerly along the westerly line of said original lot No. 471 to the
southeasterly corner of original lot No. 311; thence westerly along the
southerly line of said original lot No. 311 to the easterly line of John Deveny
and Company’s Belvedere Allotment as recorded in Volume 8, page 11 of Cuyahoga
County Record of Maps; thence southerly, southeasterly, northeasterly,
southerly, southwesterly and southerly following the boundary line of said
Deveny and Company’s Belvedere Allotment to the northeasterly corner of J.H.
Breck’s allotment as recorded in Volume 15, page 35 of Cuyahoga County Records
of Maps; thence southwesterly and southerly along the easterly boundary line of
said J.H. Breck’s Allotment, to the center line of Oak Ave., S.E., as said Oak
Ave., S.E. was laid out in said J.H. Breck’s Allotment; thence westerly along
the center line of said Oak Ave. S.E. to the center line of E. 71st St.
formerly known as Brecksville Rd.; thence southwesterly along the center line
of E. 71st St. to the center line of Grant Ave. S.E. as said Grant Ave. was
laid out in J.H. Breck’s Allotment and recorded in Volume 17, page 19 of
Cuyahoga County Records of Maps; thence westerly along the center line of Grant
Ave. S.E. to the westerly line of original lot No. 306; thence northerly along
the westerly line of said original lot No. 306 to the southeasterly corner of
original lot No. 309; thence westerly along the southerly line of original lot
No. 309 to the southwesterly corner of said original lot No. 309; thence
northerly along the westerly line of original lots Nos. 309 and 313 to the
southerly line of a subdivision made by G.C. Barkwill, trustee, of a part of
original lots Nos. 312 and 313 and recorded in Volume 12, page 26 of Cuyahoga
County Records of Maps; thence westerly along the southerly line of said
subdivision about 260.5 feet to the southwesterly corner of said subdivision;
thence northerly along the westerly line of said subdivision about 92.7 feet to
a stone monument at a southeasterly corner of Engle and Skinner’s subdivision
of a part of original lot No. 312 as recorded in Volume 13, page 18 of said
County maps; thence northwesterly about 594.09 feet along the southerly line of
said Engle and Skinner’s subdivision, and along Cook and Barkwill’s subdivision
to the southwesterly corner of Cook and Barkwill’s subdivision as recorded in
Volume 16, page 14 in said County Records of Maps; thence northerly along the
westerly line of said Cook and Barkwill’s subdivision to the southeasterly
corner of a subdivision of a part of original lot No. 312 made by Adolphus
Kershaw and recorded in Volume 19, page 20 of said County Records of Maps;
thence westerly along the southerly line of Kershaw’s subdivision and its
prolongation in a direct line to the westerly line of original lot No. 312;
thence northerly along said westerly line of original lot No. 312 to the
southeasterly corner of original lot No. 287; thence westerly along the
southerly line of original lots Nos. 287, 286, 285, 277 and 276 to the center
of the Cuyahoga River; thence southerly up the center line of the Cuyahoga
River following its crooks and bends to the southerly line of original lot No.
88; thence westerly along the southerly line of original lots Nos. 88, 81, 76
and 63 to the center line of Broadview Rd., S.W., formerly known as
Independence Rd.; thence southerly along the center line of Broadview Rd. S.W.
639 feet; thence easterly to the east line of Broadview Rd. S.W.; thence
southerly along the easterly line of Broadview Rd. S.W. to the southerly line
of original lot No. 78; thence westerly along the southerly line of original
lots Nos. 78, 61, 60, 41 and 40 to the center line of Ridge Rd.; thence
northerly along the center line of Ridge Rd. to the northerly line of the Pearl
Ridge Allotment, as shown in Volume 47, page 17 of Cuyahoga County Records of
Maps; thence easterly along the northerly line of said allotment to a point
where the easterly line produced of a certain 8.825 acres, parcel of land, now,
or formerly owned by Ella M. Estabrook, intersects said northerly line of Pearl
Ridge Allotment; thence northerly along said easterly line produced to the
southeasterly corner of said 8.825 acre parcel of land, now, or formerly owned
by said Estabrook; thence westerly along the southerly line of said Estabrook’s
land and along the southerly line of a certain 31.175 acre parcel of land, now,
or formerly owned by Charles E. Pegler, trustee, to the southwesterly corner of
said Pegler’s land; thence northerly along the westerly line of said Pegler’s
land to the center line of the Linndale Rd.; thence westerly along the center
line of the Linndale Rd. to the center line of the Ridge Rd.; thence northerly
along the center line of the Ridge Rd. to the center of Big Creek; thence up
the center of Big Creek to its intersection with the easterly line produced of
land, now, or formerly owned by Michael Huey; thence northerly along the
easterly line produced and along the easterly line of said Huey’s land to the
northwest corner of land, now, or formerly owned by Frederick Shedd, trustee;
thence easterly along the northerly line of said Shedd land to the center line
of Ridge Rd.; thence northerly along the center line of said Ridge Rd. to the
southerly line of original lot No. 27; thence westerly along the southerly line
of original lot No. 27 to the northerly line of land of the Cleveland,
Cincinnati, Chicago and St. Louis Railway Co.; thence southwesterly along the
northerly line of land of said Cleveland, Cincinnati, Chicago and St. Louis
Railway Co. to the center of Big Creek; thence northerly following the center
of Big Creek to the southerly line of Bellaire Rd. S.W.; thence southwesterly
along the southerly line of Bellaire Rd. S.W. to the westerly line of original
lot No. 4, which is also the easterly line of section 10; thence southerly
along the easterly line of sections 10 and 1 to the southeasterly corner of
section 1; thence westerly along the southerly lines of sections 1, 2, 3, 4 and
5 to the center of Rocky River; thence northerly down the center line of Rocky
River to the southerly line of the City of Lakewood; thence easterly,
northerly, easterly and northeasterly along the southerly boundary of the City
of Lakewood to the westerly line of original lot No. 8; thence northerly along
the westerly line of original lots Nos. 8, 9 and 10 to the southerly shore line
of Lake Erie; thence easterly along the southerly shore line of Lake Erie to
the place of beginning.
§ 103.002 Division into Wards
   The City of Cleveland is redivided into fifteen (15) wards under the
provisions of Charter Section
25-1, effective for purposes of nominating and electing members of City Council
in the year 2025 and for all purposes on and after January 5, 2026, which wards
are more particularly defined and described in this chapter.
(Ord. No. 1-2025. Passed 1-6-25, eff. 1-9-25)
§ 103.01 Ward One
   Situated in the City of Cleveland, County of Cuyahoga, State of Ohio, and
being known as Ward 1, further described in the following courses running in a
general counterclockwise direction.
   Beginning at the intersection of the centerlines of East 140th Street and
Bartlett Avenue;
   1.   thence easterly along the centerline of Bartlett Avenue to the
intersection with the centerline of East 142nd Street;
   2.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of East 142nd Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Glendale Avenue;
   3.   thence continuing westerly along the centerline of Glendale Avenue to
the intersection with the centerline of East 140th Street;
   4.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of East 140th Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Benwood Avenue;
   5.   thence continuing easterly along the centerline of Benwood Avenue to
the intersection with the centerline of East 141st Street;
   6.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of East 141st Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Harvard Avenue;
   7.   thence continuing westerly along the centerline of Harvard Avenue to
the intersection with the centerline of East 131st Street;
   8.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of East 131st Street
to the intersection of the City of Cleveland and the City of Garfield Heights
boundary line;
   9.   thence continuing easterly in a general counterclockwise direction
along the City of Cleveland and the City of Garfield Heights boundary line to
the tripoint of the City of Cleveland, the City of Garfield Heights and the
City of Maple Heights;
   10.   thence continuing easterly in a general counterclockwise direction
along the City of Cleveland and the City of Maple Heights boundary line to the
tripoint of the City of Cleveland, the City of Maple Heights and the City of
Warrensville Heights;
   11.   thence continuing northerly in a general counterclockwise direction
along the City of Cleveland and the City of Warrensville Heights boundary line
to the tripoint of the City of Cleveland, the City of Shaker Heights and the
City of Warrensville Heights;
   12.   thence continuing westerly in a general counterclockwise direction
along the City of Cleveland and the City of Shaker Heights boundary line to the
intersection of the northerly projection of the centerline of East 140th
Street;
   13.   thence leaving the City of Cleveland and the City of Shaker Heights
boundary line and continuing southerly along the northerly projection of the
centerline of East 140th Street to the intersection with the centerline of
Milverton Road;
   14.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of East 140th Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Byron Avenue;
   15.   thence continuing westerly along the centerline of Byron Avenue to the
intersection with the centerline of East 139th Street;
   16.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of East 139th Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Melzer Avenue;
   17.   thence continuing easterly along the centerline of Melzer Avenue to
the intersection with the centerline of East 140th Street;
   18.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of East 140th Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Bartlett Avenue and the point of
beginning.
   Legal description approved by Eric B. Westfall, P.S., Section Chief, Plats,
Surveys and House Numbering Section, revised 12/20/2024.
(Ord. No. 1-2025. Passed 1-6-25, eff. 1-9-25)
§ 103.02 Ward Two
   Situated in the City of Cleveland, County of Cuyahoga, State of Ohio, and
being known as Ward 2, further described in the following courses running in a
general clockwise direction.
   Beginning at the intersection of the centerlines of East 140th Street and
Bartlett Avenue;
   1.   thence easterly along the centerline of Bartlett Avenue to the
intersection with the centerline of East 142nd Street;
   2.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of East 142nd Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Glendale Avenue;
   3.   thence continuing westerly along the centerline of Glendale Avenue to
the intersection with the centerline of East 140th Street;
   4.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of East 140th Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Benwood Avenue;
   5.   thence continuing easterly along the centerline of Benwood Avenue to
the intersection with the centerline of East 141st Street;
   6.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of East 141st Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Harvard Avenue;
   7.   thence continuing westerly along the centerline of Harvard Avenue to
the intersection with the centerline of East 131st Street;
   8.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of East 131st Street
to the intersection of the City of Cleveland and the City of Garfield Heights
boundary line;
   9.   thence continuing westerly in a general clockwise direction along the
City of Cleveland and the City of Garfield Heights boundary line to the
tripoint of the City of Cleveland, the Village of Cuyahoga Heights and the City
of Garfield Heights;
   10.   thence continuing northerly in a general clockwise direction along the
City of Cleveland and the Village of Cuyahoga Heights boundary line to the
tripoint of the City of Cleveland, the Village of Cuyahoga Heights and the
Village of Newburgh Heights;
   11.   thence continuing northerly in a general clockwise direction along the
City of Cleveland and the Village of Newburgh Heights boundary line to the
intersection with the centerline of Fleet Avenue;
   12.   thence continuing easterly along the centerline of Fleet Avenue to the
intersection with the centerline of Aetna Road;
   13.   thence continuing easterly along the centerline of Aetna Road to the
intersection with the centerline of East 105th Street;
   14.   thence continuing northerly along the centerline of East 105th Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Benham Avenue;
   15.   thence continuing easterly along the centerline of Benham Avenue to
the intersection with the centerline of East 127th Street;
   16.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of East 127th Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Holburn Avenue;
   17.   thence continuing easterly along the centerline of Holburn Avenue to
the intersection with the centerline of East 131st Street;
   18.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of East 131st Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Melzer Avenue;
   19.   thence continuing easterly along the centerline of Melzer Avenue to
the intersection with the centerline of East 138th Street;
   20.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of East 138th Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Bartlett Avenue;
   21.   thence continuing easterly along the centerline of Bartlett Avenue to
the intersection with the centerline of East 140th Street and the point of
beginning.
   Legal description approved by Eric B. Westfall, P.S., Section Chief, Plats,
Surveys and House Numbering Section, revised 12/20/2024.
(Ord. No. 1-2025. Passed 1-6-25, eff. 1-9-25)
§ 103.03 Ward Three
   Situated in the City of Cleveland, County of Cuyahoga, State of Ohio, and
being known as Ward 3, further described in the following courses running in a
general counterclockwise direction.
   Beginning at the intersection of the centerlines of Bartlett Avenue and East
140th Street;
   1.   thence northerly along the centerline of East 140th Street to the
intersection with the centerline of Melzer Avenue;
   2.   thence continuing westerly along the centerline of Melzer Avenue to the
intersection with the centerline of East 139th Street;
   3.   thence continuing northerly along the centerline of East 139th Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Byron Avenue;
   4.   thence continuing easterly along the centerline of Byron Avenue to the
intersection with the centerline of East 140th Street;
   5.   thence continuing northerly along the centerline of East 140th Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Milverton Road;
   6.   thence continuing northerly along the northerly projection of the
centerline of East 140th Street to a corner of the City of Cleveland and the
City of Shaker Heights boundary line;
   7.   thence continuing northerly in a general counterclockwise direction
along the City of Cleveland and the City of Shaker Heights boundary line to the
intersection with the centerlines of Larchmere Boulevard and North Moreland
Boulevard;
   8.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of North Moreland
Boulevard to the intersection with the centerline of the north roadway of
Shaker Square;
   9.   thence continuing in a general southwesterly direction along the
roadways of Shaker Square to the intersection with the centerline of South
Moreland Boulevard;
   10.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of South Moreland
Boulevard to the intersection with the centerline of Buckeye Road;
   11.   thence continuing westerly along the centerline of Buckeye Road to the
intersection with the centerline of East 120th Street;
   12.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of East 120th Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Honeydale Avenue;
   13.   thence continuing westerly along the centerline of Honeydale Avenue to
the intersection with the centerline of East 116th Street;
   14.   thence continuing northerly along the centerline of East 116th Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Harvey Avenue;
   15.   thence continuing westerly along the centerline of Harvey Avenue to
the intersection with the centerline of East 115th Street;
   16.   thence continuing northerly along the centerline of East 115th Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Buckeye Road;
   17.   thence continuing westerly along the centerline of Buckeye Road to the
intersection with the centerline of East 112th Street;
   18.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of East 112th Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Forest Avenue;
   19.   thence continuing westerly along the centerline of Forest Avenue and
Lamontier Avenue to the intersection with the centerline of Woodhill Road;
   20.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of Woodhill Road to
the intersection with the centerline of East 93rd Street;
   21.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of East 93rd Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Kinsman Road;
   22.   thence continuing easterly along the centerline of Kinsman Road to the
intersection with the centerline of Kingsbury Boulevard;
   23.   thence continuing southeasterly along the centerline of Kingsbury
Boulevard to the intersection with the centerline of Bessemer Avenue;
   24.   thence continuing southwesterly along the centerline of Bessemer
Avenue to the intersection with the centerline of East 102nd Street;
   25.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of East 102nd Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Union Avenue;
   26.   thence continuing westerly along the centerline of Union Avenue to the
intersection with the centerline of unimproved East 79th Street;
   27.   thence continuing northerly along the centerline of unimproved East
79th Street to the intersection with the centerline of unimproved Burr Avenue;
   28.   thence continuing northwesterly along the centerline of unimproved
Burr Avenue to the intersection with the centerline of East 78th Street;
   29.   thence continuing northeasterly along the centerline of East 78th
Street to the intersection with the centerline of East 79th Street Extension;
   30.   thence continuing northerly along the centerline of East 79th Street
Extension to the intersection with the centerline of Bessemer Avenue;
   31.   thence continuing northerly along the centerline of East 79th Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Garden Valley Avenue;
   32.   thence continuing westerly along the westerly projection of the
centerline of Garden Valley Avenue to the intersection with the toe of the
westerly hillside of the Kingsbury Run Valley;
   33.   thence continuing in a general northwesterly direction along said toe
of hillside to the intersection with the centerline of the Opportunity
Corridor;
   34.   thence continuing westerly along the centerline of the Opportunity
Corridor to the intersection with the centerline of East 55th Street;
   35.   thence leaving the centerline of East 55th Street and continuing
westerly along the centerline of Interstate 490 to the intersection with the
centerline of Interstate 77;
   36.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of Interstate 77 to
the intersection of the City of Cleveland and the Village of Newburgh Heights
boundary line;
   37.   thence leaving the City of Cleveland and the Village of Newburgh
Heights boundary line and continuing easterly along the centerline of Fleet
Avenue to the intersection with the centerline of Aetna Road;
   38.   thence continuing easterly along the centerline of Aetna Road to the
intersection with the centerline of East 105th Street;
   39.   thence continuing northerly along the centerline of East 105th Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Benham Avenue;
   40.   thence continuing easterly along the centerline of Benham Avenue to
the intersection with the centerline of East 127th Street;
   41.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of East 127th Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Holburn Avenue;
   42.   thence continuing easterly along the centerline of Holburn Avenue to
the intersection with the centerline of East 131st Street;
   43.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of East 131st Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Melzer Avenue;
   44.   thence continuing easterly along the centerline of Melzer Avenue to
the intersection with the centerline of East 138th Street;
   45.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of East 138th Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Bartlett Avenue;
   46.   thence continuing easterly along the centerline of Bartlett Avenue to
the intersection with the centerline of East 140th Street and the point of
beginning.
   Legal description approved by Eric B. Westfall, P.S., Section Chief, Plats,
Surveys and House Numbering Section, revised 1/2/2025.
(Ord. No. 1-2025. Passed 1-6-25, eff. 1-9-25)
§ 103.04 Ward Four
   Situated in the City of Cleveland, County of Cuyahoga, State of Ohio, and
being known as Ward 4, further described in the following courses running in a
general counterclockwise direction.
   Beginning at the intersection of the centerlines of West 47th Street and
Woburn Avenue;
   1.   thence westerly along the centerlines of Woburn Avenue to the
intersection of the City of Cleveland and the City of Brooklyn boundary line;
   2.   thence continuing southerly in a general counterclockwise direction
along the City of Cleveland and the City of Brooklyn boundary line to the
tripoint of the City of Cleveland, the City of Brooklyn and the City of Parma;
   3.   thence continuing easterly in a general counterclockwise direction
along the City of Cleveland and the City of Parma boundary line to the tripoint
of the City of Cleveland, the Village of Brooklyn Heights and the City of
Parma;
   4.   thence continuing northeasterly in a general counterclockwise direction
along the City of Cleveland and the Village of Brooklyn Heights boundary line
to the tripoint of the City of Cleveland, the Village of Brooklyn Heights and
the Village of Cuyahoga Heights;
   5.   thence continuing northerly in a general counterclockwise direction
along the City of Cleveland and the Village of Cuyahoga Heights boundary line
to the intersection with the centerline of Harvard Avenue;
   6.   thence continuing westerly along the centerline of Harvard Avenue to
the intersection with the centerline of Jennings Road;
   7.   thence continuing northerly along the centerline of Jennings Road to
the intersection with the centerline of West 14th Street;
   8.   thence continuing northwesterly along the centerline of West 14th
Street to the intersection with the centerline of the main line tracks of the
Norfolk Southern Railway, formerly known as the Wheeling and Lake Erie Railway;
   9.   thence continuing westerly along the centerline of said N. S. Railway
main line tracks to the intersection with the centerline of Pearl Road;
   10.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of Pearl Road to the
intersection with the centerline of Broadview Road westerly;
   11.   thence continuing westerly along the centerline of Broadview Road
westerly to the intersection with the centerline of West 36th Street;
   12.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of West 36th Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Muriel Avenue;
   13.   thence continuing easterly along the centerline of Muriel Avenue to
the intersection with the centerline of West 35th Street;
   14.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of West 35th Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Memphis Avenue;
   15.   thence continuing easterly along the centerline of Memphis Avenue to
the intersection with the centerline of Pearl Road;
   16.   thence continuing southwesterly along the centerline of Pearl Road to
the intersection with the centerline of Henritze Avenue;
   17.   thence continuing westerly along the centerline of Henritze Avenue to
the intersection with the centerline of West 47th Street;
   18.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of West 47th Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Woburn Avenue and the point of
beginning.
   Legal description approved by Eric B. Westfall, P.S., Section Chief, Plats,
Surveys and House Numbering Section, revised 12/30/2024.
(Ord. No. 1-2025. Passed 1-6-25, eff. 1-9-25)
§ 103.05 Ward Five
   Situated in the City of Cleveland, County of Cuyahoga, State of Ohio, and
being known as Ward 5, further described in the following courses running in a
general counterclockwise direction.
   Beginning at the intersection of the centerlines of East 79th Street and
Euclid Avenue;
   1.   thence westerly along the centerline of Euclid Avenue to the
intersection with the centerline of East 55th Street;
   2.   thence continuing northerly along the centerline of East 55th Street to
the intersection with the centerline of Chester Avenue;
   3.   thence continuing westerly along the centerline of Chester Avenue to
the intersection with the centerline of East 22nd Street, a portion now
vacated;
   4.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of vacated East 22nd
Street to the intersection with the centerline of Euclid Avenue;
   5.   thence continuing westerly along the centerline of Euclid Avenue to the
intersection with the centerline of East 17th Street;
   6.   thence continuing northerly along the centerline of East 17th Street to
the intersection with the centerline of Chester Avenue;
   7.   thence continuing westerly along the centerline of Chester Avenue to
the intersection with the centerline of East 13th Street;
   8.   thence continuing northerly along the centerline of East 13th Street to
the intersection with the centerline of Superior Avenue;
   9.   thence continuing westerly along the centerline of Superior Avenue to
the intersection with the centerline of the east roadway of Public Square;
   10.   thence continuing in a general southwesterly direction along the
roadways of Public Square to the intersection with the centerline of West
Superior Avenue;
   11.   thence continuing westerly along the centerline of West Superior
Avenue to the intersection with the centerline of Huron Road;
   12.   thence continuing southeasterly along the centerline of Huron Road to
the intersection with the centerline of Ontario Street;
   13.   thence continuing southeasterly along the centerline of Ontario Street
and Broadway to the intersection with the centerline of Interstate 90;
   14.   thence continuing southwesterly along the centerline of Interstate 90
to the intersection with the centerline of the Cuyahoga River;
   15.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of the Cuyahoga River
to the intersection of the City of Cleveland and the Village of Cuyahoga
Heights boundary line;
   16.   thence continuing northeasterly in a general counterclockwise
direction along the City of Cleveland and the Village of Cuyahoga Heights
boundary line to the tripoint of the City of Cleveland, the Village of Cuyahoga
Heights and the Village of Newburgh Heights;
   17.   thence continuing easterly in a general counterclockwise direction
along the City of Cleveland and the Village of Newburgh Heights boundary line
to the intersection with the centerline of Interstate 77;
   18.   thence continuing northerly along the centerline of Interstate 77 to
the intersection with the centerline of Interstate 490;
   19.   thence continuing easterly along the centerline of Interstate 490 to
the intersection with the centerline of East 55th Street;
   20.   thence leaving the centerline of East 55th Street and continuing
easterly along the centerline of the Opportunity Corridor to the intersection
with the toe of the westerly hillside of the Kingsbury Run Valley;
   21.   thence continuing in a general southeasterly direction along said toe
of hillside to the intersection of the westerly projection of the centerline of
Garden Valley Avenue;
   22.   thence continuing easterly along the westerly projection of the
centerline and the centerline of Garden Valley Avenue to the intersection with
the centerline of East 79th Street;
   23.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of East 79th Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Bessemer Avenue;
   24.   thence continuing southeasterly along the centerline of Bessemer
Avenue to the intersection with the centerline of the main line tracks of the
Norfolk Southern Railway, formerly known as the Penn Central Railroad;
   25.   thence continuing northerly along the centerline of said N. S. Railway
main line tracks to the intersection with the centerline of East 79th Street;
   26.   thence continuing northerly along the centerline of East 79th Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Euclid Avenue and the point of
beginning.
   Legal description approved by Eric B. Westfall, P.S., Section Chief, Plats,
Surveys and House Numbering Section, revised 1/2/2025.
(Ord. No. 1-2025. Passed 1-6-25, eff. 1-9-25)
§ 103.06 Ward Six
   Situated in the City of Cleveland, County of Cuyahoga, State of Ohio, and
being known as Ward 6, further described in the following courses running in a
general clockwise direction.

   Beginning at the intersection of the centerlines of Euclid Avenue and East
79th Street;

   1.   thence northerly along the centerline of East 79th Street to the
intersection with the centerline of Chester Avenue;

   2.   thence continuing westerly along the centerline of Chester Avenue to
the intersection with the centerline of East 75th Street;

   3.   thence continuing northerly along the centerline of East 75th Street to
the intersection with the centerline of Hough Avenue;

   4.   thence continuing easterly along the centerline of Hough Avenue and
Mount Sinai Drive to the intersection with the centerline of East 105th Street;

   5.   thence continuing northerly along the centerline of East 105th Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive;

   6.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of Martin Luther King,
Jr. Drive to the intersection with the centerline of Euclid Avenue;

   7.   thence continuing northeasterly along the centerline of Euclid Avenue
to the intersection with the centerline of Ford Drive;

   8.   thence continuing northwesterly along the centerline of Ford Drive to
the intersection with the centerline of Bellflower Road;

   9.   thence continuing northeasterly along the centerline of Bellflower Road
to the intersection with the centerline of East 115th Street;

   10.   thence continuing northerly along the centerline of East 115th Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Ashbury Avenue;

   11.   thence continuing northeasterly along the centerline of Ashbury Avenue
to the intersection with the centerline of Lakeview Road;

   12.   thence continuing southeasterly along the centerline of Lakeview Road
to the intersection of the City of Cleveland and the City of East Cleveland
boundary line;

   13.   thence continuing southerly in a general clockwise direction along the
City of Cleveland and the City of East Cleveland boundary line to the tripoint
of the City of Cleveland, the City of Cleveland Heights and the City of East
Cleveland;

   14.   thence continuing southerly in a general clockwise direction along the
City of Cleveland and the City of Cleveland Heights boundary line to the
tripoint of the City of Cleveland, the City of Cleveland Heights and the City
of Shaker Heights;

   15.   thence continuing southerly in a general clockwise direction along the
City of Cleveland and the City of Shaker Heights boundary line to the
intersection with the centerlines of Larchmere Boulevard and North Moreland
Boulevard;

   16.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of North Moreland
Boulevard to the intersection with the centerline of the north roadway of
Shaker Square;

   17.   thence continuing in a general southwesterly direction along the
roadways of Shaker Square to the intersection with the centerline of South
Moreland Boulevard;

   18.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of South Moreland
Boulevard to the intersection with the centerline of Buckeye Road;

   19.   thence continuing westerly along the centerline of Buckeye Road to the
intersection with the centerline of East 120th Street;

   20.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of East 120th Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Honeydale Avenue;

   21.   thence continuing westerly along the centerline of Honeydale Avenue to
the intersection with the centerline of East 116th Street;

   22.   thence continuing northerly along the centerline of East 116th Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Harvey Avenue;

   23.   thence continuing westerly along the centerline of Harvey Avenue to
the intersection with the centerline of East 115th Street;

   24.   thence continuing northerly along the centerline of East 115th Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Buckeye Road;

   25.   thence continuing westerly along the centerline of Buckeye Road to the
intersection with the centerline of East 112th Street;

   26.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of East 112th Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Forest Avenue;

   27.   thence continuing westerly along the centerline of Forest Avenue and
Lamontier Avenue to the intersection with the centerline of Woodhill Road;

   28.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of Woodhill Road to
the intersection with the centerline of East 93rd Street;

   29.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of East 93rd Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Kinsman Road;

   30.   thence continuing easterly along the centerline of Kinsman Road to the
intersection with the centerline of Kingsbury Boulevard;

   31.   thence continuing southeasterly along the centerline of Kingsbury
Boulevard to the intersection with the centerline of Bessemer Avenue;

   32.   thence continuing southwesterly along the centerline of Bessemer
Avenue to the intersection with the centerline of East 102nd Street;

   33.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of East 102nd Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Union Avenue;

   34.   thence continuing westerly along the centerline of Union Avenue to the
intersection with the centerline of unimproved East 79th Street;

   35.   thence continuing northerly along the centerline of unimproved East
79th Street to the intersection with the centerline of unimproved Burr Avenue;

   36.   thence continuing northwesterly along the centerline of unimproved
Burr Avenue to the intersection with the centerline of East 78th Street;

   37.   thence continuing northeasterly along the centerline of East 78th
Street to the intersection with the centerline of East 79th Street Extension;

   38.   thence continuing northerly along the centerline of East 79th Street
Extension to the intersection with the centerline of Bessemer Avenue;

   39.   thence continuing easterly along the centerline of Bessemer Avenue to
the intersection with the centerline of the main line tracks of the Norfolk
Southern Railway, formerly known as the Penn Central Railroad;

   40.   thence continuing northerly along the centerline of said N. S. Railway
main line tracks to the intersection with the centerline of East 79th Street;

   41.   thence continuing northerly along the centerline of East 79th Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Euclid Avenue and the point of
beginning.

   Legal description approved by Eric B. Westfall, P.S., Section Chief, Plats,
Surveys and House Numbering Section, revised 12/30/2024.
(Ord. No. 1-2025. Passed 1-6-25, eff. 1-9-25)
§ 103.07 Ward Seven
   Situated in the City of Cleveland, County of Cuyahoga, State of Ohio, and
being known as Ward 7, further described in the following courses running in a
general counterclockwise direction.
   Beginning at the intersection of the centerlines of West 65th Street and
Clark Avenue;
   1.   thence easterly along the centerline of Clark Avenue to the
intersection with the centerline of Train Avenue;
   2.   thence continuing northerly and northeasterly along the centerline of
Train Avenue to the intersection with the centerline of Interstate 90;
   3.   thence continuing easterly along the centerline of Interstate 90 to the
intersection with the centerline of Interstate 71;
   4.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of Interstate 71 to
the intersection with the centerline of Clark Avenue;
   5.   thence continuing easterly along the centerline of Clark Avenue to the
intersection with the centerline of West 14th Street;
   6.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of West 14th Street to
the intersection with the centerline of Quigley Road;
   7.   thence continuing easterly along the centerline of Quigley Road to the
intersection with the centerline of Clark Avenue;
   8.   thence continuing easterly along the easterly projection of the
centerline of Clark Avenue to the intersection with the centerline of the
Cuyahoga River;
   9.   thence continuing northwesterly along the centerline of the Cuyahoga
River to the intersection with the centerline of Interstate 90;
   10.   thence continuing northeasterly along the centerline of Interstate 90
to the intersection with the centerline of Broadway;
   11.   thence continuing northwesterly along the centerline of Broadway and
Ontario Street to the intersection with the centerline of Huron Road;
   12.   thence continuing northwesterly along the centerline of Huron Road to
the intersection with the centerline of West Superior Avenue;
   13.   thence continuing southwesterly along the centerline of West Superior
Avenue to the intersection with the centerline of West 9th Street;
   14.   thence continuing northwesterly along the centerline of West 9th
Street to the intersection with the centerline of the main line tracks of the
Norfolk Southern Railway, formerly known as the Penn Central Railroad;
   15.   thence continuing easterly along the centerline of said N. S. Railway
main line tracks to the intersection with the centerline of the Cleveland
Memorial Shoreway;
   16.   thence continuing easterly along the centerline of the Cleveland
Memorial Shoreway to the intersection of the northerly projection of the
centerline of East 49th Street;
   17.   thence continuing northerly along the northerly projection of the
centerline of East 49th Street to the intersection of the Lake Erie shoreline;
   18.   thence continuing southwesterly along the Lake Erie shoreline,
including all of Burke Lakefront Airport, to the intersection of the northerly
projection of the centerline of West 65th Street;
   19.   thence continuing southerly along the northerly projection of the
centerline of West 65th Street to the intersection with the centerline of the
main line tracks of the Norfolk Southern Railway, formerly known as the Penn
Central Railroad;
   20.   thence continuing southwesterly along the centerline of said N. S.
Railway main line tracks to the intersection of the northerly projection of the
centerline of West 76th Street;
   21.   thence continuing southerly along the northerly projection of the
centerline of West 76th Street to the intersection with the centerline of
Goodwalt Avenue;
   22.   thence continuing easterly along the centerline of Goodwalt Avenue to
the intersection with the centerline of West 74th Street;
   23.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of West 74th Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Detroit Avenue;
   24.   thence continuing westerly along the centerline of Detroit Avenue to
the intersection with the centerline of West 74th Street southerly;
   25.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of West 74th Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Madison Avenue;
   26.   thence continuing easterly along the centerline of Madison Avenue to
the intersection with the centerline of West 73rd Street;
   27.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of West 73rd Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Colgate Court;
   28.   thence continuing easterly along the centerline of Colgate Court to
the intersection with the centerline of West 65th Street;
   29.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of West 65th Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Clark Avenue and the point of
beginning.
   Legal description approved by Eric B. Westfall, P.S., Section Chief, Plats,
Surveys and House Numbering Section, revised 12/30/2024.
(Ord. No. 1-2025. Passed 1-6-25, eff. 1-9-25)
§ 103.08 Ward Eight
   Situated in the City of Cleveland, County of Cuyahoga, State of Ohio, and
being known as Ward 8, further described in the following courses running in a
general clockwise direction.
   Beginning at the intersection of the centerlines of East 79th Street and
Euclid Avenue;
   1.   thence westerly along the centerline of Euclid Avenue to the
intersection with the centerline of East 55th Street;
   2.   thence continuing northerly along the centerline of East 55th Street to
the intersection with the centerline of Chester Avenue;
   3.   thence continuing westerly along the centerline of Chester Avenue to
the intersection with the centerline of East 22nd Street, a portion now
vacated;
   4.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of vacated East 22nd
Street to the intersection with the centerline of Euclid Avenue;
   5.   thence continuing westerly along the centerline of Euclid Avenue to the
intersection with the centerline of East 17th Street;
   6.   thence continuing northerly along the centerline of East 17th Street to
the intersection with the centerline of Chester Avenue;
   7.   thence continuing westerly along the centerline of Chester Avenue to
the intersection with the centerline of East 13th Street;
   8.   thence continuing northerly along the centerline of East 13th Street to
the intersection with the centerline of Superior Avenue;
   9.   thence continuing westerly along the centerline of Superior Avenue to
the intersection with the centerline of the east roadway of Public Square;
   10.   thence continuing in a general southwesterly direction along the
roadways of Public Square to the intersection with the centerline of West
Superior Avenue;
   11.   thence continuing westerly along the centerline of West Superior
Avenue to the intersection with the centerline of West 9th Street;
   12.   thence continuing northwesterly along the centerline of West 9th
Street to the intersection with the centerline of the main line tracks of the
Norfolk Southern Railway, formerly known as the Penn Central Railroad;
   13.   thence continuing easterly along the centerline of said N. S. Railway
main line tracks to the intersection with the centerline of the Cleveland
Memorial Shoreway;
   14.   thence continuing easterly along the centerline of the Cleveland
Memorial Shoreway to the intersection of the northerly projection of the
centerline of East 49th Street;
   15.   thence continuing northerly along the northerly projection of the
centerline of East 49th Street to the intersection of the Lake Erie shoreline;
   16.   thence continuing northeasterly along the Lake Erie shoreline to the
intersection of the City of Cleveland and the Village of Bratenahl boundary
line;
   17.   thence continuing southerly in a general clockwise direction along the
City of Cleveland and the Village of Bratenahl boundary line to the
intersection with the centerline of East 105th Street;
   18.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of East 105th Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Saint Clair Avenue;
   19.   thence continuing southwesterly along the centerline of Saint Clair
Avenue to the intersection with the centerline of Martin Luther King, Jr.
Drive;
   20.   thence continuing southeasterly along the centerline of Martin Luther
King, Jr. Drive to the intersection with the centerline of East 105th Street;
   21.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of East 105th Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Mount Sinai Drive;
   22.   thence continuing westerly along the centerline of Mount Sinai Drive
and Hough Avenue to the intersection with the centerline of East 75th Street;
   23.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of East 75th Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Chester Avenue;
   24.   thence continuing easterly along the centerline of Chester Avenue to
the intersection with the centerline of East 79th Street;
   25.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of East 79th Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Euclid Avenue and the point of
beginning.
   Legal description approved by Eric B. Westfall, P.S., Section Chief, Plats,
Surveys and House Numbering Section, revised 12/30/2024.
(Ord. No. 1-2025. Passed 1-6-25, eff. 1-9-25)
§ 103.09 Ward Nine
   Situated in the City of Cleveland, County of Cuyahoga, State of Ohio, and
being known as Ward 9, further described in the following courses running in a
general counterclockwise direction.
   Beginning at the intersection of the centerlines of Saranac Road and East
152nd Street;
   1.   thence northerly along the centerline of East 152nd Street to the
intersection with the centerline of Interstate 90;
   2.   thence continuing southwesterly along the centerline of Interstate 90
to the intersection of the southerly projection of the centerline of East 147th
Street;
   3.   thence continuing northerly along the southerly projection of the
centerline of East 147th Street to the intersection with the centerline of
Westropp Avenue;
   4.   thence continuing westerly along the centerline of Westropp Avenue to
the intersection with the centerline of East 143rd Street;
   5.   thence continuing northerly along the centerline of East 143rd Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Lakeshore Boulevard;
   6.   thence continuing southwesterly along the centerline of Lakeshore
Boulevard to the intersection of the City of Cleveland and the Village of
Bratenahl boundary line;
   7.   thence continuing southeasterly in a general counterclockwise direction
along the City of Cleveland and the Village of Bratenahl boundary line to the
intersection with the centerline of East 105th Street;
   8.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of East 105th Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Saint Clair Avenue;
   9.   thence continuing southwesterly along the centerline of Saint Clair
Avenue to the intersection with the centerline of Martin Luther King, Jr.
Drive;
   10.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of Martin Luther
King, Jr. Drive to the intersection with the centerline of Euclid Avenue;
   11.   thence continuing northeasterly along the centerline of Euclid Avenue
to the intersection with the centerline of Ford Drive;
   12.   thence continuing northwesterly along the centerline of Ford Drive to
the intersection with the centerline of Bellflower Road;
   13.   thence continuing northeasterly along the centerline of Bellflower
Road to the intersection with the centerline of East 115th Street;
   14.   thence continuing northerly along the centerline of East 115th Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Ashbury Avenue;
   15.   thence continuing northeasterly along the centerline of Ashbury Avenue
to the intersection with the centerline of Lakeview Road;
   16.   thence continuing southeasterly along the centerline of Lakeview Road
to the intersection of the City of Cleveland and the City of East Cleveland
boundary line;
   17.   thence continuing northerly in a general counterclockwise direction
along the City of Cleveland and the City of East Cleveland boundary line to the
intersection with the centerline of East 152nd Street;
   18.   thence continuing northerly along the centerline of East 152nd Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Saint Clair Avenue;
   19.   thence continuing southwesterly along the centerline of Saint Clair
Avenue to the intersection with the centerline of Coit Road;
   20.   thence continuing northwesterly along the centerline of Coit Road to
the intersection with the centerline of East 140th Street;
   21.   thence continuing northerly along the centerline of East 140th Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Aspinwall Avenue;
   22.   thence continuing easterly along the centerline of Aspinwall Avenue to
the intersection with the centerline of Saranac Road;
   23.   thence continuing northeasterly along the centerline of Saranac Road
to the intersection with the centerline of East 152nd Street and the point of
beginning.
   Legal description approved by Eric B. Westfall, P.S., Section Chief, Plats,
Surveys and House Numbering Section, revised 12/30/2024.
(Ord. No. 1-2025. Passed 1-6-25, eff. 1-9-25)
§ 103.10 Ward Ten
   Situated in the City of Cleveland, County of Cuyahoga, State of Ohio, and
being known as Ward 10, further described in the following courses running in a
general clockwise direction.
   Beginning at the intersection of the centerlines of Saranac Road and East
152nd Street;
   1.   thence northerly along the centerline of East 152nd Street to the
intersection with the centerline of Interstate 90;
   2.   thence continuing southwesterly along the centerline of Interstate 90
to the intersection of the southerly projection of the centerline of East 147th
Street;
   3.   thence continuing northerly along the southerly projection of the
centerline of East 147th Street to the intersection with the centerline of
Westropp Avenue;
   4.   thence continuing westerly along the centerline of Westropp Avenue to
the intersection with the centerline of East 143rd Street;
   5.   thence continuing northerly along the centerline of East 143rd Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Lakeshore Boulevard;
   6.   thence continuing southwesterly along the centerline of Lakeshore
Boulevard to the intersection of the City of Cleveland and the Village of
Bratenahl boundary line;
   7.   thence continuing northerly in a general clockwise direction along the
City of Cleveland and the Village of Bratenahl boundary line to the
intersection of the Lake Erie shoreline;
   8.   thence continuing northeasterly along the Lake Erie shoreline to the
intersection of the City of Cleveland and the City of Euclid boundary line;
   9.   thence continuing southerly in a general clockwise direction along the
City of Cleveland and the City of Euclid boundary line to the tripoint of the
City of Cleveland, the City of Euclid and the City of South Euclid;
   10.   thence continuing easterly in a general clockwise direction along the
City of Cleveland and the City of South Euclid boundary line to the tripoint of
the City of Cleveland, the City of Cleveland Heights and the City of South
Euclid;
   11.   thence continuing westerly in a general clockwise direction along the
City of Cleveland and the City of Cleveland Heights boundary line to the
tripoint of the City of Cleveland, the City of Cleveland Heights and the City
of East Cleveland;
   12.   thence continuing westerly in a general clockwise direction along the
City of Cleveland and the City of East Cleveland boundary line to the
intersection with the centerline of East 152nd Street;
   13.   thence continuing northerly along the centerline of East 152nd Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Saint Clair Avenue;
   14.   thence continuing southwesterly along the centerline of Saint Clair
Avenue to the intersection with the centerline of Coit Road;
   15.   thence continuing northwesterly along the centerline of Coit Road to
the intersection with the centerline of East 140th Street;
   16.   thence continuing northerly along the centerline of East 140th Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Aspinwall Avenue;
   17.   thence continuing easterly along the centerline of Aspinwall Avenue to
the intersection with the centerline of Saranac Road;
   18.   thence continuing northeasterly along the centerline of Saranac Road
to the intersection with the centerline of East 152nd Street and the point of
beginning.
   Legal description approved by Eric B. Westfall, P.S., Section Chief, Plats,
Surveys and House Numbering Section, revised 12/30/2024.
(Ord. No. 1-2025. Passed 1-6-25, eff. 1-9-25)
§ 103.11 Ward Eleven
   Situated in the City of Cleveland, County of Cuyahoga, State of Ohio, and
being known as Ward 11, further described in the following courses running in a
general clockwise direction.
   Beginning at the intersection of the centerlines of Clark Avenue and West
65th Street;
   1.   thence southerly along the centerline of West 65th Street to the
intersection with the centerline of Storer Avenue;
   2.   thence continuing westerly along the centerline of Storer Avenue to the
intersection with the centerline of West 67th Street;
   3.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of West 67th Street to
the intersection with the centerline of Denison Avenue;
   4.   thence continuing southeasterly along the centerline of Denison Avenue
to the intersection with the centerline of the Interstate 71 off ramp;
   5.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of the Interstate 71
off ramp to the intersection with the centerline of the main line tracks of the
Norfolk Southern Railway, formerly known as the Wheeling and Lake Erie Railway;
   6.   thence continuing southeasterly along the centerline of said N. S.
Railway main line tracks to the intersection with the centerline of Pearl Road;
   7.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of Pearl Road to the
intersection with the centerline of Broadview Road westerly;
   8.   thence continuing westerly along the centerline of Broadview Road
westerly to the intersection with the centerline of West 36th Street;
   9.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of West 36th Street to
the intersection with the centerline of Muriel Avenue;
   10.   thence continuing easterly along the centerline of Muriel Avenue to
the intersection with the centerline of West 35th Street;
   11.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of West 35th Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Memphis Avenue;
   12.   thence continuing easterly along the centerline of Memphis Avenue to
the intersection with the centerline of Pearl Road;
   13.   thence continuing southwesterly along the centerline of Pearl Road to
the intersection with the centerline of Henritze Avenue;
   14.   thence continuing westerly along the centerline of Henritze Avenue to
the intersection with the centerline of West 47th Street;
   15.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of West 47th Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Woburn Avenue;
   16.   thence continuing westerly along the centerlines of Woburn Avenue to
the intersection of the City of Cleveland and the City of Brooklyn boundary
line;
   17.   thence continuing northerly in a general clockwise direction along the
City of Cleveland and the City of Brooklyn boundary line to the intersection of
the easterly projection of the centerline of Walford Avenue;
   18.   thence continuing westerly along the centerline of Walford Avenue to
the intersection with the centerline of West 100th Street;
   19.   thence continuing northerly along the centerline of West 100th Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Denison Avenue;
   20.   thence continuing northwesterly along the centerline of Denison Avenue
to the intersection with the centerline of Lorain Avenue;
   21.   thence continuing northeasterly along the centerline of Lorain Avenue
to the intersection with the centerline of West 98th Street;
   22.   thence continuing northerly along the centerline of West 98th Street
to the intersection of the easterly projection of the centerline of Western
Avenue;
   23.   thence continuing westerly along the easterly projection of the
centerline of Western Avenue to the intersection with the centerline of West
100th Street;
   24.   thence continuing northerly along the centerline of West 100th Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Old West Boulevard;
   25.   thence continuing northeasterly along the centerline of Old West
Boulevard to the intersection with the centerline of Detroit Avenue;
   26.   thence continuing northeasterly along the centerline of Detroit Avenue
to the intersection with the centerline of West Boulevard;
   27.   thence continuing northerly along the centerline of West Boulevard to
the intersection with the centerline of Baltic Road;
   28.   thence continuing northeasterly along the centerline of Baltic Road to
the intersection with the centerline of Clifton Boulevard;
   29.   thence continuing northwesterly along the centerline of Clifton
Boulevard to the intersection with the centerline of West Boulevard;
   30.   thence continuing northerly along the northerly projection of the
centerline of West Boulevard to the intersection of the Lake Erie shoreline;
   31.   thence continuing easterly along the Lake Erie shoreline to the
intersection of the northerly projection of the centerline of West 65th Street;
   32.   thence continuing southerly along the northerly projection of the
centerline of West 65th Street to the intersection with the centerline of the
main line tracks of the Norfolk Southern Railway, formerly known as the Penn
Central Railroad;
   33.   thence continuing southwesterly along the centerline of said N. S.
Railway main line tracks to the intersection of the northerly projection of the
centerline of West 76th Street;
   34.   thence continuing southerly along the northerly projection of the
centerline of West 76th Street to the intersection with the centerline of
Goodwalt Avenue;
   35.   thence continuing easterly along the centerline of Goodwalt Avenue to
the intersection with the centerline of West 74th Street;
   36.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of West 74th Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Detroit Avenue;
   37.   thence continuing westerly along the centerline of Detroit Avenue to
the intersection with the centerline of West 74th Street southerly;
   38.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of West 74th Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Madison Avenue;
   39.   thence continuing easterly along the centerline of Madison Avenue to
the intersection with the centerline of West 73rd Street;
   40.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of West 73rd Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Colgate Court;
   41.   thence continuing easterly along the centerline of Colgate Court to
the intersection with the centerline of West 65th Street;
   42.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of West 65th Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Clark Avenue and the point of
beginning.
   Legal description approved by Eric B. Westfall, P.S., Section Chief, Plats,
Surveys and House Numbering Section, revised 1/2/2025.
(Ord. No. 1-2025. Passed 1-6-25, eff. 1-9-25)
§ 103.12 Ward Twelve
   Situated in the City of Cleveland, County of Cuyahoga, State of Ohio, and
being known as Ward 12, further described in the following courses running in a
general counterclockwise direction.
   Beginning at the intersection of the centerlines of Berea Road and West
117th Street, also being a boundary corner between the City of Cleveland and
the City of Lakewood;
   1.   thence southerly along the centerline of West 117th Street to the
intersection with the centerline of Geraldine Avenue, a portion now vacated;
   2.   thence continuing westerly along the centerline of Geraldine Avenue to
the intersection with the centerline of West 120th Street;
   3.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of West 120th Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Lorain Avenue;
   4.   thence continuing southwesterly along the centerline of Lorain Avenue
to the intersection with the centerline of West 132nd Street;
   5.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of West 132nd Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Cooley Avenue;
   6.   thence continuing easterly along the centerline of Cooley Avenue to the
intersection with the centerline of West 128th Street;
   7.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of West 128th Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Worthington Avenue;
   8.   thence continuing westerly along the westerly projection of the
centerline of Worthington Avenue to the intersection with the centerline of
West 130th Street;
   9.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of West 130th Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Interstate 71;
   10.   thence continuing easterly along the centerline of Interstate 71 to
the intersection of the City of Cleveland and the Village of Linndale boundary
line;
   11.   thence continuing northeasterly in a general counterclockwise
direction along the City of Cleveland and the Village of Linndale boundary line
to the tripoint of the City of Cleveland, the City of Brooklyn and the Village
of Linndale;
   12.   thence continuing northeasterly in a general counterclockwise
direction along the City of Cleveland and the City of Brooklyn boundary line to
the intersection of the easterly projection of the centerline of Walford
Avenue;
   13.   thence continuing westerly along the centerline of Walford Avenue to
the intersection with the centerline of West 100th Street;
   14.   thence continuing northerly along the centerline of West 100th Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Denison Avenue;
   15.   thence continuing northwesterly along the centerline of Denison Avenue
to the intersection with the centerline of Lorain Avenue;
   16.   thence continuing northeasterly along the centerline of Lorain Avenue
to the intersection with the centerline of West 98th Street;
   17.   thence continuing northerly along the centerline of West 98th Street
to the intersection of the easterly projection of the centerline of Western
Avenue;
   18.   thence continuing westerly along the easterly projection of the
centerline of Western Avenue to the intersection with the centerline of West
100th Street;
   19.   thence continuing northerly along the centerline of West 100th Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Old West Boulevard;
   20.   thence continuing northeasterly along the centerline of Old West
Boulevard to the intersection with the centerline of Detroit Avenue;
   21.   thence continuing northeasterly along the centerline of Detroit Avenue
to the intersection with the centerline of West Boulevard;
   22.   thence continuing northerly along the centerline of West Boulevard to
the intersection with the centerline of Baltic Road;
   23.   thence continuing northeasterly along the centerline of Baltic Road to
the intersection with the centerline of Clifton Boulevard;
   24.   thence continuing northwesterly along the centerline of Clifton
Boulevard to the intersection with the centerline of West Boulevard;
   25.   thence continuing northerly along the northerly projection of the
centerline of West Boulevard to the intersection of the Lake Erie shoreline;
   26.   thence continuing westerly along the Lake Erie shoreline to the
intersection of the City of Cleveland and the City of Lakewood boundary line;
   27.   thence continuing southerly in a general counterclockwise direction
along the City of Cleveland and the City of Lakewood boundary line to the
intersection with the centerline of Berea Road and the point of beginning.
   Legal description approved by Eric B. Westfall, P.S., Section Chief, Plats,
Surveys and House Numbering Section, revised 1/2/2025.
(Ord. No. 1-2025. Passed 1-6-25, eff. 1-9-25)
§ 103.13 Ward Thirteen
   Situated in the City of Cleveland, County of Cuyahoga, State of Ohio, and
being known as Ward 13, further described in the following courses running in a
general clockwise direction.
   Beginning at the intersection of the centerlines of Berea Road and West
117th Street, also being a boundary corner between the City of Cleveland and
the City of Lakewood;
   1.   thence southerly along the centerline of West 117th Street to the
intersection with the centerline of Geraldine Avenue, a portion now vacated;
   2.   thence continuing westerly along the centerline of Geraldine Avenue to
the intersection with the centerline of West 120th Street;
   3.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of West 120th Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Lorain Avenue;
   4.   thence continuing southwesterly along the centerline of Lorain Avenue
to the intersection with the centerline of West 132nd Street;
   5.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of West 132nd Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Cooley Avenue;
   6.   thence continuing easterly along the centerline of Cooley Avenue to the
intersection with the centerline of West 128th Street;
   7.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of West 128th Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Worthington Avenue;
   8.   thence continuing westerly along the westerly projection of the
centerline of Worthington Avenue to the intersection with the centerline of
West 130th Street;
   9.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of West 130th Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Interstate 71;
   10.   thence continuing easterly along the centerline of Interstate 71 to
the intersection of the City of Cleveland and the Village of Linndale boundary
line;
   11.   thence continuing southerly in a general clockwise direction along the
City of Cleveland and the Village of Linndale boundary line to the tripoint of
the City of Cleveland, the City of Brooklyn and the Village of Linndale;
   12.   thence continuing southerly in a general clockwise direction along the
City of Cleveland and the City of Brooklyn boundary line to the tripoint of the
City of Cleveland, the City of Brooklyn and the City of Parma;
   13.   thence continuing westerly in a general clockwise direction along the
City of Cleveland and the City of Parma boundary line to the tripoint of the
City of Cleveland, the City of Brook Park and the City of Parma;
   14.   thence continuing northerly in a general clockwise direction along the
City of Cleveland and the City of Brook Park boundary line to the intersection
with the centerline of the main line tracks of the Norfolk Southern Railway,
formerly known as the Penn Central Railroad;
   15.   thence continuing northeasterly along the centerline of said N. S.
Railway main line tracks to the intersection with the centerline of West 140th
Street;
   16.   thence continuing northerly along the centerline of West 140th Street
to the intersection of the City of Cleveland and the City of Lakewood boundary
line;
   17.   thence continuing easterly in a general clockwise direction along the
City of Cleveland and the City of Lakewood boundary line to the intersection
with the centerline of Berea Road and the point of beginning.
   Legal description approved by Eric B. Westfall, P.S., Section Chief, Plats,
Surveys and House Numbering Section, revised 12/20/2024.
(Ord. No. 1-2025. Passed 1-6-25, eff. 1-9-25)
§ 103.14 Ward Fourteen
   Situated in the City of Cleveland, County of Cuyahoga, State of Ohio, and
being known as Ward 14, further described in the following courses running in a
general clockwise direction.
   Beginning at the intersection of the centerlines of West 65th Street and
Clark Avenue;
   1.   thence easterly along the centerline of Clark Avenue to the
intersection with the centerline of Train Avenue;
   2.   thence continuing northerly and northeasterly along the centerline of
Train Avenue to the intersection with the centerline of Interstate 90;
   3.   thence continuing easterly along the centerline of Interstate 90 to the
intersection with the centerline of Interstate 71;
   4.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of Interstate 71 to
the intersection with the centerline of Clark Avenue;
   5.   thence continuing easterly along the centerline of Clark Avenue to the
intersection with the centerline of West 14th Street;
   6.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of West 14th Street to
the intersection with the centerline of Quigley Road;
   7.   thence continuing easterly along the centerline of Quigley Road to the
intersection with the centerline of Clark Avenue;
   8.   thence continuing easterly along the easterly projection of the
centerline of Clark Avenue to the intersection with the centerline of the
Cuyahoga River;
   9.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of the Cuyahoga River
to the intersection of the City of Cleveland and the Village of Cuyahoga
Heights boundary line;
   10.   thence continuing southerly in a general clockwise direction along the
City of Cleveland and the Village of Cuyahoga Heights boundary line to the
intersection with the centerline of Harvard Avenue;
   11.   thence continuing westerly along the centerline of Harvard Avenue to
the intersection with the centerline of Jennings Road;
   12.   thence continuing northerly along the centerline of Jennings Road to
the intersection with the centerline of West 14th Street;
   13.   thence continuing northwesterly along the centerline of West 14th
Street to the intersection with the centerline of the main line tracks of the
Norfolk Southern Railway, formerly known as the Wheeling and Lake Erie Railway;
   14.   thence continuing westerly along the centerline of said N. S. Railway
main line tracks to the intersection with the centerline of the Interstate 71
off ramp;
   15.   thence continuing northerly along the centerline of the Interstate 71
off ramp to the intersection with the centerline of Denison Avenue;
   16.   thence continuing northwesterly along the centerline of Denison Avenue
to the intersection with the centerline of West 67th Street;
   17.   thence continuing northerly along the centerline of West 67th Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Storer Avenue;
   18.   thence continuing easterly along the centerline of Storer Avenue to
the intersection with the centerline of West 65th Street;
   19.   thence continuing northerly along the centerline of West 65th Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Clark Avenue and the point of
beginning.
   Legal description approved by Eric B. Westfall, P.S., Section Chief, Plats,
Surveys and House Numbering Section, revised 12/23/2024.
(Ord. No. 1-2025. Passed 1-6-25, eff. 1-9-25)
§ 103.15 Ward Fifteen
   Situated in the City of Cleveland, County of Cuyahoga, State of Ohio, and
being known as Ward 15, further described in the following courses running in a
general clockwise direction.
   Beginning at the intersection of the centerlines of Lorain Avenue and the
main line tracks of the Norfolk Southern Railway, formerly known as the Penn
Central Railroad;
   1.   thence southwesterly along the centerline of said N. S. Railway main
line tracks to the intersection of the City of Cleveland and the City of Brook
Park boundary line;
   2.   thence continuing southwesterly in a general clockwise direction along
the City of Cleveland and the City of Brook Park boundary line to the tripoint
of the City of Cleveland, the City of Brook Park and the City of Fairview Park;
   3.   thence continuing easterly in a general clockwise direction along the
City of Cleveland and the City of Fairview Park boundary line to the tripoint
of the City of Cleveland, the City of Fairview Park and the City of Lakewood;
   4.   thence continuing northerly in a general clockwise direction along the
City of Cleveland and the City of Lakewood boundary line to the intersection
with the centerline of West 140th Street;
   5.   thence continuing southerly along the centerline of West 140th Street
to the intersection with the centerline of the main line tracks of the Norfolk
Southern Railway, formerly known as the Penn Central Railroad;
   6.   thence continuing southwesterly along the centerline of said N. S.
Railway main line tracks to the intersection with the centerline of Lorain
Avenue and the point of beginning.
   Legal description approved by Eric B. Westfall, P.S., Section Chief, Plats,
Surveys and House Numbering Section, revised 12/20/2024.
(Ord. No. 1-2025. Passed 1-6-25, eff. 1-9-25)
§ 103.16 Ward Sixteen – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1-2025. Passed 1-6-25, eff. 1-9-25)
§ 103.17 Ward Seventeen – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1-2025. Passed 1-6-25, eff. 1-9-25)
§ 103.18 Ward Eighteen – Repealed
(Ord. No. 474-13. Passed 3-26-13, eff. 3-28-13)
§ 103.19 Ward Nineteen – Repealed
(Ord. No. 474-13. Passed 3-26-13, eff. 3-28-13)
§ 103.20 Ward Twenty – Repealed
(Ord. No. 370-09. Passed 3-23-09, eff. 3-25-09)
§ 103.21 Ward Twenty-One – Repealed
(Ord. No. 370-09. Passed 3-23-09, eff. 3-25-09)
§§ 103.22 to 103.33 Reserved
CHAPTER 105 – OFFICIAL STANDARDS
105.01   Corporate Seal
105.02   Port Seal
105.03   Ceremonial Seal
105.04   City Banner
105.05   Prohibited Uses of Banner
105.06   Display of U.S. Flag on City Property
105.07   Display of U.S. Flag in Parade
105.08   U.S. Flag Use in Unveiling Ceremonies
105.09   Display of U.S. Flag on Public Streets
105.10   Desecration of U.S. Flag
105.11   Memorials
105.12   City Base Levels
105.13   Marking City Vehicles
105.99   Penalty
   Note: The legislative history of this chapter, except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 63410-A, passed
September 22, 1924.
Cross-reference:
   Departmental seals, CO
121.02
   Desecration, CO
623.07
   Seal of Clerk of Council, CO
113.05
   Vandalism to Police and Firefighter Memorials, CO
623.091
   War memorial vandalism, CO
623.09
Statutory reference:
   State flag, RC 5.01
   State legal holidays, RC 1.14, 5.20 et seq.
§ 105.01 Corporate Seal
   (a)   The corporate seal of the City of Cleveland shall consist of a disc
one and three-fourths (1-3/4) inches in diameter, upon which shall be the coat
of arms of the State of Ohio, surrounded by two (2) circles. The outer circle
shall contain the words, “The corporate seal of the City of Cleveland” and the
inner circle shall contain the words “The State of Ohio, U.S.A.”
   (b)   The corporate seal shall be kept in the office of the Mayor, and shall
be affixed to all bonds, notes or certificates of indebtedness issued by the
City, to all deeds and leases executed in behalf of the City and to no other
documents or papers whatever.
§ 105.02 Port Seal
   The port seal of the City of Cleveland shall consist of an elliptical design
in the shape of an expanded globe containing latitudinal and longitudinal
lines. The port seal shall contain the words “Cleveland World Port”, offset to
accommodate an outline of the Terminal Tower Group to be left of the word
“World” and a freight vessel to the right of the word “Port”. The port seal is
established and shall be used for promotional purposes only.
(Ord. No. 685-60. Passed 4-11-60, eff. 4-12-60)
§ 105.03 Ceremonial Seal
   The ceremonial seal of the City of Cleveland shall consist of a circular
design divided into four (4) quadrants. The upper left quadrant shall contain a
stylized skyline of the City. The upper right quadrant shall contain a leaf and
tree symbol. The lower left quadrant shall contain a symbol of meshing gears.
The lower right quadrant shall contain a stylized water symbol. The
circumscription surrounding the new seal shall read “The Great Seal of the City
of Cleveland.” The ceremonial seal is established and shall be used for
ceremonial purposes only.
(Ord. No. 2028-73. Passed 11-19-73, eff. 11-26-73)
§ 105.04 City Banner
   The Municipal emblem of the City shall be a banner of the following
description and design: the banner shall consist of three (3) vertical stripes,
of equal width, in color red, white and blue respectively, the red being
nearest the standard and the white in the center. The middle stripe shall bear
the American shield with the word “Cleveland,” in blue, across its center, and
the figures “1796” in red, at its base, encircled by a laurel wreath. The
outline of the lower half of the shield shall be in red and of the upper in
blue. In the upper left-hand corner of the shield shall stand an anvil, hammer
and wheel, and in the upper right-hand corner an anchor, windlass and oars.
Under the shield, in black letters, shall be placed the words “Progress and
Prosperity.”
§ 105.05 Prohibited Uses of Banner
   No person, firm, company or corporation shall use the City banner or any
imitation or design thereof, except for the usual and customary purposes,
decoration and display. No person, firm, company or corporation shall print or
stamp thereon any word, legend or device, other than those described in Section
105.04. However, the Mayor shall have authority to grant permission for the use
of the design in such ways as he or she considers proper, other than for
advertising purposes.
§ 105.06 Display of U.S. Flag on City Property
   The flag of the United States shall be displayed daily from sunrise to
sunset on all Municipal buildings and on such stationary flagstaffs as may be
located upon City property in conformity with the flag code adopted by the
National Flag Conference, June 15, 1923, until such time as the United States
or the State has made other provisions for the display of the National flag.
(Ord. No. 1277-39. Passed 10-23-39)
§ 105.07 Display of U.S. Flag in Parade
   In all parades upon the public streets of the City the flag of the United
States shall be displayed in accordance with the following rules:
   (a)   In procession with another flag the United States flag shall be
displayed on the marching right;
   (b)   In procession with a line of other flags the United States flag shall
be displayed in front of the center of the line;
   (c)   When displayed on a motor vehicle, the United States flag shall be
fastened to the body upon a separate standard. It shall not be draped over the
hood, top, side or back of such vehicle;
   (d)   Under no circumstances shall the United States flag be carried in a
horizontal position.
   (e)   On a float in a parade the flag shall be displayed from a staff only.
(Ord. No. 1277-39. Passed 10-23-39)
§ 105.08 U.S. Flag Use in Unveiling Ceremonies
   The United States flag when used in connection with the unveiling of a
statue or monument shall not be allowed to fall to the ground upon the
unveiling. It must be carried aloft to wave out, forming a distinctive feature
during the remainder of such ceremony.
(Ord. No. 1277-39. Passed 10-23-39)
§ 105.09 Display of U.S. Flag on Public Streets
   No permit shall be given for the display of the United States flag upon the
streets of the City unless when displayed over the middle of the street the
United States flag shall be suspended vertically, with the blue field to the
north in an east and west street or to the east in a north and south street.
(Ord. No. 1277-39. Passed 10-23-39)
§ 105.10 Desecration of U.S. Flag
   No person shall knowingly cast contempt upon any flag of the United States
by publicly mutilating, defacing, defiling, burning or wearing it or spitting
or trampling upon it. As used in this section, “flag of the United States”
includes any flag, standard colors, ensign or any picture or representation of
either, or of any part of either, made of any substance or represented on any
substance, of any size purporting to be either of the flag, standard, colors or
ensign of the United States of America, or a picture or a representation of
either, upon which is shown the colors, the stars and the stripes, in any
number of either thereof, or of any part of either, by which the average person
seeing the same without deliberation may believe the same to represent the
flag, standards, colors or ensign of the United States of America.
(Ord. No. 1161-70. Passed 6-29-70, eff. 7-1-70)
§ 105.11 Memorials
   No memorial shall be constructed, nor shall any proffer of a memorial to be
constructed upon public property in the City be accepted, except pursuant to
the policies hereinafter set forth:
   (a)   The appropriateness of locating a given memorial on public lands or
buildings shall be predicated upon the public character of the subject to be
memorialized, the public interest in the subject to be memorialized and the
public benefit implicit in the proposed memorial.
      (1)   Memorials may appropriately be erected on public lands to recall to
public attention historic events of public interest closely associated with the
site.
      (2)   Memorials may appropriately be erected on public lands to
commemorate outstanding cultural achievements, public services or patriotic
sacrifices of inspirational value to all citizens.
      (3)   Memorials bearing the names of profit- making organizations shall
not be erected on public lands.
   (b)   An approval for any memorial site proposed on public property shall be
based upon the following policy:
      (1)   Memorials marking spots or areas of historic interest may be
located appropriately at or near the areas memorialized.
      (2)   Memorials commemorating the activities or interests of local groups
or private organizations may most appropriately be placed on the properties or
within the headquarters of the interested groups.
      (3)   Memorials commemorating the patriotic sacrifice or outstanding
public service of individuals or groups may appropriately be located in areas
which the public popularly associates with their name.
      (4)   Memorials not falling under the above classifications and found to
merit a public location shall be grouped in designated memorial areas rather
than distributed throughout public lands.
      (5)   Special consideration shall be given by the Fine Arts Committee of
the City Planning Commission to the placement of any important memorial costing
more than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) which may be determined to be an
asset to the City’s cultural life.
   (c)   The character and design of any memorial proposed for a location on
public land shall be approved by the Commission through its Fine Arts Committee
and the director of the department responsible for the affected property before
it may be submitted to Council for acceptance.
   (d)   No memorial to be located on public property shall be approved for
acceptance before a fund has been set up by the sponsors to provide for its
maintenance.
   (e)   A memorial accepted by the City may be moved to another location if,
after careful consideration, the Planning Commission and the directors of the
departments responsible for the affected properties rule the proposed
relocation to be in the public interest.
(Ord. No. 1033-47. Passed 7-31-47)
§ 105.12 City Base Levels
   The plane of reference for the grades of streets, sewers, water pipes and
for all levels taken, or elevations established in the City shall be the mean
sea level datum, or base, as used by the U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey, and is
hereby established as six hundred fifty six and ninety-three hundredths
(656.930) feet below the elevation of bench mark No. 1 situated in the
northeastern section of Monumental Park, commonly called Public Square. Such
bench mark is a bronze bolt, encased in masonry, and provided with suitable
cover, located about one hundred seventy-four and twenty-two hundredths
(174.22) feet easterly of the center line of Ontario Street, and one hundred
fifty- three and forty-one hundredths (153.41) feet northerly of the center
line of Superior Avenue, N.W. The plane of reference is fixed as six hundred
sixty-eight and four hundred ninety-nine thousandths (668.499) feet below the
brass plate bench mark on the westerly and of the parapet wall on the Superior
Avenue side of the Soldiers’ and Sailors’ monument in the Public Square.
(Ord. No. 781-41. Passed 6-9-41)
§ 105.13 Marking City Vehicles
   The words “City of Cleveland” shall be painted plainly visible on the
outside of the body of each motor vehicle owned by the City. The letters of
these words shall be at least four (4) inches in the least dimension, and the
color shall contrast with the color of the vehicle body. Motor vehicles used by
the Division of Police in the detection and the suppression of crime shall be
exempt from the provisions of this section.
   No person shall operate a City vehicle which is not lettered as prescribed
herein.
§ 105.99 Penalty
   (a)   Whoever uses the City banner for advertising purposes, or prints,
stamps, or emblazons thereon any word, legend or device, not duly authorized as
stated in Section
105.04, shall be fined not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than twenty-
five dollars ($25.00). Each banner so used or so printed or stamped constitutes
a separate offense.
   (b)   Whoever displays the flag of the United States contrary to the
provisions of Sections
105.07 to
105.09, shall be fined not more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
   (c)   Whoever violates Section
105.10 shall be fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or
imprisoned not more than one (1) year, or both.
   (d)   Whoever violates Section
105.13 shall be fined not more than ten dollars ($10.00).
(Ord. No. 1161-70. Passed 6-29-70, eff. 7-1-70)
CHAPTER 106 – DEMOCRACY DAY
106.01   Democracy Day; Public Hearing
106.02   Letter
106.03   Further Hearings
§ 106.01 Democracy Day; Public Hearing
   Beginning in the year 2017, the Mayor and City Council shall designate one
day in the second week of May following the November federal elections as
"Democracy Day: A Call for a U.S. Constitutional Amendment." On this day, the
Mayor and City Council shall sponsor a public hearing in a public space within
the City. The City shall publicize the public hearing on its website and
through area media at least one (1) month in advance of the hearing. The public
hearing will examine the impact on the City of political contributions of
corporations, unions, political action committees, and super-PACs. The Mayor
and at least one (1) City Councilperson shall submit testimony at the public
hearing. In addition, all citizens of Cleveland will be permitted to submit
oral testimony for a period of at least five (5) minutes per citizen. The
public hearing shall be held during an evening or weekend time. The City shall
record the minutes of the hearing and make them available to the public no
later than three (3) months after the hearing by posting them on Council's or
the City's website.
(Ord. No. 1059-17. Passed 9-25-17, eff. 9-27-17)
§ 106.02 Letter
   Within one (1) week following the public hearing, the Clerk shall send a
letter to the leaders of the Ohio House and Senate, and Cleveland's U.S.
Congressional Representatives, and both Ohio U.S. Senators stating that a
public hearing was held to support an amendment to the U.S. Constitution
declaring:
   (a)   Only human beings, not corporations, are legal persons with
constitutional rights;
   (b)   Money is not equivalent to speech, and, therefore, regulating
political contributions and spending is not equivalent to limiting political
speech.
(Ord. No. 1059-17. Passed 9-25-17, eff. 9-27-17)
§ 106.03 Further Hearings
   The biennial public hearings will continue for a period of ten (10) years
through May 2027 or until a constitutional amendment reflecting the principles
set forth in section
106.02 is ratified by three-quarters (3/4) of state legislatures.
(Ord. No. 1059-17. Passed 9-25-17, eff. 9-27-17)
CHAPTER 107 – MILITARY SPENDING AND RELATED TAX REVENUES FOR MILITARY PURPOSES
107.01   Required Information to be Published
107.02   Required Press Releases
107.03   Calculation of Estimates
107.04   Format for Publishing Information
107.05   Date of Publication
107.06   Publication in City Record
§ 107.01 Required Information to be Published
   The Mayor, with the assistance of the Department of Finance, is authorized
and directed to publish annually:
   (a)   Estimates of the extent to which locally generated Federal tax dollars
are used for military purposes, specifically including the estimates indicated
in subsections (b), (c) and (d) of this section;
   (b)   An estimate of the amount of money proposed to be spent for military
and related items by the Federal government according to the latest Federal
budget per person and for Cuyahoga County using an allocation based on
population alone to be calculated as described in Section
107.03;
   (c)   An estimate of the portion of the Federal funds budget proposed to be
spent for military related items, according to the latest Federal budget to be
calculated as described in Section
107.03;
   (d)   An estimate of the taxes paid per person and for Cuyahoga County for
military related expenditures for the most recent year in which data are
available, to be calculated as described in Section
107.03.
(Ord. No. 2179-86. Passed 2-9-87, eff. 2-11-87)
§ 107.02 Required Press Releases
   The Mayor is authorized and directed to cause a press release containing the
information listed in Section
107.01 to be issued to television stations WKYC, WEWS, WJW, the wire services
UPI and AP, the Cleveland Plain Dealer, the Akron Beacon Journal, the Call and
Post, all Sun Newspapers which serve the City of Cleveland, at least five (5)
radio stations which serve the City of Cleveland and any other media outlets
which the Mayor chooses to include.
(Ord. No. 2179-86. Passed 2-9-87, eff. 2-11-87)
§ 107.03 Calculation of Estimates
   The estimates required in Section
107.01 shall be calculated as follows:
   (a)   Calculations based on the Federal budget shall be done using the
Budget of the United States Government for the Fiscal Year beginning on October
1st of the same calendar year for which this report is to be published;
   (b)   As an intermediate step, the total proposed military related
expenditure shall be calculated by adding the proposed outlays for the
following spending categories listed in Table 15 of the Budget of the United
States Government, Fiscal Year 1986; 050-National Defense; 152-Internal
Security Assistance; the subsection entitled Department of Defense-Civil of
Category 602-Federal Employment Retirement and Disability; 700-Veterans
Benefits and Services and sixty percent (60%) of the category 901-Interest on
the Public Debt;
   (c)   The estimate of military related spending per person required in
Section
107.01 (b) shall be calculated by dividing the total proposed military related
expenditure as calculated in Section
107.03 (b) by the population of the United States of America, according to the
most recently published decennial census;
   (d)   The estimate of military related spending allocated to Cuyahoga County
shall be calculated by multiplying the per person estimate calculated in
Section
107.03 (c) by the population of Cuyahoga County according to the most recently
published decennial census;
   (e)   The estimate of the portion of the Federal funds budget that is
military related required in Section
107.01 (c) shall be calculated by dividing the total proposed military related
expenditure as calculated in Section
107.03 (b) by the total proposed Federal funds expenditure as listed in
memorandum at the end of Table 15 of the Budget of the United States
Government, Fiscal Year 1986, and converting the ratio to a percentage
expressed to the nearest tenth of one percent (0.10%);
   (f)   As part of the information required for Section
107.01 (d), the total taxes paid in Cuyahoga County for each of the following
taxes as listed in Table 2 of the Budget of the United States Government,
Fiscal year 1986 shall be obtained; individual income taxes, corporation income
taxes, estate and gift taxes, and customs duties. In addition, sixty percent
(60%) of the excise taxes shall be included as an estimate of the Federal funds
portion of the excise taxes. A total for the above taxes shall be determined;
   (g)   The tax collections described in Section
107.03 (f) shall be determined using official government data for Cuyahoga
County for the most recent year available whenever possible. State data pro-
rated based on population may be used when county data is not available. All
totals for tax collections shall be based on the same collection year;
   (h)   The estimated allocation to military related spending for each tax
shall be obtained by multiplying the tax collected in each category by the
portion of the Federal funds budget that is military related, as calculated in
Section
107.03 (c);
   (i)   The estimated allocation to military related spending per person for
each tax shall be obtained by dividing each of the estimated allocations for
Cuyahoga County obtained in Section
107.03 (h) by the population of Cuyahoga County, according to the most recently
published decennial census.
(Ord. No. 2179-86. Passed 2-9-87, eff. 2-11-87)
§ 107.04 Format for Publishing Information
   The information required in Section
107.01 shall be published in the following format:
   “Local Military Spending Estimates”. In accordance with this chapter, the
following estimates of Federal tax monies to be collected from Cuyahoga County
and estimates of the share of those monies to be used for military purposes are
released publicly in the information provided below.
   EXPENDITURE AND TAX REPORT
   1.   Proposed military and military related spending, Fiscal Year ______.
 
 Total             Allocation for Cuyahoga County Allocation per Person
 $________________ $________________              $________________
   2.   Portion of the Fiscal Year ______ Federal funds budget allocated for
military and military related purposes: ______%.
   3.   Federal tax collections in Cuyahoga County and allocations to military
and military related spending:
 
                   Total Collections Allocation for    Per Person Allocation
Tax Source         Cuyahoga County   Military Spending for
                                                       Military Spending
Individual Income  $________         $________         $________
Tax
Corporation Income $________         $________         $________
Tax
Estate & Gift Tax  $________         $________         $________
Customs Duties     $________         $________         $________
60% of Excise Tax  $________         $________         $________
Total              $________         $________         $________
 
   Note: The above estimates are based on Federal, State or County data, and
the City of Cleveland is not the source of any of the data. The estimates are
calculated as prescribed in this chapter. Sources of data and methods of
computation are available on request from the Director of Finance, City of
Cleveland, City Hall, 601 Lakeside Avenue, Cleveland, Ohio 44114.
(Ord. No. 2179-86. Passed 2-9-87, eff. 2-11-87)
§ 107.05 Date of Publication
   The publications required in Section
107.01 shall be made no later than April 1st of each calendar year, using
budget data for the Fiscal Year beginning October 1st of the same year.
(Ord. No. 2179-86. Passed 2-9-87, eff. 2-11-87)
§ 107.06 Publication in City Record
   The City Clerk shall publish in the City Record the information required to
be published as a press release as provided in Section
107.02.
(Ord. No. 2179-86. Passed 2-9-87, eff. 2-11-87)
CHAPTER 109 – DOMESTIC PARTNERSHIP REGISTRY
109.01   Definitions
109.02   Domestic Partnership Criteria
109.03   Filing
109.04   Registration
109.05   Termination
109.06   Legal Effect
109.07   Severability
§ 109.01 Definitions
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   “Domestic partnership” refers to the non- marital committed
relationship of two (2) adults of the same or different sex, who share a common
residence and affirm that they share responsibility for each other’s common
welfare, and have signed and filed a Declaration of Domestic Partnership with
the city.
   (b)   “Share a common residence” means that both domestic partners share the
same residence. It is not necessary that both domestic partners have title to
the property where they reside or the legal right to possess the common
residence. Two (2) people may share a common residence even if one (1) or both
have additional residences. Domestic partners do not cease to share a common
residence if one (1) leaves the common residence but intends to return. Nothing
in this definition or chapter shall affect or supersede any residency
requirement set forth in Section
74 of the City’s Charter. Shared common residence does not have the same
meaning as bona fide residence.
   (c)   Domestic partners will be deemed to have an “committed” relationship
and to “share responsibility for one another’s common welfare” if they execute
a Declaration of Domestic Partnership affirming that such facts are true.
(Ord. No. 1745-08. Passed 12-8-08, eff. 1-7-09)
§ 109.02 Domestic Partnership Criteria
   To establish a domestic partnership, both individuals must file a
Declaration of Domestic Partnership with the City affirming that they meet all
of the following qualifications:
   (a)   Both individuals share a common residence;
   (b)   Both individuals affirm that they have an committed relationship and
share responsibility for each other’s common welfare;
   (c)   Neither individual is married to any other individual;
   (d)   Neither individual is part of an existing domestic partnership with
any third party;
   (e)   Each individual is eighteen (18) years of age or older; and
   (f)   The individuals are not related to one another by blood in a way that
would prevent them from being married to one another in this State.
(Ord. No. 1745-08. Passed 12-8-08, eff. 1-7-09)
§ 109.03 Filing
   (a)   Filing Location. Two (2) individuals seeking to become domestic
partners must complete and file a Declaration of Domestic Partnership with the
Division of Assessments and Licenses.
   (b)   Filing Prohibition. No individual who has previously filed a
Declaration of Domestic Partnership in this City may file a new Declaration of
Domestic Partnership until a Notice of Termination of Domestic Partnership has
been filed with the City. However, this prohibition shall not apply if the
previous domestic partnership ended because one (1) of the domestic partners is
deceased.
(Ord. No. 1745-08. Passed 12-8-08, eff. 1-7-09)
§ 109.04 Registration
   (a)   Registration Forms. The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses shall
develop “Declaration of Domestic Partnership” and “Notice of Termination of
Domestic Partnership” forms, and shall not add to or alter the requirements
listed in Section
109.02 of this chapter.
   (b)   Registration Requirements. The “Declaration of Domestic Partnership”
form shall require each registrant to:
      (1)   Affirm that he or she meets the requirements of Section
109.02 of this chapter;
      (2)   Provide a mailing address;
      (3)   Sign the form under penalty of perjury; and
      (4)   Have a notary public acknowledge his or her signature.
   (c)   Availability of Forms. The city shall have declaration and termination
forms available at the Division of Assessments and Licenses.
   (d)   Administrative Fee. The city shall charge an administrative fee of
fifty-five dollars ($55.00) to persons filing a Declaration of Domestic
Partnership. No fee shall be charged for the filing of a Notice of Termination
of Domestic Partnership.
   (e)   Partnership Registration. The city shall register the Declaration of
Domestic Partnership in a registry and return a copy of the declaration form to
the domestic partners at the address provided as their common residence.
   (f)   Termination Registration. The city shall register the Notice of
Termination of Domestic Partnership pursuant to the requirements set forth in
Section
109.05 of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 1745-08. Passed 12-8-08, eff. 5-7-09)
   Note: Pursuant to section 2 of Ord. No. 1745-08, the effective date of this
Section
109.04 is 5-7-09.
§ 109.05 Termination
   (a)   Termination. A domestic partnership ends when:
      (1)   One (1) of the domestic partners dies; or
      (2)   A Notice of Termination of Domestic Partnership has been filed by
one (1) or both domestic partners with the city.
   (b)   Notice of Termination. If the facts affirmed in the Declaration of
Domestic Partnership cease to be true, one (1) or both parties to a domestic
partnership shall file a Notice of Termination of Domestic Partnership with the
Division of Assessments and Licenses. Upon receipt, the city shall return a
copy of the notice marked “filed” to each of the partners, if jointly filed; or
two (2) copies to the filing partner. Unless the partners jointly file the
notice, the partner filing the notice shall, within five (5) days, send a copy
of the filed notice to the other partner’s last known address. However, this
requirement shall not apply if the termination is due to the death of one (1)
of the domestic partners.
   (c)   Effective Termination Date. Termination of a domestic partnership
shall be effective upon filing of the Notice of Termination of Domestic
Partnership with the City by one (1) or both partners, or on the date of the
death of one (1) of the domestic partners.
   (d)   Notice to Third Parties. Following the termination of a domestic
partnership the burden of notification rests with, each former domestic partner
who has received or qualified for any benefit or right based upon the existence
of a domestic partnership and whose receipt of that benefit or enjoyment of
that right has not otherwise terminated, to give prompt notification to any
third party who provides such benefit or right that the domestic partnership
has terminated. The City shall not be liable for any injury to any third-party
by virtue of lack of notice of termination to the domestic partnership,
including any third-party which has provided any benefits regarding the
domestic partnership.
   (e)   Failure to Give Notice. Failure to provide notice to third parties as
prescribed in this section shall not delay or prevent the termination of the
domestic partnership.
(Ord. No. 1745-08. Passed 12-8-08, eff. 5-7-09)
   Note: Pursuant to section 2 of Ord. No. 1745-08, the effective date of this
Section
109.05 is 5-7-09.
§ 109.06 Legal Effect
   (a)   Registering as domestic partners by two (2) individuals who are also
married to one other, in this or in another state, shall under no
circumstances, be considered as evidence, knowledge, awareness, or an admission
that the partners are not lawfully married and it shall not be given any other
legal effect, in this or any other state, with regard to whether the persons
are lawfully married.
   (b)   Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to alter or contravene
county, state or federal law.
   (c)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as recognizing or treating
a Declaration of Domestic Partnership as a marriage or a legal status that
intends to approximate the design, qualities, significance or effect of
marriage.
(Ord. No. 1745-08. Passed 12-8-08, eff. 1-7-09)
§ 109.07 Severability
   If any section, subsection, clause or provision of this chapter is held
invalid, the remainder shall not be affected by such invalidity.
(Ord. No. 1745-08. Passed 12-8-08, eff. 1-7-09)
CHAPTER 110 – CAMPAIGN FINANCE REGULATION
110.01   Definitions
110.02   Limitations on Campaign Contributions
110.03   Notice; Appeals; Penalties
110.04   Fair Campaign Finance Commission – Repealed
110.05   Campaign Finance Reports – Repealed
110.06   Prohibited Activities – Repealed
110.07   Penalties – Repealed
110.08   Appeals – Repealed
110.09   Effective Date – Repealed
§ 110.01 Definitions
   The following definitions shall apply to Chapter
110:
   (a)   "Campaign committee" or "committee" means any candidate or combination
of two (2) or more individuals acting jointly to bring about the nomination or
election of one (1) or more candidates for the office of the Mayor or the
office of a member of Council.
   (b)   "Candidate" means any individual listed on a ballot for nomination to
or election to the office of the Mayor or the office of a member of Council, or
who has organized a campaign committee for the purpose of engaging in a write-
in campaign for election to the office of the Mayor or the office of a member
of Council, or who files a declaration of intent to be a write-in candidate
pursuant to the general laws of the state, or who receives a contribution or
makes an expenditure or gives his or her consent for any other person to
receive a contribution or make an expenditure with a view toward bringing about
his or her candidacy or election to the office of the Mayor or the office of a
member of Council.
   (c)   "Contribution" means a gift, loan, advance, deposit, forgiveness of
indebtedness, donation, payment or transfer of money or transfer of anything of
value, made directly or indirectly in aid of the nomination or election of one
(1) or more candidates for the office of the Mayor or the office of a member of
Council. It shall not include in-kind services, services provided without
compensation by individuals volunteering a portion or all of their time or
ordinary home hospitality or personal expenses of a volunteer paid for by that
volunteer.
   (d)   "Corporation" means a corporation, whether for profit or nonprofit.
   (e)   "Election" means any primary, regular or special election held in the
City for the office of Mayor or the office of member of Council.
   (f)   "Individual" means any person, excluding corporations, political
parties, and political action committees.
   (g)   "Person" shall mean any individual, partnership, corporation,
association, firm, committee, club or other organization or group of persons,
however organized.
   (h)   "Political action committee" shall have the same meaning as provided
in RC 3517.01.
   (i)   "Political party" shall have the same meaning as contained in RC Title
XXXV, as the same shall be amended from time to time.
(Ord. No. 105-16. Passed 2-8-16, eff. 2-9-16)
§ 110.02 Limitations on Campaign Contributions
   (a)   No individual shall make, and no candidate for the office of Mayor on
his or her own behalf or committee on behalf of a candidate for the office of
Mayor shall accept, any contribution which exceeds a total of five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00) per individual contributor per calendar year in support of
a primary and regular election combined, or a primary and special election
combined.
   (b)   No political action committee shall make, and no candidate for the
office of Mayor on his or her own behalf or committee on behalf of a candidate
for the office of Mayor shall accept, any contribution which exceeds a total of
seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7.500.00) per political action committee
per calendar year in support of a primary and regular election combined, or a
primary and special election combined.
   (c)   No individual shall make, and no candidate for the office of a member
of Council on his or her own behalf or committee on behalf of a candidate for
the office of member of Council shall accept, any contribution which exceeds a
total of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per individual contributor per
calendar year in support of a primary and regular election combined, or a
primary and special election combined.
   (d)   Notwithstanding any other provision in this section, no political
action committee shall make, and no candidate for the office of member of
Council on his or her own behalf, or committee on behalf of a candidate, shall
accept any contribution which exceeds a total of six thousand dollars
($6,000.00) per political action committee per calendar year, in support of a
primary and regular election combined, or primary and special election
combined.
   (e)   No corporation shall make, and no candidate for the offices of Mayor
or member of Council shall accept on his or her own behalf or committee on
behalf of a candidate for the offices of Mayor or member of Council shall
accept from a corporation, any contribution in support of a primary and regular
election combined, or a primary and special election combined.
   (f)   Notwithstanding the provisions in divisions (a) and (c) of this
section, no candidate on his or her own behalf or committee on behalf of a
candidate, shall accept, from any City of Cleveland employee a contribution
that exceeds a total of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per individual employee
per calendar year in support of a primary and regular election combined, or a
primary and special election combined.
   (g)   The limitations set forth in divisions (a), (b), (c), and (d) of this
section apply to aggregate gifts during any given calendar year. A contributor
may make a contribution up to the applicable limit in each of any three (3)
non-election years as well as the year of the election.
   (h)   In the case of an appointment to fill a vacancy in the office of
member of Council, or the office of Mayor, the contribution limits provided for
in this section shall apply to the election campaign period for such office.
   (i)   Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, there is no limitation
on the amount of personal funds that a candidate may make to his or her own
campaign.
   (j)   This section shall apply to any contributions made to a candidate or
committee, whether used by the candidate or committee to finance a current
campaign, to pay deficits incurred in a prior campaign, or otherwise.
(Ord. No. 615-2024. Passed 6-3-24, eff. 6-7-24)
§ 110.03 Notice; Appeals; Penalties
   (a)   Any person who violates Section
110.02 shall be given written notice of the violation by the Director of Law.
There shall be no penalty for any prohibited activity set forth in Section
110.02 which is remedied within fifteen (15) days of notice of the violation.
   (b)   Any person who is cited pursuant to division (a) shall have thirty
(30) days in which to appeal the finding of the Director of Law to the Board of
Zoning Appeals. In the event that written notice of intent to appeal is
received by the Board of Zoning Appeals within the thirty (30) day period, the
Board shall schedule a public hearing of the matter, setting forth a date, time
and place and giving written notice to the appellant. Any person so cited will
be entitled to representation, to present evidence on his or her behalf and to
cross examine any witness. The Board shall render a decision within five (5)
days after taking all arguments and testimony and completion of the public
hearing which decision shall be final.
   (c)   Any person, candidate, or campaign committee violating any prohibition
in Section
110.02 shall be fined up to five hundred dollars ($500.00). A second or
subsequent violation of any prohibition in Section
110.02 shall incur a fine up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
(Ord. No. 1736-08. Passed 4-13-09, eff. 4-20-09)
§ 110.04 Fair Campaign Finance Commission – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1736-08. Passed 4-13-09, eff. 4-20-09)
§ 110.05 Campaign Finance Reports – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1736-08. Passed 4-13-09, eff. 4-20-09)
§ 110.06 Prohibited Activities – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1736-08. Passed 4-13-09, eff. 4-20-09)
§ 110.07 Penalties – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1736-08. Passed 4-13-09, eff. 4-20-09)
§ 110.08 Appeals – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1736-08. Passed 4-13-09, eff. 4-20-09)
§ 110.09 Effective Date – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1736-08. Passed 4-13-09, eff. 4-20-09)
CHAPTER 110A – CIRCULATION OF INITIATIVE OR REFERENDUM PETITION REGULATION
110A.01   Itemized Statement by Circulator of Petition
110A.02   Prohibited Practices Relative to Petitions
110A.99   Penalty
Note: Former Chapter 110A, entitled "Campaign Finance Reports", was repealed by
Ord. No. 1736-08, passed 4-13-09, eff. 4-20-09.
§ 110A.01 Itemized Statement by Circulator of Petition
   (a)   The circulator of an initiative or referendum petition, or his or her
agent, shall, within five (5) days after such petition is filed with the Clerk
of Council, file an itemized statement, made under penalty of election
falsification, showing in detail:
      (1)   All moneys or things of value paid, given, or promised for
circulating such petition;
      (2)   Full names and addresses of all persons to whom such payments or
promises were made;
      (3)   Full names and addresses of all persons who contributed anything of
value to be used in circulating such petitions; and
      (4)   Time spent and salaries earned while circulating or soliciting
signatures to petitions by persons who were regular salaried employees of some
person who authorized them to solicit signatures for or circulate the petition
as a part of their regular duties.
   (b)   The statement provided for in division (a) of this section shall not
be required from persons who take no other part in circulating a petition than
signing declarations to parts of the petition and soliciting signatures to
them.
   (c)   Such statement shall be open to public inspection for a period of one
(1) year.
(Ord. No. 854-17. Passed 11-20-17, eff. 11-21-17)
§ 110A.02 Prohibited Practices Relative to Petitions
   No person shall, directly or indirectly:
   (a)   Willfully misrepresent the contents of any initiative or referendum
petition;
   (b)   Pay or offer to pay any elector anything of value for signing an
initiative or referendum petition;
   (c)   Promise to help another person to obtain appointment to any office
provided for by the constitution or laws of the State of Ohio or by the
ordinances of the City of Cleveland or any municipal corporation, or to any
position or employment in the service of the State of Ohio or any political
subdivision thereof, including the City of Cleveland, as a consideration for
obtaining signatures to an initiative or referendum petition;
   (d)   Obtain signatures to any initiative or referendum petition as a
consideration for the assistance or promise of assistance of another person in
securing an appointment to any office or position provided for by the
constitution or laws of the State of Ohio or by the ordinances of any municipal
corporation therein, including the City of Cleveland, or employment in the
service of the State of Ohio or any subdivision thereof, including the City of
Cleveland;
   (e)   Alter, add to, or erase any signatures or names on the parts of a
petition after such parts have been filed with the Clerk of Council;
   (f)   Fail to file the sworn itemized statement required in Section
110A.01;
   (g)   Accept anything of value for signing an initiative or referendum
petition; or
   (h)   By intimidation or threats, influence or seek to influence any person
to sign or abstain from signing, or to solicit signatures to or abstain from
soliciting signatures to an initiative or referendum petition.
(Ord. No. 854-17. Passed 11-20-17, eff. 11-21-17)
§ 110A.99 Penalty
   (a)   Whoever violates Section
110A.02(a) through (f) shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
   (b)   Whoever violates Section
110A.02(g) shall be fined not more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
   (c)   Whoever violates Section
110A.02(h) is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 854-17. Passed 11-20-17, eff. 11-21-17)
TITLE III: LEGISLATIVE
   Chapter
111   Council
   Chapter
113   Clerk of Council
   Chapter
115   City Record and Printing
CHAPTER 111 – COUNCIL
111.01   City Office Space Designation
111.02   Disclosure of Private Interest in Legislation
111.03   Opening Prayer at Meetings
111.04   Recitation of Pledge of Allegiance at Meetings
111.05   Audits
111.06   Contracting for Audit
111.07   Audit Reports
111.071   Hiring of Professional Consultants by City Council
111.072   Hiring of Professional Utility Consultants by City Council
111.073   Hiring of Professional Airport Consultants by City Council
111.08   Refusal to Obey Subpoena or Produce Evidence
111.09   Subpoenas of the Council
111.99   Penalty
   Note: The legislative history of this chapter, except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 63410-A, passed
September 22, 1924.
Charter reference:
   Audit and examination, Charter §
47
   Clerk of Council, Charter §
31
   Investigatory powers, Charter §
46
   Legislative procedure, Charter §
32 et seq.
   Meetings, Charter §
28
   Powers, terms and vacancies, Charter §
24
   President of Council, Charter §
30
   Qualifications of members, Charter §
26
   Removal from office, Charter §
16
   Rules, Charter §
29
   Salary and attendance, Charter §
27
Cross-reference:
   Clerk of Council, CO
Ch. 113
Statutory reference:
   Hearings against delinquent officers, RC 733.35 et seq.
   Misconduct, RC 733.72 et seq.
§ 111.01 City Office Space Designation
   The use of the Council Chamber and the Council Committee Rooms shall be
controlled by Council. Council shall by resolution assign space in the City
Hall and in other buildings belonging to the City for its own use, and for the
use and occupancy of the Municipal Court, the Civil Service Commission, the
Mayor and the Clerk of Council. All other space in the City Hall and in other
buildings which belong to the City shall be assigned by the Mayor to the use
and occupancy of the various other departments and offices of the City. The
office of the City Planning Commission shall be in or in connection with that
of the Platting Commissioner.
§ 111.02 Disclosure of Private Interest in Legislation
   A member of Council shall publicly disclose on the official records of
Council any direct or financial interest or other personal or private right he
or she may have in any legislation pending before Council prior to its third
reading and passage. However, the disclosure shall not deprive the member of
Council of his or her right to vote on such legislation nor shall the failure
of any member of Council to make the disclosure affect the validity of the
legislation.
(Ord. No. 1288-62. Passed 6-8-64, eff. 6-13-64)
§ 111.03 Opening Prayer at Meetings
   The Clerk of Council shall make the necessary arrangement to secure the
services of a clergyman to offer prayer at the opening of each regular meeting
of Council as provided by the rules of Council. He or she shall arrange for
rotation in selection so as to give recognition to the various faiths and
denominations represented in the membership of Council. He or she is authorized
and directed to present to such clergyman by way of honorarium a stipend of
twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each regular meeting of Council.
(Ord. No. 2926-76. Passed 12-20-76, eff. 12-27-76)
§ 111.04 Recitation of Pledge of Allegiance at Meetings
   At the conclusion of the prayer offered at the opening of each meeting of
Council, the President of Council may lead the members of Council and all those
present at the meeting in the recitation of the Pledge of Allegiance.
(Ord. No. 1669-68. Passed 9-9-68, eff. 9-11-68)
§ 111.05 Audits
   Council shall maintain a continuous audit of the books of accounts, records
and transactions of the administrative departments of the City, which audit
shall be made in accordance with the requirements of Charter Section
47. The auditors employed, as hereinafter provided, shall at all times be
subject to the directions of Council, and the directions of Council’s Committee
on Appropriation and Finance, not contrary to the Charter, the provisions of
this section or of any contract made in accordance herewith.
§ 111.06 Contracting for Audit
   Between January 1 and February 1 in each year the Clerk of Council shall
advertise for proposals from certified public accountants who have the
qualifications set forth in Charter Section
47 for the furnishing of the labor and materials necessary to maintain the
audit provided for therein. Proposals shall be made on such basis as Council
may by resolution direct. When such proposals have been received and properly
tabulated they shall be reported to Council at its first regular meeting
thereafter, and Council shall by resolution award a contract for such
continuous audit for the ensuing period of one (1) year. Such contract shall be
executed by the Clerk in behalf of the City.
§ 111.07 Audit Reports
   Any reports made by auditors under contract provided for herein shall be
made only to Council and shall be printed and distributed, and a summary
thereof printed in the City Record, all as required in Charter Section
47.
§ 111.071 Hiring of Professional Consultants by City Council
   On behalf of the City Council, the President of Council is authorized to
enter into contract with professional consultants to provide assistance to the
members of Council and/or Council staff in all matters of Council, including
but not limited to, communications, legislative research and drafting,
accounting matters, and any other matters that may hereafter come before the
Council as part of its official business. The cost of contracts shall be paid
from funds appropriated for the use of the Council.
(Ord. No. 223-07. Passed 2-5-07, eff. 2-9-07)
§ 111.072 Hiring of Professional Utility Consultants by City Council
   (a)   On behalf of City Council, the President of Council is hereby
authorized to enter into contract with professional consultants to provide
assistance to the members of Council in the investigation of utility related
matters pertaining to the Divisions of Cleveland Public Power, Water, and Water
Pollution Control, including but not limited to, utility rate increases,
service efficiency issues, capital project performance, deregulation, and
operational and financial assessments. The cost of said contracts shall be paid
from Fund Nos. 52 SF 001, 54 SF 001, 58 SF 001 and such other funds deemed
appropriate by the Director of Finance.
   (b)   That the Director of Public Utilities shall provide notice of future
water and sewer rate increases by publishing such rate increases in the City
Record at least six (6) months prior to the introduction of legislation
approving said rate increases and, at the same time, by providing written
notice of the proposed increases to all members of Council.
(Ord. No. 1071-98. Passed 6-8-98, eff. 6-16-98 without the signature of the
Mayor)
§ 111.073 Hiring of Professional Airport Consultants by City Council
   On behalf of City Council, the President of Council is hereby authorized to
enter into contract with professional consultants to provide assistance to the
members of Council in the investigation of airport-related matters pertaining
to the Department of Port Control, including but not limited to, airport
construction projects, contract monitoring, public improvements, OEO monitoring
and operational and financial assessments. The cost of said contracts shall be
paid from funds appropriated for the use of the Department of Port Control.
(Ord. No. 1075-07. Passed 7-11-07, eff. 7-18-07 without the signature of the
Mayor)
§ 111.08 Refusal to Obey Subpoena or Produce Evidence
   No person shall refuse to obey any subpoena issued under authority of
Charter Sections
46, 119, and 137, nor refuse to produce books, papers or other evidence
required by the Council, Mayor, Civil Service Commission, or a committee or
person authorized by any of them, or by the Director of Public Safety, or any
member of the Board of Zoning Appeals, or the Board of Building Standards and
Appeals, as provided in Charter Section
76-6 and Sections
329.02,
3103.16 (b) and
3103.17 of the Codified Ordinances, or the Community Relations Board, as
provided in Section
157.02.
(Ord. No. 81-56. Passed 3-12-56, eff. 3-19-56)
§ 111.09 Subpoenas of the Council
   (a)   That, notwithstanding the provisions of Section
111.08 of the Codified Ordinances of Cleveland, Ohio, 1976, and in accordance
with Charter Section
46, the chairman of a standing committee of the Council, with the approval of
the President of Council, may subpoena witnesses to appear before such
committee at a time and place designated in the subpoena, to testify concerning
matters of inquiry into the conduct of any department, office, officer or
employee of the City and to make investigation as to City affairs and may
require the production of books, papers, and records in furtherance of such
inquiries and investigations. The subpoena shall be in a form acceptable to the
Director of Law. If a subpoena is issued, it may be directed to a City law
enforcement officer who shall serve and return it to the Clerk of Council.
   (b)   No person shall fail to obey a subpoena issued under this section, or,
having appeared pursuant to such order, refuse to answer a question pertinent
to the matter under inquiry.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of contempt of
the Council, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(Ord. No. 1167-95. Passed 6-19-95, eff. 6-28-95)
§ 111.99 Penalty
   Whoever violates Section
111.08 is guilty of contempt and shall be fined not more than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) or imprisoned not more than thirty (30) days or both.
(Ord. No. 81-56. Passed 3-12-56, eff. 3-19-56)
CHAPTER 113 – CLERK OF COUNCIL
113.01   Designation and Qualifications
113.02   City Clerk Designated
113.03   Recording City Documents
113.04   Recording Public Utilities Documents
113.05   Seal of the Clerk
113.06   Duties of the Clerk
113.07   Payment of Costs for Interpreters, Translators and Auxiliary Aids and
Services
113.08   Bureau of Complaints
113.09   Municipal Reference Library
113.10   Bureau of the Budget
113.11   Annual Report
113.12   Fees for Publications and Services – Repealed
   Note: The legislative history of this chapter, except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 63410-A, passed
September 22, 1924.
Charter reference:
   General provisions, Charter §
31
Cross-reference:
   Duty to arrange for opening prayer at Council meetings, CO
111.03
   Revelation of confidential matters, CO
621.12
   Tampering with records, CO
625.16
Statutory reference:
   Photostat or microfilm recording, RC 9.01
§ 113.01 Designation and Qualifications
   Council shall choose a Clerk, a Chief of the Bureau of Information, a Chief
of the Bureau of Budget and such other officers and employees as Council may by
resolution determine to be necessary. The Clerk and all such officers and
employees shall serve during the pleasure of Council. No person shall be
eligible for Clerk who has not had training or experience in legislative
procedure or in the preparation of legislation. The Clerk shall have
supervision over the assistant clerks and employees of Council.
(Ord. No. 975-66. Passed 4-18-66, eff. 4-20-66)
§ 113.02 City Clerk Designated
   The Clerk of Council is the City Clerk, as the term is used in the Charter
and ordinances of the City or in the laws of the State which may be applicable.
§ 113.03   Recording City Documents
   The City Clerk shall properly record, file and index all official documents,
reports, papers or communications received by Council. He or she shall have the
custody and control of all of the files and records of Council and such other
official documents and reports belonging to the City as are not part of the
records of other offices of the City.
§ 113.04 Recording Public Utilities Documents
   The certified copies of public utility grants, renewals and extensions
thereof and all transfers, mortgages and other documents affecting the title or
use of public utilities, required to be filed with the City under provisions of
Charter Section
187, shall be communicated to Council and be properly filed, recorded, indexed
and preserved as public records by the City Clerk.
§ 113.05 Seal of the Clerk
   There shall be a seal of the Clerk of Council, which shall be in the custody
of the Clerk and shall be used by him or her in all cases in which he or she is
required to use a seal. The seal shall consist of a disc one and three-fourths
(1-3/4) inches in diameter, upon which shall be the City banner, surrounded by
a circle upon which shall appear the words “City of Cleveland, O.” “Clerk of
Council.”
§ 113.06 Duties of the Clerk
   (a)   The Clerk of Council shall keep an accurate and correct Journal of
proceedings of Council and of each Council committee. The Clerk shall have the
custody of all the laws and ordinances of the City, and shall compile and edit
the City Record and shall make the City Record available electronically and in
print as may be requested. The Clerk shall furnish all transcripts, orders and
certificates called for by any person, and authenticate the same by the Clerk's
official signature under the Clerk's seal.
   (b)   The Clerk shall, within two (2) weeks after the passage of any
ordinance by Council vacating, narrowing or altering any street or alley,
inform the Cuyahoga County Fiscal Officer of the action of Council by mailing
the County Fiscal Officer a certified copy of such ordinance. The Clerk shall
furnish to the public library of the City, either in print or by electronic
means, copies of all reports, Council proceedings or matters produced under
authority of the City immediately upon their publication.
(Ord. No. 1184-2019. Passed 9-23-19, eff. 9-25-19)
§ 113.07 Payment of Costs for Interpreters, Translators and Auxiliary Aids and
Services
   When the Clerk deems it necessary so that the Offices of Council and the
Office of the Clerk may maintain compliance with Title VI of the Civil Rights
Act of 1964 and Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act, the Clerk may
authorize payment of costs to provide qualified interpreters and translators
for various languages, qualified sign language, oral or cued speech
interpreters, and other auxiliary aids and services, including, but not limited
to Braille translation services and computer-aided real-time transcription
(CART), and teletypewriters (TTYs). The Director of Finance is authorized to
pay such costs from Council's general fund operating budget.
(Ord. No. 1187-17. Passed 10-9-17, eff. 10-11-17)
§ 113.08 Bureau of Complaints
   (a)   There is hereby established in the office of the Clerk of Council a
Bureau of Complaints to be administered and controlled by a Chief subject to
the provisions of the Charter and ordinances of the City, and to the
supervision and direction of the Clerk. The Chief and the necessary personnel
to carry out the functions of the Bureau shall be appointed by the Clerk with
the approval of Council.
   (b)   The Bureau shall receive complaints of citizens concerning the public
service, refer such complaints to the appropriate department for investigation
and report, advise the complainant of the result of such investigation and
report and do and perform such related functions as Council shall require.
   (c)   The Chief shall maintain an Information and Complaint Desk in the
lobby of the City Hall and at such other places as Council may direct, for the
purpose of directing the public to the proper departments and receiving
complaints concerning the service to the public by the several departments of
the City government.
   (d)   In the handling of complaints the Chief and his or her assistants
shall adhere to the following procedure:
      (1)   Receipt of complaints, written or verbal;
      (2)   Acknowledgment to the complainant of the receipt thereof, if
received by mail;
      (3)   Investigation and report by the department affected shall show name
and address of the complainant, date and nature of the complaint, as well as a
statement of what has been done to take care of the complaint and the reason,
if any, for the lack of service;
      (4)   Forwarding of one (1) of the copies of the complaint to the
department concerned, and retention by the Bureau of one (1) copy in a file
known as the open file;
      (5)   Investigation and report by the department concerned shall be
completed within five (5) days unless unusual conditions prevail. Such report
shall be made upon the blanks herein prescribed;
      (6)   Report from the department concerned shall be entered on the
duplicate held by the Bureau and shall be transferred to a closed file;
      (7)   Advise complainant of the report from the department concerned;
      (8)   A complete written report shall be furnished to the Mayor and
Council each month.
(Ord. No. 672-52. Passed 5-19-52, eff. 5-21-52)
§ 113.09 Municipal Reference Library
   (a)   The Municipal Reference Library in the City Hall, a division of the
Cleveland Public Library, is hereby designated an official depository library
for all printed, mimeographed or typewritten reports and documents issued by
each committee of Council and the various departments, divisions or commissions
of the City.
   (b)   Whenever any committee of Council, a department, division or
commission issues any such report or document, the head of such agency shall
cause at least one (1) copy thereof to be promptly deposited in the Municipal
Reference Library for the archive collection.
   (c)   There is hereby established an archive room in the office of the city
Clerk which shall be under the jurisdiction and administration of the Municipal
Reference Library.
   (d)   The Municipal Reference Library shall collect, catalogue, arrange and
properly maintain all documents, reports and papers deposited therein, in such
a manner so that they may be at all times easily accessible to all members of
Council, all City officials and the general public for reference service. The
Municipal Reference Library shall further secure such books, pamphlets,
periodicals, documents and other literature by purchase or by loan from the
Cleveland Public Library and other libraries and sources of information as may
be needed by any members of Council or a City official in the course of his or
her work.
   (e)   All copies of reports, documents and papers deposited with the
Municipal Reference Library for the archive collection shall become the
property of the Cleveland Public Library.
(Ord. No. 1796-42. Passed 1-18-43)
§ 113.10 Bureau of the Budget
   There shall be in the office of the Clerk of Council a Bureau of the Budget,
the head of which shall be a person trained in accounting and preferably also
with legal training and experience. He or she shall study, investigate and
report to the Clerk on all financial reports, ordinances and accounts filed
with the Clerk. He or she shall serve as clerk and advisor of the Finance
Committee or of Council as a committee of the whole, when annual appropriation
matters are before the Committee. He or she shall keep in close touch with and
make investigations into the income and expenditure accounts of the City and
the several departments and offices and report thereon whenever Council shall
by resolution request. He or she shall make such investigations as Council
shall require, and for such purposes he or she shall have all of the authority
set forth in Charter Section
46. He or she shall perform such other duties as Council or the Clerk shall
require.
(Ord. No. 476-40. Passed 1-27-41)
§ 113.11 Annual Report
   (a)   The Clerk of Council shall each year compile, edit and have printed an
“annual report of the Council of the City of Cleveland,” containing the
activities and accomplishments of the Council; and such other facts and
statistics, together with cuts and graphs as the Clerk deems advisable. Such
report shall be prepared, published and distributed in such manner as the Clerk
deems advisable.
   (b)   The Clerk of Council shall receive and keep on file copies of any
annual reports for the Mayor, the several departments, divisions, bureaus,
commissions and offices of City government.
(Ord. No. 1642-92. Passed 11-23-92, eff. 11-30-92)
§ 113.12 Fees for Publications and Services – Repealed
(Ord. No. 108-2020. Passed 1-27-20, eff. 1-29-20)
CHAPTER 115 – CITY RECORD AND PRINTING
115.01   Contents of City Record
115.02   Printing and Issuance
115.03   Distribution of the City Record – Repealed
115.04 to 115.99   Reserved
   Note: The legislative history of this chapter except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 63410-A, passed
September 22, 1924.
Charter reference:
   Provisions for City Record, Charter §
75
Cross-reference:
   Prevailing wages to be paid for work done by contract, CO
185.33
§ 115.01 Contents of City Record
   The City Record shall contain such matter as is specifically required by the
Charter to be published therein and such information of a descriptive or
expository character concerning the official business and Municipal activities
of the City and other cities and governmental bodies as may be deemed useful
and appropriate by Council. The City Record shall be received in judicial
proceedings as prima facie evidence of the truth of the contents thereof.
§ 115.02 Printing and Issuance
   The size and typography of the City Record shall be determined by the Clerk
of Council with the approval of Council, who shall aim to keep each issue
uniform in size and general design with preceding issues and shall not change
the same except for good and sufficient reason and with the approval of
Council. The Clerk shall have authority to determine the number of copies of
the City Record to be printed and distributed, provided that the number shall
not at any time exceed five thousand (5,000) copies unless specifically
authorized by Council.
§ 115.03 Distribution of the City Record – Repealed
(Ord. No. 108-2020. Passed 1-27-20, eff. 1-29-20)
§§ 115.04 to 115.99 Reserved
TITLE V: ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION
   Chapter
121   Departments Generally
   Chapter
123   Office of Mayor
   Chapter
125   Department of Law
   Chapter
127   Department of Finance
   Chapter
129   Department of Public Utilities
   Chapter
131   Department of Public Works
   Chapter
133   Department of Parks and Recreation
   Chapter
135   Department of Public Safety
   Chapter
137   Department of Community Development
   Chapter
138   Department of Building and Housing
   Chapter
139   Department of Port Control
   Chapter
141   Department of Public Health
   Chapter
143   Department of Human Resources
   Chapter
144   Department of Development
   Chapter
145   Department on Aging
   Chapter
147   Department of Consumer Affairs
   Chapter
148   Department of Innovation and Technology
CHAPTER 121 – DEPARTMENTS GENERALLY
121.01   Offices Considered Departments
121.02   Departmental Seals
121.03   Offices of Public Record
121.04   Rules and Regulations of Mayor and Department Heads
121.05   Acceptance of Gifts
121.06   Application and Acceptance of Grants
121.08   Employee Recognition
121.10   Professional Services Contracts $10,000 or Less
   Note: The legislative history of this chapter, except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 63410-A, passed
September 22, 1924.
Charter reference:
   Departmental divisions, Charter §
79
   Establishment and discontinuance of departments and offices, Charter §
77
   General provisions for directors of departments, Charter §
78
   Records required, Charter §
82
§ 121.01 Offices Considered Departments
   For the purposes of the general provisions of the Charter and ordinances of
the City, the Municipal Court, Council, office of the Mayor, office of the
Clerk of Council, Sinking Fund Commission, City Planning Commission, Office of
Capital Projects, and the Board of Revision of Assessments shall be treated and
construed as being departments of the City government, in addition to the
administrative departments under charge of the Mayor, as established by the
Charter or ordinances of the City.
(Ord. No. 109-11. Passed 4-4-11, eff. 4-6-11)
§ 121.02 Departmental Seals
   Each administrative department which is required to authenticate with a City
seal any document issued by it shall have a departmental seal, which shall be
in the custody of the director of the department, and shall be used as directed
by him or her. The seal shall consist of a disc one and three-fourths (1-3/4)
inches in diameter, upon which shall be the City banner, surrounded by a
circle, upon which shall appear the words “City of Cleveland, O.” and
“Department of ______________”, filling in the blank with the appropriate name.
§ 121.03 Offices of Public Record
   (a)   The offices of the City Clerk and the offices of all directors of
departments, of all commissioners or chiefs of divisions and of all heads of
bureaus and offices under the Mayor, all of the commissions appointed by
Council and of all other boards or commissions of the City, but not the office
of the Mayor, shall be offices of public record. Each such office shall
preserve, file, record and index in proper form, all official documents and
formal reports received by it pertaining to the duties assigned to it, and not
required to be transmitted to another office of the City. They shall likewise
preserve, file, record and index properly authenticated copies of all official
documents and all formal reports issued by them.
   (b)   Any official document received by any such office and not pertaining
to the duties or functions of such office shall not be retained, filed or
indexed in such office, but shall be transmitted immediately to the appropriate
office, or to the office of the Mayor. Boards and commissions or other
authorities which do not maintain offices shall be deemed, for the purposes of
this section, to be a part of and included within such offices in the
administrative service as they may be most nearly affiliated with, as
designated by ordinance or by the Mayor.
   (c)   All the documents and records covered by provisions of this section
shall be the property of the City and shall not be removed from their
respective offices except for proper use, and shall be returned upon the
completion of any such use. Private papers, not pertaining to the business of
any office, shall not be filed or recorded among its records. The official
documents and records of any office shall, during the hours when such office is
open, be under proper regulations and conditions open to examination by all
persons whose official duties so require and to all citizens or taxpayers of
the City who may so request. However, documents, reports and records not yet
completed, or in use in the work of the office, or documents or records
containing information which is required in evidence in litigation in which the
City is interested, or which if revealed would result in injury to the
interests of the City in litigation or in the conduct of the City’s business,
need not be so revealed.
§ 121.04 Rules and Regulations of Mayor and Department Heads
   The Mayor shall prescribe such rules and regulations as he or she may deem
necessary or expedient, not inconsistent with the Charter or the ordinance of
the City, for the general conduct of the City’s affairs under his or her
management, and for the guidance of any two (2) or more departments in their
relations with each other and with other public authorities. The director of
each department shall in like manner prescribe such rules and regulations as he
or she may deem necessary and expedient for the proper conduct of his or her
department, not inconsistent with the Charter or ordinances of the City, or
with the general rules and regulations prescribed by the Mayor. All such rules
and regulations may be revoked or amended or added to at any time by the
officer having authority to prescribe them. On or before December 31, 1924, the
City Manager shall submit to Council a report setting forth in proper
arrangement all general and departmental rules and regulations then in effect.
Such report shall be published in pamphlet form or otherwise. Thereafter the
City Manager or Mayor shall give written notice to Council whenever new or
additional general rules and regulations are prescribed by himself, herself or
by any director or when existing rules and regulations are amended or revoked.
§ 121.05 Acceptance of Gifts
   The director of any department is hereby authorized to accept gifts of
property, including money, provided:
   (a)   The gift is used in the operation of the department;
   (b)   The donor has provided written notification to the director of intent
to make a gift, specifying the type of gift and the amount;
   (c)   The director has accepted the gift in writing prior to the date of
donation; and
   (d)   The aggregate fair market value of all gifts made by the donor during
the calendar year does not exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00).
   The director shall notify the Clerk of Council of the acceptance of any gift
pursuant to this section.
(Ord. No. 341-91. Passed 4-29-91, eff. 5-2-91)
§ 121.06 Application and Acceptance of Grants
   The director of any department is hereby authorized to apply for and accept
grants from various entities, both public and private, to conduct the operation
of the director’s department, provided that the proceeds of each grant shall
not exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) and provided further that the City
is not obligated to provide in cash matching funds as a condition of receiving
the grant. The director of any department is further authorized to file all
papers and execute all documents necessary to receive the funds under said
grants and, upon acceptance of said grants by a director pursuant to this
section, the grant funds shall be appropriated for the purposes set forth in
the grant agreement. The director shall notify the Clerk of Council of the
making of any grant application or the acceptance of any grant pursuant to this
section.
(Ord. No. 341-91. Passed 4-29-91, eff. 5-2-91)
§ 121.08 Employee Recognition
   The director of any department is hereby authorized to expend funds in order
to provide food, beverages, and mementos for events honoring employees for
work-related achievements.
(Ord. No. 18-92. Passed 1-27-92, eff. 2-3-92)
§ 121.10 Professional Services Contracts $10,000 or Less
   Notwithstanding and as an exception to the Codified Ordinances of the City
of Cleveland, 1976 to the contrary, all directors of the various City
departments, or the directors’ designee, shall provide to the Clerk of Council,
within seven (7) days of execution, a copy of any and all professional services
contracts which are executed and/or certified in an amount of ten thousand
dollars ($10,000.00) or less.
(Ord. No. 1425-2000. Passed 8-7-00, eff. 8-17-00 without the signature of the
Mayor)
CHAPTER 123 – OFFICE OF MAYOR
123.01   Office of Special Audits and Investigations
123.02   Office of Civil Defense
123.03   Office of Capital Projects
123.031   Rental of Site and Purchase of Food, Refreshments, and Mementos
123.04   Employment of Professional Service for Capital Improvement Program
123.05   Mayor’s Report
123.06   Office of Budget and Management
123.061   Rainy Day Reserve Fund; Establishment; Management Principles
123.07   Office of Consumer Affairs – Repealed
123.08   Office of Equal Opportunity
123.09   Office of Urban Analytics and Innovation – Repealed
Charter reference:
   Appointing power, Charter §
70
   Authority in Council, Charter §
72
   General powers and duties, Charter §
71
   Investigatory powers, Charter §
46
   Removal from office, Charter §
16
   Report of estimate of expenses, Charter §
38
   Salary, Charter §
69
   Term and qualifications, Charter §
68
   Vacancy in office; Acting Mayor, Charter §
73
   Veto powers in Council, Charter §
37
Cross-reference:
   Bond required, CO
171.15
   Community Relations Board, CO
Ch. 157
   Consumers Council Advisory Board, CO
Ch. 159
   Salary, CO
173.06
Statutory reference:
   Reports to Council, RC 733.32, 733.41
§ 123.01 Office of Special Audits and Investigations
   With the concurrence of the Board of Control, as required by Charter Section
77, there is hereby established in the Office of the Mayor, and subject to his
or her direction and control, the Office of Special Audits and Investigations,
which shall consist of not more than two (2) special auditors and
investigators. Such special auditors and investigators shall be in the
noncompetitive class of the classified service and shall receive such
compensation as shall be fixed by the Mayor within the schedule of compensation
as established by ordinance.
(Ord. No. 1277-42. Passed 11-30-42) (BOC Res. No. 1682-42. Adopted 12-30-42)
§ 123.02 Office of Civil Defense
   Pursuant to the provisions of Charter Section
77 and with the concurrence of the Board of Control, there is hereby
established in the Office of the Mayor, the Office of Civil Defense, to be
administered and controlled by a Director of Civil Defense appointed by the
Mayor in compliance with RC 5915.06, who shall serve at the pleasure of the
Mayor and subject to his or her supervision and control. To assist the Director
in the administration of the duties of his or her office the Mayor shall
appoint an executive committee of such number of persons as he or she may
determine necessary or desirable who may or may not hold other official
positions in the governmental service of the State or any of its political
subdivisions who shall serve at his or her pleasure. The Director, with the
approval of the Mayor, shall appoint a Deputy Director of Civil Defense who
shall be responsible for the distribution of the work of the Office among the
several departments of the City. In addition the Director, with the approval of
the Mayor, shall appoint three (3) Zone Directors of Civil Defense, who shall
serve at the pleasure of the Mayor and be responsible for the discharge of such
duties as may be required of them within their respective areas as determined
by the Mayor and as may be assigned to them by the Mayor, the Director or
Council. Such clerical, stenographic and other necessary employees of the
Office as the Director shall determine to be necessary adequately to staff the
Office shall be appointed in accordance with the civil service provisions of
the Charter, by the Deputy Director, with the approval of the Director. The
several administrative departments of the City shall furnish upon request of
the Deputy Director such members of the respective departments as the Mayor
shall determine and designate.
(Ord. No. 1069-51. Passed 5-7-51) (BOC Res. No. 306-51. Adopted 5-9-51)
§ 123.03 Office of Capital Projects
   (a)   With the concurrence of the Board of Control, as required by Section
77 of the Charter, there is established in the Office of the Mayor, the Office
of Capital Projects, to be administered and controlled by an Executive
Assistant or Special Assistant to the Mayor, to be appointed by the Mayor to be
the Director of Capital Projects and subject to the Mayor’s supervision and
control. The Director shall manage and supervise all capital projects of the
City except as otherwise provided by the Charter and ordinances of the City,
right-of-way management including the granting of permits for the use of
encroachment upon the public highways in the City as may be provided for by
ordinance, and perform all other duties pertaining to the Office of Capital
Projects which may be required of him or her by ordinance or by the Mayor. The
Director shall appoint, in accordance with the civil service provisions of the
Charter, clerical or office support employees as may be required for the
performance of the duties of the Office, and shall be responsible for their
supervision.
   (b)   The Director may appoint a Consulting Engineer who shall be
immediately responsible to the Director. The Consulting Engineer shall have
such special engineering matters, investigations and reports referred to him or
her as may be directed by or through the office of the Director. The Consulting
Engineer shall conduct the engineering investigation and preliminary planning
upon such projects as may be referred to him or her, and his or her services
shall be made available for consultation in engineering matters such as river
and harbor improvement, sewage treatment, street extensions, city planning,
grade crossing eliminations and kindred projects arising in the Department, and
may render similar service to the Mayor and other departments upon written
request from the director of the department desiring the same and bearing the
written approval of the Director.
   (c)   The Director is authorized to enter into successive agreements, each
for a term not to exceed one (1) year, with the County to perform annual bridge
inspections in the City of Cleveland. The cost of the contract shall be subject
to annual appropriations.
   (d)   There is established a Division of Engineering and Construction in the
Office of Capital Projects, which shall be administered and controlled by a
Special Assistant to the Mayor, appointed by the Mayor to be the Manager of
Engineering and Construction. The Manager of Engineering and Construction shall
prepare or cause to be prepared all surveys, maps, plats, plans, drawings,
estimates and engineering specifications necessary for public improvements,
works and undertakings under the charge of the Office of Capital Projects other
than buildings, and render similar service to other departments of the City
government upon requisition from such departments, approved by the Director of
the Office of Capital Projects. The Manager shall have charge of making the
City boundaries where the same shall be necessary; the numbering of lots and
houses; the construction, maintenance and repair of sidewalks; the planning,
construction, improvement, repair and maintenance and operation of bridges and
viaducts; the construction and repair of sewers pertaining to streets and
freeways, subject to the approval of the Director of Public Utilities; and the
supervision and inspection of construction of sewers. The Manager shall further
perform all duties required of him or her by ordinance or by the Director of
Capital Projects. The Manager is designated the Platting Commissioner of the
City as the same is provided for in Charter Section
171.
   (e)   The Manager of Engineering and Construction may ascertain the carrying
capacity of every City bridge, and when such carrying capacity of any such City
bridge is ascertained, warning notice thereof shall be conspicuously painted in
large letters at each end of such bridge. Notice shall also caution all persons
against driving thereon a loaded conveyance of greater weight than the carrying
capacity thereof. No person shall disregard such caution and drive on such
bridge a loaded conveyance of greater weight than the carrying capacity of such
bridge.
   (f)   There is established a Division of Architecture and Site Development
in the Office of Capital Projects, which shall be administered and controlled
by a Special Assistant to the Mayor, appointed by the Mayor to be the Manager
of Architecture and Site Development. The Manager of Architecture and Site
Development shall design and prepare or cause to be designed and prepared
drawings, plans, estimates and architectural specifications for all City
buildings and all City park and recreational properties and facilities upon
written request from the director of the department desiring the same and
bearing the written approval of the Director of Capital Projects.
   (g)   There is established a Division of Real Estate in the Office of
Capital Projects, which shall be administered and controlled by a Commissioner
to be known as the Commissioner of Real Estate, subject to the provisions of
the Charter and ordinances of the City and subject to the direction of the
Director of Capital Projects. The Commissioner of Real Estate shall, with the
approval of the Director of Capital Projects appoint all officers and employees
in his or her division. The Commissioner of Real Estate shall control and
manage the real estate functions for the various departments of City government
including the creation and maintenance of property records for all
acquisitions, sales and leases of City property not under the control of
another city department; such property records shall indicate each property’s
source, use, price, funding source, tax status, and legal descriptions.
(Ord. No. 1332-10. Passed 11-22-10, eff. 11-22-10) (BOC Res. No. 562-10.
Adopted 12-29-10)
§ 123.031 Rental of Site and Purchase of Food, Refreshments, and Mementos
   (a)   The Director of Personnel and Human Resources shall have the authority
to expend funds in order to provide food, refreshments, mementos and, if
necessary, to rent a site for the following:
      (1)   Training sessions conducted jointly with the labor unions relating
to dispute resolution and other labor-related issues;
      (2)   Employee programs and events sponsored by the Department of
Personnel and Human Resources;
      (3)   Meetings to conduct labor negotiations;
      (4)   Training evaluation meetings held by DERS trainers to review City
programs in progress and discuss new programs;
      (5)   Events honoring employees for work- related achievements, including
but not limited to, the annual employees’ service award program; and
      (6)   Events honoring employees for raising contributions for charitable
organizations.
   (b)   The Director of Personnel and Human Resources is authorized to enter
into one (1) or more contracts with vendors to obtain the food, refreshments,
mementos, and to rent locations under division (a) of this section, payable
from funds appropriated for this purpose.
(Ord. No. 747-06. Passed 7-12-06, eff. 7-14-06)
§ 123.04 Employment of Professional Service for Capital Improvement Program
   The Mayor is hereby authorized to employ by written contract such
professional or expert services as the Board of Control shall deem necessary to
supplement the regularly employed staff of the City in order to facilitate the
preparation of plans, drawings, detailed specifications and estimates of costs,
and the supervision of construction of projects included in the capital
improvement program as the same may from time to time be adopted. The selection
of the persons or firms to furnish such expert services shall be made upon the
nomination of the director of the department concerned from a list of qualified
persons available for such employment as may be determined after a full and
complete canvass by the official designated by the Mayor for the purpose of
compiling such list. Each such contract shall be prepared by the Director of
Law, certified by the Director of Finance and a written report of the execution
of every such contract with an abstract of its terms shall be filed with
Council forthwith.
(Ord. No. 49-53. Passed 1-19-53, eff. 1-21-53)
§ 123.05 Mayor’s Report
   (a)   Pursuant to Charter Section
38(j), the Mayor shall report to Council one (1) week prior to the submission
of the Mayor’s Estimate, detailed information concerning the work performed,
the services rendered and the capital improvements undertaken during the prior
year and the proposed program of work to be performed, the services to be
rendered and the capital improvements to be undertaken in the ensuing year.
   (b)   Pursuant to Charter Section
38(j), beginning in 2026 the Mayor’s Estimate shall contain the budget and the
employee headcount and pay bands from, at a minimum, the previous year.
(Ord. No. 220-2025. Passed 2-24-25, eff. 2-26-25)
§ 123.06 Office of Budget and Management
   (a)   There is hereby established in the Office of the Mayor the Office of
Budget and Management to be administered and controlled by an Executive
Assistant to the Mayor, specifically appointed by the Mayor, to be the Director
of this Office. The Director shall appoint, in accordance with the civil
service provisions of the Charter, such assistants and clerical, stenographic
and other employees as may be required for the performance of the duties of the
Office, and shall be responsible for their supervision.
   (b)   It shall be his or her duty to conduct research into all phases of
City government and make recommendations to the Mayor relating to its
operation. In furtherance of this purpose he or she shall conduct a continual
study of the structure of Municipal departments with respect to present and
future needs, analyze budgetary requests and relate such requests to evolving
community requirements, conduct a continuing analysis of departmental income
and cost and correlate such income and the public need and do and perform such
other services and duties as will assist the Mayor in the efficient and
progressive operation of the City’s government.
(Ord. No. 2090-B-76. Passed 1-24-77, eff. 1-24-77)
§ 123.061 Rainy Day Reserve Fund; Establishment; Management Principles
   (a)   There is hereby established a Rainy Day Reserve Fund, to which shall
be credited amounts reflecting a positive budgetary balance from the General
Fund as of December 31 of each year.
   (b)   The following principles, representing sound fiscal management, will
govern the preparation of the annual General Fund budget and the maintenance of
the Rainy Day Reserve Fund established pursuant to division (a) of this
section:
      (1)   The annual General Fund budget should be prepared and considered in
a prudent manner without reliance on unrealistic revenue or expenditure
assumptions.
      (2)   The annual General Fund budget should first fully account for
payment of all current liabilities including all necessary operating expenses
to be incurred during the budget year.
      (3)   The initial budgetary goal each year should be to fully fund all
current obligations so as to eliminate any year-end GAAP deficit that may
exist.
      (4)   Consistent with divisions (b)(2) and (b)(3) of this section, the
Mayor should propose and the Council should adopt annual General Fund budgets
which provide for a reserve in excess of anticipated expenditures which may
then be credited to the Rainy Day Reserve Fund.
      (5)   The Rainy Day Reserve Fund should accumulate to at least a level
equal to two percent (2%) of General Fund expenditures. It should only be
reduced during significant periods of economic downturn or to fund
unanticipated one-time General Fund obligations. If drawn upon, the City will
seek to replenish the Rainy Day Reserve Fund in its entirety during the
succeeding budget year.
(Ord. No. 1987-92. Passed 1-11-93, eff. 1-21-93)
§ 123.07 Office of Consumer Affairs – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1329-10. Passed 12-6-10, eff. 12-6-10) (BOC Res. No. 560-10. Adopted
12-29-10)
§ 123.08 Office of Equal Opportunity
   (a)   There is established in the Office of the Mayor, the Office of Equal
Opportunity to be administered and controlled by an Executive Assistant to the
Mayor appointed by the Mayor to be the Director of Equal Opportunity. The
Director shall appoint, under the civil service provisions of the Charter,
employees required to perform the duties of the office, and shall be
responsible for their supervision.
   (b)   According to the City’s desire to encourage equal employment
opportunity of minorities and women by contractors, and to promote use in all
City Contracts, as defined in Section
187.01, of minority business enterprises (MBEs), female business enterprises
(FBEs) and Cleveland Area Small Businesses (CSBs), all as defined in Section
187.01, when appropriate under Chapter
187 (collectively, the “Targeted Businesses”), the Director of Equal
Opportunity shall:
      (1)   Supervise, coordinate, monitor, and enforce for all City contracts
affirmative action programs and the CSB, MBE and FBE programs in the manner
described in Chapter
187;
      (2)   Supervise, coordinate, monitor, and enforce for all City contracts,
compliance with the City’s equal employment opportunity requirements, including
but not limited to procedures, affirmative action programs, employment goals,
and other means to implement CSB, MBE and FBE participation goals, when and as
specifically applicable, in the manner described in Chapter
187. All compliance functions of the various contracting, departments shall be
performed in or under the direction of the Office of Equal Opportunity. The
Director of Equal Opportunity shall be responsible for securing compliance by
all contractors and subcontractors with the provisions of Chapter
187, as appropriate, and any implementing rules or regulations. Contracting
departments shall comply with the provisions of Chapter
187 and any implementing rules or regulations of the Director of Equal
Opportunity. Contracting departments shall cooperate with the Director of Equal
Opportunity and shall furnish such information and assistance as the Director
of Equal Opportunity may require;
      (3)   Provide appropriate management, technical assistance, and
information to and programs for Targeted Businesses to maximize their
participation in City contracts, with the assistance to include:
         A.   Providing assistance with the establishment, expansion, and
overall development of Targeted Businesses;
         B.   Assisting in the arrangement of business associations among
individuals, the Targeted Businesses, and other businesses; and
         C.   Planning and participating in training seminars to inform
potential bidders of applicable programs, and business opportunities available.
      (4)   Serve as liaison with economic development organizations and
agencies which support the development of Targeted Businesses in the community;
      (5)   Coordinate any City-sponsored economic development programs for
Targeted Businesses;
      (6)   Promulgate, and revise as necessary, regulations implementing the
Cleveland Area Business Program under Chapter
187.
   (c)   It shall also be the duty of the Director of Equal Opportunity to
ensure that the City’s contractors comply with applicable prevailing wage laws.
   (d)   By February 15 of each year, the Mayor shall file the following
written reports with the Clerk of Council, and a copy shall be provided to each
member of the Council:
      (1)   A report stating, for each City department and for the City as a
whole, the percentage and total value of contracts and subcontracts performed
by CSBs, MBEs and FBEs during the preceding year;
      (2)   Such other information related to the Cleveland Area Business
Program under Chapter
187 as may be useful in evaluating the success of the program.
(Ord. No. 77-08. Passed 2-4-08, eff. 3-15-08)
§ 123.09 Office of Urban Analytics and Innovation – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1081-2024. Passed 11-25-24, eff. 1-1-25) (BOC Res. No. 638-24.
Adopted 12-18-24)
CHAPTER 125 – DEPARTMENT OF LAW
125.01   Director’s Powers and Duties
125.02   Legal Counsel for Board of Appeals; Building, Housing and Health
Commissioners
125.03   Director’s Responsibilities when City is Debtor or Creditor
125.04   Employment of Associate Counsel
125.05   Legal Services for the Cleveland Board of Education
125.06   Employment of Experts
125.07   Registration Fee Payment
125.08   Continuing Legal Education Programs; Fees
125.09   Computer Assisted Research Agreements
125.10   Legislative Service Division
125.11   Law Student Internship Agreements
Charter reference:
   Director as City Solicitor, Charter §
93
   Director as Prosecuting Attorney, Charter §
84
   Legal opinions, Charter §
86
   Qualifications and duties of Director, Charter §
83
   Suits Affecting City, Charter §
85
Cross-reference:
   Legal action by Director regarding Zoning Code enforcement, CO
327.03
   Provisions for Municipal Court, CO
Ch. 149
§ 125.01 Director’s Powers and Duties
   (a)   The work of the Department of Law shall be distributed between a civil
branch and a criminal branch. The Director of Law shall supervise and control
the Department. He or she may appoint such number of Assistant Directors of Law
as he or she deems necessary for the proper conduct of the work of the civil
branch, whose appointments shall be subject to the approval of Council, three
(3) of whom he or she may designate as Chief Counsel, Chief Trial Counsel and
Chief Corporate Counsel, and not to exceed eight (8) of whom he or she may
designate as Chief Assistant Director of Law.
   (b)   The Director shall be the Prosecuting Attorney of the Municipal Court,
pursuant to the provisions of Charter Section
84. He or she may also designate not more than twenty-seven (27) assistant
prosecutors, whose appointments shall be subject to the approval of Council.
Two (2) of whom may be designated, respectively, as Chief Assistant Prosecutor
and First Assistant Prosecutor; and three (3) of whom may be designated as
Deputy Assistant Prosecutor.
   (c)   The Director is authorized to employ such number of clerks,
stenographers and persons in other classifications as he or she may deem
necessary.
(Ord. No. 528-2025. Passed 5-12-25, eff. 5-13-25)
§ 125.02 Legal Counsel for Board of Appeals; Building, Housing and Health
Commissioners
   The Director of Law shall assign an assistant director of law to serve as
legal counsel for the Board of Appeals established pursuant to Charter Section
76-6 and for the Building, Housing and Health Commissioners. The person so
assigned shall be under the immediate supervision and direction of the
Director, and shall prosecute in the Municipal Court all violations of the
provisions of the Building Code, Housing Code and Health Code, or with
reference to the type, design, construction, materials used, use or occupancy
of any structure in the City. He or she shall perform such other and further
duties as may be required of him or her by the Director or by ordinance. He or
she shall have an office in the City Hall and issue therefrom summons in the
name of the Director, hold hearings thereon, prepare affidavits for warrants
and see to it that warrants are issued thereunder and have charge of the
conduct of all prosecutions arising thereunder.
(Ord. No. 1742-46. Passed 2-3-47)
§ 125.03 Director’s Responsibilities when City is Debtor or Creditor
   The Director of Law shall have the power, and authority to adjust, settle,
compromise or submit to arbitration any actions, causes of action, accounts,
debts, claims, demands, disputes and matters in favor of or against the City,
or in which the City is concerned as debtor or creditor, now existing or which
may hereafter arise.
(Ord. No. 56990. Passed 2-27-22)
§ 125.04 Employment of Associate Counsel
   The Director of Law may, in special emergencies and out of the funds
provided therefor by Council, employ associate counsel for special work
relating to his or her office, and when matters involving patents are referred
to him or her for opinion, he or she may procure out of such funds the
necessary opinions from practitioners in patent law.
(Ord. No. 63410-A. Passed 9-22-24)
§ 125.05 Legal Services for the Cleveland Board of Education
   The Director of Law, and such assistant directors of law as he or she may
designate, may serve as legal advisor and attorney for the Board of Education
of the Cleveland City School District. The Director is authorized to enter into
any agreement which may be necessary to provide for such legal services to the
Board and to negotiate a fee arrangement with the Board for reasonable
compensation therefor. For providing legal services the Director and such
assistant directors as he or she may designate, may accept additional
compensation from the treasury of the Board in addition to the salary received
from the City Treasury.
(Ord. No. 1571-70. Passed 9-2-70, eff. 9-8-70)
§ 125.06 Employment of Experts
   The Director of Law may employ experts to prosecute or defend suits for or
on behalf of the City provided, however, that the cost of any contract for
expert services shall not exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00).
(Ord. No. 1737-08. Passed 12-8-08, eff. 12-10-08)
§ 125.07 Registration Fee Payment
   The Director of Law is hereby authorized to pay the registration fee
required by the Ohio Supreme Court to practice law in the State of Ohio for
himself or herself and the attorneys appointed by the Director in the civil and
criminal branches of the Department of Law.
(Ord. No. 68-88. Passed 1-25-88, eff. 2-1-88)
§ 125.08 Continuing Legal Education Programs; Fees
   The Director of Law is hereby authorized to charge and collect a fee from
non-City employees to participate in legal education and training programs
organized or sponsored by the Department of Law and conducted in accordance
with Ohio’s continuing legal education program. The amount of the fee for each
program shall be fixed by the Director of Law. The fees collected pursuant to
this section shall be deposited into Fund No. 12 SF 146 and are hereby
appropriated to pay the cost of the programs organized or sponsored by the
Department of Law, including the cost of the lecturers, facilities, materials,
and refreshments, the cost of the participation by attorneys in the Department
of Law in other continuing legal education programs and the other expenses of
the Department of Law.
(Ord. No. 877-91. Passed 4-29-91, eff. 5-2-91)
§ 125.09 Computer Assisted Research Agreements
   The Director of Law is authorized to enter into subscription, license and
other agreements necessary to obtain electronic online access to computer-
assisted legal and other research databases, materials and services required
for the work of the Department of Law.
(Ord. No. 355-01. Passed 5-21-01, eff. 5-31-01)
§ 125.10 Legislative Service Division
   (a)   The civil branch of the Department of Law shall contain a Legislative
Service Division. The Director of Law shall appoint and fix the compensation of
attorneys and other technical, professional and clerical staff necessary to
perform the duties of the Legislative Service Division. The Director of Law
shall report directly to City Council on matters involving the Legislative
Service Division.
   (b)   The Legislative Service Division shall, in conjunction with City
Council staff, provide the following legal services at the request of the
Council President, any City Council Committee, or any member of City Council:
      (1)   Assist and cooperate with any City Council Committee;
      (2)   Prepare legislation;
      (3)   Provide impartial and accurate information and reports on
legislative issues in accordance with the Rules of Council;
      (4)   Educate City Council members on community development block grant
policies and issues and assist City Council members in utilizing funds,
including, community development block grant and neighborhood equity funds;
      (5)   Advise members on the effects of ordinances and resolutions; and
      (6)   Any other legal duties as requested.
   (c)   The Legislative Service Division shall be provided with adequate
office space in the Law Department for its operation.
(Ord. No. 1484-A-01. Passed 2-4-02, eff. 2-13-02)
§ 125.11 Law Student Internship Agreements
   The Director of Law is authorized to enter into one (1) or more agreements
with law schools for the City to participate in student intern programs,
including programs where the City receives reimbursements of salaries or
stipends paid to law students interning at the Department of Law, programs
where the law students receive funds directly from the law school or another
source for interning at the Department of Law, programs where the City provides
a portion of the salaries or stipends paid to law students interning at the
Department of Law, and programs where the law students receive academic credit
for interning at the Department of Law.
(Ord. No. 2066-05. Passed 12-5-05, eff. 12-12-05)
CHAPTER 127 – DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE
127.01   Director’s General Duties
127.02   Decertification of Funds Encumbered by Council
127.03   Annual Report of Accounts Payable and Revenue Shortages
127.04   Annual Report of Licenses and Permits
127.05   Rebates of Assessments
127.06   Substitutes for Metal Tags and Licenses
127.07   Bills and Claims of City-Employed Laborers
127.08   Agreement with Social Service Clearing House
127.09   Legal and Accounting Services for Bond Issues
127.10   Workers’ Compensation Actuarial Services
127.11   Support, Maintenance, and Supplies for the MITIS Computer System
127.12   Standard and Requirement Contracts for Various Telecommunications
Purposes and Payment of Recurring Fees – Repealed
127.13   Publication of Legal Notices
127.14   Contracts for Collection Services on Behalf of the City of Cleveland
127.15   Reserved
127.16   Reserved
127.17   Scrip Depository Account
127.18 to 127.21   Reserved
127.22   Salaries in Cash; Other Warrants
127.23   Reserved
127.24   Duties of Commissioner of Accounts
127.25   Reserved
127.251   Division of Financial Reporting and Control
127.252   Duties of Controller
127.26 to 127.28   Reserved
127.29   Division of Mail
127.30   Division of Taxation
127.31   Duties of Administrator of Division of Taxation
127.32   Division of Printing and Reproduction
127.33   Duties of the Commissioner of Printing and Reproduction
127.34   Use of the Division of Printing and Reproduction's Services by Other
Political Subdivisions; Fee
127.35   Division of Risk Management
127.36   Duties of the Commissioner of Risk
127.37   Reserved
127.38   Expense Fund for Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses
127.39   Bureau of Taxicab Regulation
127.40   Duties of Chief of Bureau of Taxicab Regulation
127.41   Annual Audits of All City Funds by Independent Public Accountants
127.42   Dishonored Check Fee
127.43   Credit Transfer Services
127.44   Division of Information Technology and Services – Repealed
127.45   Duties of the Commissioner of Information Technology and Services –
Repealed
127.451   Office of Information Technology Planning – Repealed
127.46   Unclaimed Funds Recovery Service Agreements
127.47   Sale of Stocks and Bonds
127.48   Employee Recognition, Training, and Retreats for the Office of the
Clerk of the Cleveland Municipal Court
127.49   Food, Beverages, Mementos and Professional Services for Activities,
Events or Trainings Hosted or Sponsored by the Cleveland Commission on Black
Women and Girls
   Note: The legislative history of this chapter, except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 63410-A, passed
September 22, 1924.
Charter reference:
   Accounting procedure, Charter §
95
   Commissioner of Accounts, Charter §
97
   Director’s duties, Charter §
94
   Division of Assessments and Licenses, Charter §
103
   Division of Purchases and Supplies, Charter §
101
   Division of Treasury, Charter §
99
   Duties, Charter §
100
   General provisions for contracts, Charter §
106 et seq.
   Monthly financial statement, Charter §
96
   Sinking Fund provisions, Charter §
110
   Special Audits, Charter §
98
Cross-reference:
   Bonds for Treasurer, Commissioner of Accounts, Director of Finance, CO
171.16
   Bureau of the Budget, CO
113.10
   Income tax provisions, CO
Ch. 191 et seq.
   Office of Budget and Management, CO
123.06
   Sinking Fund provisions, CO
Ch. 179
Statutory reference:
   Powers and duties of Treasurer, RC 733.44
   Special funds authorized, RC Ch. 5705
   Treasurer’s annual report to Council, RC 733.45
§ 127.01 Director’s General Duties
   In addition to the duties imposed upon him or her by the Charter and
ordinances of the City, the Director of Finance shall perform all the duties
imposed upon city auditors by the laws of the State, so far as the same are
consistent with the Charter and ordinances of the City.
§ 127.02 Decertification of Funds Encumbered by Council
   (a)   No funds encumbered pursuant to the authorization of an ordinance or
resolution enacted by Council may be decertified by the Department of Finance
or any other department unless the following procedure has been fully complied
with:
      (1)   Decertification shall be by ordinance and shall include therein the
following information prepared by the director of the department requesting the
decertification.
      (2)   An ordinance for the decertification shall include therein the
following information prepared by the director of the department requesting the
same:
         A.   An identification of the fund number from which the money has
been certified;
         B.   An identification of the number of the resolution or ordinance
which originally certified the funds;
         C.   A short concise statement of the reason for the ordinance for
decertification.
   (b)   No funds which are decertified by Council shall be used for any
purpose whatsoever without a new appropriation approved by Council.
   (c)   Any breach of the requirements of this section by any director of any
department shall be considered a breach of the director’s fiduciary duty to the
City of Cleveland and it shall be reported to the bonding company or surety of
such director.
(Ord. No. 256-A-78. Passed 10-23-78 over Mayor’s veto, eff. 10-24-78)
§ 127.03 Annual Report of Accounts Payable and Revenue Shortages
   In addition to and supplementing the financial statements required by
Charter Section
96, annually and not later than February 1 of each year, the Director of
Finance shall prepare and submit to Council as of December 31 of the preceding
year a complete, itemized and detailed statement of all outstanding accounts
payable of the City together with a complete statement of the anticipated
revenues which were expected to be used for the payment of the accounts, and an
explanation of the reasons why the revenues were insufficient for the payment
of such accounts.
(Ord. No. 101671. Passed 10-22-34)
§ 127.04 Annual Report of Licenses and Permits
   In addition to and supplementing any other report required by the Charter,
the Director of Finance shall prepare and submit to Council annually a report
on licenses and permits issued by the City. The report shall indicate the
number of licenses and permits issued, the charge made for the licenses and
permits, the revenue derived by the City from each classification and the cost
to the City for providing the services for which these charges are made. The
report shall be submitted to Council on or before March 1 of each year.
(Ord. No. 350-66. Passed 10-10-66, eff. 10-13-66)
§ 127.05 Rebates of Assessments
   When any rebate of assessments is to be made pursuant to Charter Section
162, the Director of Finance shall first cause to be inserted in the City
Record a list containing the parcels of property upon which rebates of
assessments are to be made, and the name and address of the owner thereof, as
shown by the records in the Division of Assessments and Licenses. Not less than
ninety (90) days thereafter he or she shall mail to the street address of each
parcel of land upon which such rebate is to be made, a notice addressed to the
“owner of premises”, setting forth the facts with reference to the rebate and
the method of payment of the same.
(Ord. No. 102302. Passed 3-11-35)
§ 127.06 Substitutes for Metal Tags and Licenses
   Notwithstanding any provision of any ordinance of the City requiring metal
license tags, signs or plates to be issued in connection with any license
authorized thereby, the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses is hereby
authorized as may be necessary to issue substitutes therefor in the form of
decalcomanias, transfers, plastic or other substitutes for metal.
(Ord. No. 1404-42. Passed 10-5-42)
§ 127.07 Bills and Claims of City-Employed Laborers
   In all cases where work or material shall for any purpose be by any person
furnished to or for the City, the person so furnishing such work or material,
or both, shall be required to make out a detailed account of the items of such
labor or material, or both, as the case may be, with the charge of each item
set opposite the same. However, in all estimates on contracts for special
improvements except final estimates, it shall be sufficient, unless the
Director of Finance shall otherwise require, for the Commissioner of
Engineering and Construction to certify to a statement showing the total value
of the work or material furnished, the amount of all estimates previously given
thereon, the percentage retained and the balance due the contractor.
§ 127.08 Agreement with Social Service Clearing House
   The Director of Finance upon the request of the Chief Justice of the
Municipal Court and of the directors of the several departments involved, or
any of them, is hereby authorized to enter into a yearly agreement with the
Welfare Federation of Cleveland for the services of the social service clearing
house required by the City during such year. The charge for such service shall
be based upon the percentage of total services of the social service clearing
house which each agency subscribing to such services used during the twelve
(12) month period from September 1 of the second preceding year to August 31 of
the year immediately preceding the making of such agreement. The cost to the
City shall be allocated and charged to the appropriation for the Municipal
Court and for each particular department in an amount representing the
percentage of chargeable service required by the Court and each such department
as shown by the records of the social service clearing house.
(Ord. No. 1985-47. Passed 11-24-47)
§ 127.09 Legal and Accounting Services for Bond Issues
   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized to employ by contract such
expert accounting service as may be required under any indenture of mortgage
entered into as part of any mortgage revenue bonds issued to finance the
Municipal public utility operations. Contracts may be made without competitive
bidding but shall be entered into only with the person or firm determined by
the Board of Control after inquiry and investigation, to be the best qualified
to render such service to the City.
(Ord. No. 353-55. Passed 3-21-55, eff. 3-25-55)
§ 127.10 Workers’ Compensation Actuarial Services
   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized to employ by contract such
expert actuarial services and claims management services as may be required to
accrue the lowest premium rate to the City as well as reduce the cost of claims
for workers’ compensation. The contract may be made without competitive bidding
but shall be entered into only with the person or firm determined by the Board
of Control, after inquiry and investigation, to be the best qualified to render
such service to the City.
(Ord. No. 2628-90. Passed 1-28-91, eff. 2-5-91)
§ 127.11 Support, Maintenance, and Supplies for the MITIS Computer System
   (a)   The Director of Finance is authorized to enter into one (1) or more
standard purchase or requirement contract duly let to the lowest and best
bidder after competitive bidding to acquire support, maintenance, and supplies
for the MITIS computer system that are deemed by the Director of Finance as
necessary to operate the Division of Taxation, which includes, but is not
limited to materials, equipment, supplies, services, peripherals, components,
licenses, repairs, upgrades, training, and technical support and maintenance
for hardware, software, firmware, website, and application software. That under
Section
108(b) of the Charter, the purchases authorized by this division may be made
through cooperative agreements using state procedures. The Director of Finance
may sign all documents with the State of Ohio or any of its political
subdivisions that are necessary to make the purchases, and may enter into one
(1) or more contracts with the vendors selected through that cooperative
process. Any purchase made under this division shall be made by the
Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies and paid from the annual appropriations
made for that purpose.
   (b)   The Director of Finance is authorized to enter into one (1) or more
contracts with software developers or vendors to acquire support, maintenance,
and supplies for the MITIS computer system that are deemed by the Director of
Finance as necessary to operate the Division of Taxation, which includes, but
is not limited to, materials, equipment, supplies, services, peripherals,
components, licenses, repairs, upgrades, training, and technical support and
maintenance for hardware, software, firmware, website, and application
software. The selection of the computer software developers or vendors shall be
made by the Board of Control on the nomination of the Director of Finance from
lists of qualified computer software developers or vendors available as may be
determined after a full and complete canvass by the Director of Finance for the
purposes of compiling the lists. The compensation to be paid shall be fixed by
the Board of Control and paid from the annual appropriation made for that
purpose.
   (c)   The Director of Finance is authorized to execute one (1) or more
license agreements directly with the firm or firms licensing the software and
to purchase peripherals from that firm, for the MITIS computer system that are
deemed by the Director of Finance as necessary to operate the Division of
Taxation. Any purchase made under this division shall be paid from the annual
appropriations made for that purpose.
(Ord. No. 1922-07. Passed 12-10-07, eff. 12-14-07)
   Note: Former Section
127.11 was repealed by Ord. No. 387-92, passed 4-6-92, eff. 4-10-92.
§ 127.12 Standard and Requirement Contracts for Various Telecommunications
Purposes and Payment of Recurring Fees – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1081-2024. Passed 11-25-24, eff. 1-1-25) (BOC Res. No. 638-24.
Adopted 12-18-24)
§ 127.13 Publication of Legal Notices
   The Director of Finance is authorized to purchase legal notifications
required by law to be published by the City in newspapers of general
circulation that exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00).
(Ord. No. 1511-2019. Passed 12-2-19, eff. 12-4-19)
§ 127.14 Contracts for Collection Services on Behalf of the City of Cleveland
   (a)   The Director of Finance is authorized to enter into a contract or
contracts for professional non-legal services necessary to collect any or all
of the following:
      (1)   Statutory fees as assessed by the City;
      (2)   Civil and domestic court costs;
      (3)   Criminal court costs so long as the defendant is not incarcerated
on the date the debt is certified;
      (4)   Municipal taxes;
      (5)   EMS debts;
      (6)   property damage; and
      (7)   parking tickets.
   (b)   Any collection contract entered into under the authority of this
section may include in its scope the collection of any or all receivables of
the City of Cleveland whether or not expressly listed in division (a). The
types of receivables listed in division (a) are illustrative only and shall not
limit the scope of collection work that may be included in the contract.
   (c)   In any case in which it is not already provided that the debtor is
liable for the costs of collection under any provision of the Codified
Ordinances or state law, or any rule of court or judgment entry, the debtor may
be assessed a fee in an amount equal to the costs paid by the City to any
consultant for the costs of collection of the debt.
   (d)   The cost of each contract authorized by this section shall be paid
from any proper appropriation accounts including any fund to which are credited
the following fees, which are appropriated for this purpose:
      (1)   The fee established under division (c) of this section; and
      (2)   Any other fee established by the Codified Ordinances or state law,
or rule of court or judgment entry that imposes upon a debtor the cost of
collecting a receivable of the City.
(Ord. No. 1012-2022. Passed 10-17-22, eff. 10-20-22)
§ 127.15 Reserved
§ 127.16 Reserved
§ 127.17 Scrip Depository Account
   The Commissioner of Accounts shall maintain an account known as the Scrip
Depository Account, in which he or she shall enter all transactions relating to
the receipt and disbursement of tax anticipation notes, commonly called scrip.
The City Treasurer, upon proper receiving warrants of the Commissioner, shall
receive all tax anticipation notes which may come into the possession of the
City from whatever sources. He or she shall safely maintain the same in his or
her custody and control and make disbursements thereof only upon proper
warrants of the Commissioner.
(Ord. No. 102490. Passed 4-8-35)
§§ 127.18 to 127.21 Reserved
§ 127.22 Salaries in Cash; Other Warrants
   The salaries of all City officials and employees, the payrolls of all public
boards, corporations or authorities, the public money of which is deposited by
the Treasurer, pursuant to the terms of this chapter or the laws of this State,
may be paid in cash. To provide money for such payment the Commissioner of
Accounts shall issue his or her warrant authorizing the issuance of checks upon
the depositary for such amount stated in the warrant, as shall be sufficient to
meet such demands. All other warrants shall be drawn in favor of the persons to
whom the amounts specified therein respectively are due, or in favor of their
assigns.
§ 127.23 Reserved
§ 127.24 Duties of Commissioner of Accounts
   The Commissioner of Accounts shall maintain records of all moneys received
by the City Treasurer and of all disbursements made by the Treasurer upon
warrant of the Commissioner of Accounts.
(Ord. No. 2363-81. Passed 12-14-81, eff. 12-16-81)
§ 127.25 Reserved
§ 127.251 Division of Financial Reporting and Control
   There is hereby established, in the Department of Finance, a Division of
Financial Reporting and Control, to be administered and controlled by a
Controller, subject to the provisions of the Charter and ordinances of the City
and to the supervision and direction of the Director of Finance.
(Ord. No. 2363-81. Passed 12-14-81, eff. 12-16-81)
§ 127.252 Duties of Controller
   The City Controller shall provide controls over the maintenance of the
accounting systems of the City and the integrity of information submitted to
that system; reconcile interfund accounts payable and receivable; organize and
maintain a property control system; monitor grant expenditures and cash
drawdowns; prepare monthly and annual financial reports and statements; and
perform cash reconciliations.
   He or she shall perform such other duties as may from time to time be
required of him or her by ordinance or by the Director of Finance.
(Ord. No. 2363-81. Passed 12-14-81, eff. 12-16-81)
§§ 127.26 to 127.28 Reserved
§ 127.29 Division of Mail
   There is hereby created in the Department of Finance a Division of Mail, to
be under the direct supervision of the Commissioner of Printing and
Reproduction, and there shall be such assistants as the Director of Finance
shall deem necessary. All outgoing mail from the various departments and
divisions shall be transmitted to the Division where it shall be properly
stamped and mailed. The Commissioner shall determine by inquiry that mail
dispatched by the Division is that involving City business and not the personal
mail of the sender. The Commissioner shall not dispatch any mail which he or
she determines is the personal mail of the sender but shall return such mail to
the sender or hold it for postage.
(Ord. No. 1444-10. Passed 11-22-10, eff. 11-24-10)
§ 127.30 Division of Taxation
   There is hereby established a Division of Taxation in the Department of
Finance which shall be directed and controlled by an Administrator, subject to
the provisions of the Charter and ordinances of the City and to the direction
of the Director of Finance.
(Ord. No. 2426-66. Passed 12-12-66, eff. 12-14-66)
§ 127.31 Duties of Administrator of Division of Taxation
   The Administrator of the Division of Taxation shall administer all
provisions of law, ordinance and regulation relating to the levying and
collection of an income tax.
(Ord. No. 2426-66. Passed 12-12-66, eff. 12-14-66)
§ 127.32 Division of Printing and Reproduction
   There is hereby established in the Department of Finance a Division of
Printing and Reproduction to be administered and controlled by a Commissioner
of Printing and Reproduction, subject to the provisions of the Charter and
ordinances of the City and to the supervision and direction of the Director of
Finance.
(Ord. No. 978-52. Passed 6-9-52, eff. 6-16-52) (BOC Res. No. 419-52. Adopted 6-
23-52)
§ 127.33 Duties of the Commissioner of Printing and Reproduction
   The Commissioner of Printing and Reproduction shall administer and control
the affairs of the Division of Printing and Reproduction and control and
supervise the printing, microfilming, photostating, blueprinting, mimeographing
or other reproduction of material required for use by any department or
division of the City. He or she shall have supervision and control of all
photographic work of the City and shall perform such further duties as may from
time to time be required by him or her by ordinance or by the Director of
Finance.
(Ord. No. 978-52. Passed 6-9-52, eff. 6-16-52) (BOC Res. No. 419-52. Adopted 6-
23-52)
§ 127.34 Use of the Division of Printing and Reproduction's Services by Other
Political Subdivisions; Fee
   The Director of Finance is authorized to enter into contracts with and
collect fees from political subdivisions to utilize the Division of Printing
and Reproduction's services during any period when available as determined by
the Director. The fees for use of the Division's services shall be set by the
Board of Control. The contracts authorized by this section shall be prepared by
the Director of Law. The Director of Finance shall deposit the fees collected
from the political subdivisions into the fund or funds designated to pay the
costs associated with providing those services. The fees collected may be used
for and are appropriated for this purpose.
(Ord. No. 335-14. Passed 3-17-14, eff. 3-18-14)
§ 127.35 Division of Risk Management
   There is established in the Department of Finance a Division of Risk
Management to be administered and controlled by a Commissioner of Risk
Management, subject to the provisions of the Charter and the Codified
Ordinances of Cleveland, Ohio, 1976, and to the supervision of the Director of
Finance.
(Ord. No. 1151-2022. Passed 11-21-22, eff. 11-23-22) (BOC Res. No. 503-22.
Adopted 12-7-22)
§ 127.36 Duties of the Commissioner of Risk Management
   The Commissioner of Risk Management under the supervision and direction of
the Director of Finance shall:
   (a)   Oversee and monitor operational risk management activities of the
City, including but not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Managing workers’ compensation claims and loss control activities;
      (2)   Preparing loss analyses, identifying exposures, and recommending
solutions;
      (3)   Implementing and coordinating safety and risk mitigation policies,
programs, and procedures; and
      (4)   Consulting with Department of Public Safety on employee security
issues and emergency planning and coordination.

   (b)   Develop business continuity planning for all departments to ensure
operational and business continuity for services; and
   (c)   Respond to alleged violations of rules, regulations, policies, and
procedures by evaluating such violations, or recommending the initiation of
investigative procedures and their adjudication; and
   (d)   Perform such other duties as may from time to time be required by
ordinance or the Director of Finance.
(Ord. No. 1151-2022. Passed 11-21-22, eff. 11-23-22) (BOC Res. No. 503-22.
Adopted 12-7-22)
§ 127.37 Reserved
§ 127.38 Expense Fund for Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses
   There shall be allowed annually to the Commissioner of Assessments and
Licenses, in addition to all salary and allowances otherwise provided by law,
the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) on deposit to provide for
reimbursement of expenses which may be incurred by his or her division in the
performance of official duties and in the furtherance of maintaining the
financial integrity of the City. On order of the Commissioner of Assessments
and Licenses and the Director of Finance, the Commissioner of Accounts shall
draw his or her warrant on the City Treasury, payable to the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses or other person as the order designates, for the
amount as the order requires; the amounts, not exceeding the amount provided by
this section, to be paid out of the general fund of the City.
   Nothing shall be paid under this section until the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses has given bond to the City in the amount of fifteen
thousand dollars ($15,000.00), and the bond shall be conditioned that he or she
will faithfully discharge all the duties enjoined on him or her, and pay over
all moneys received by him or her in his or her official capacity. The bond
shall be deposited with the Commissioner of Accounts. The premium on the bond
shall be paid by the City.
   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses shall annually, on the fifth
business day of January, file with the Commissioner of Accounts an itemized
statement, verified by him or her as to the manner in which the fund has been
expended during the preceding year. Any funds expended during a six (6) month
period may be replenished from an account set up for recovery of interest on
unpaid admissions and/or parking tax so long as the total amount expended from
the fund during any calendar year does not exceed the amount of the bond. If
any part of the fund remains unexpended, the funds shall be carried over to the
following year and noted on both the current and the following year’s itemized
report.
(Ord. No. 857-08. Passed 6-9-08, eff. 6-16-08)
§ 127.39 Bureau of Taxicab Regulation
   There is hereby established in the Division of Assessments and Licenses, in
the Department of Finance, a Bureau of Taxicab Regulation, to be administered
and controlled by a Chief of the Bureau of Taxicab Regulation, subject to the
provisions of the Charter and ordinances of the City, and to the supervision
and direction of the Director of Finance.
(Ord. No. 1828-77. Passed 6-8-78, eff. 6-12-78; Renumbered by Ord. No. 1419-87.
Passed 10-7-88, eff. 10-10-88)
§ 127.40 Duties of Chief of Bureau of Taxicab Regulation
   The Chief of the Bureau of Taxicab Regulation shall perform all duties
heretofore devolving upon the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses pursuant
to Chapter
443 - Taxicabs, of the Codified Ordinances of Cleveland, Ohio, 1976. He or she
shall supervise employees of the Bureau and owners, companies or associations
of public hacks relating to the provision of dispatching services by the City.
He or she shall have such other and further duties as may from time to time be
required of him or her by the Director of Finance, the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses or Council.
(Ord. No. 1828-77. Passed 6-8-78, eff. 6-12-78; Renumbered by Ord. No. 1419-87.
Passed 10-7-88, eff. 10-10-88)
§ 127.41 Annual Audits of All City Funds by Independent Public Accountants
   An audit of all City funds shall be performed annually by a firm or firms of
independent public accountants. The Director of Finance is hereby authorized
and directed to enter into a written contract or contracts from time to time to
employ such a firm or firms to perform such audits. Each such contract shall be
subject to the approval of the Board of Control. The Director of Finance shall
furnish a copy of each audit report prepared by such firm or firms to the
Mayor, each member of Council, and the Auditor of the State of Ohio, and shall
cause a copy of each such report to be kept on file in the Department of
Finance for public inspection contracts authorized by this section shall be
approved by the Council.
(Ord. No. 2361-80. Passed 12-15-80, eff. 12-18-80; Renumbered by Ord. No. 1419-
87. Passed 10-7-88, eff. 10-10-88)
§ 127.42 Dishonored Check Fee
   When any person shall give or cause to be given to any City official,
Department or Division, a negotiable instrument in payment of any obligation of
such person due the City, which instrument is subsequently dishonored by the
party or institution upon whom drawn, a one-time fee of Twenty-Five Dollars
($25.00) for each check shall be added to the original obligation as a
Dishonored Check Fee. The Dishonored Check Fee shall be first deposited toward
defraying the costs of collection for the division in which the original
obligation arose. Assessment of the Dishonored Check Fee shall not relieve a
maker of a dishonored negotiable instrument of criminal or civil liability
otherwise provided by law.
(Ord. No. 2154-99. Passed 2-28-00, eff. 3-6-00)
§ 127.43 Credit Transfer Services
   The Director of Finance is authorized to enter into agreements for credit
transfer services on behalf of the various departments of City government and
the Clerk of the Cleveland Municipal Court to enable payment of taxes, fees,
fines and other charges through the use of a credit card. Each person that pays
a tax, fee, fine or other charge through the use of a credit card over the
telephone, electronically, or by internet may be assessed a fee equal in amount
to the cost to the City or the Court to process the credit card payment over
the telephone, electronically, or by internet.
(Ord. No. 1421-07. Passed 11-19-07, eff. 11-21-07)
§ 127.44 Division of Information Technology and Services – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1081-2024. Passed 11-25-24, eff. 1-1-25) (BOC Res. No. 638-24.
Adopted 12-18-24)
§ 127.45 Duties of the Commissioner of Information Technology and Services –
Repealed
(Ord. No. 1081-2024. Passed 11-25-24, eff. 1-1-25) (BOC Res. No. 638-24.
Adopted 12-18-24)
§ 127.451 Office of Information Technology Planning – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1081-2024. Passed 11-25-24, eff. 1-1-25) (BOC Res. No. 638-24.
Adopted 12-18-24)
§ 127.46 Unclaimed Funds Recovery Service Agreements
   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized and directed to enter into
agreements on behalf of the various departments of City government with
persons, firms or corporations claiming to have located funds or other assets
due to the City but unclaimed or uncollected, for services for the location,
disclosure, and/or recovery of such funds or assets. The compensation for
services under the agreements authorized hereby may be determined as a
percentage of the funds or assets actually recovered for and paid to the City.
(Ord. No. 1388-93. Passed 8-11-93, eff. 8-19-93)
§ 127.47 Sale of Stocks and Bonds
   The City Treasurer is hereby authorized to sell any stocks and bonds
received by the City as payment of debts owed to the City at such time as the
City Treasurer deems advisable in the interest of the City and to deposit the
proceeds of the sale into the fund to which the debt is owed.
(Ord. No. 1656-93. Passed 8-11-93, eff. 8-19-93)
§ 127.48 Employee Recognition, Training, and Retreats for the Office of the
Clerk of the Cleveland Municipal Court
   (a)   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized to expend funds on behalf
of the Clerk of the Cleveland Municipal Court for each of the following
purposes:
      (1)   To provide food, beverages, and mementos for events honoring
employees for work- related achievements;
      (2)   To provide food, beverages, and mementos for training sessions
conducted for employees of the Office of the Clerk of the Cleveland Municipal
Court, which training sessions may include professional facilitators; and
      (3)   To rent a site for training sessions or retreats for employees of
the Clerk of the Cleveland Municipal Court, which may include participation by
non-employees, and to provide food, beverages and mementos at such training
sessions or retreats;
      (4)   To provide coffee and other beverages for the Clerk, the Clerk’s
Administrative Staff, and persons conducting business with the Office of the
Clerk of the Cleveland Municipal Court;
      (5)   To provide refreshments and beverages at public meetings conducted
by the Clerk of the Cleveland Municipal Court.
   (b)   The total amount of funds expended for all of the above programs shall
not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per year.
(Ord. No. 883-97. Passed 6-9-97, eff. 6-18-97)
§ 127.49 Food, Beverages, Mementos and Professional Services for Activities,
Events or Trainings Hosted or Sponsored by the Cleveland Commission on Black
Women and Girls
   (a)   The Director of Finance is authorized to expend funds on behalf of the
Cleveland Commission on Black Women and Girls (Commission) to provide food,
beverages and mementos for activities, events or trainings hosted or sponsored
by the Commission.
   (b)   The Director of Finance is authorized to expend funds on behalf of the
Commission for professional services needed during activities, events or
trainings hosted or sponsored by the Commission. Any contract that may be
necessary for the provision of such professional services shall not exceed ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00), shall be prepared by the Director of Law and
shall contain such terms and conditions that the Director deems necessary to
protect and benefit the public interest.
(Ord. No. 435-2025. Passed 4-7-25, eff. 4-8-25)
CHAPTER 129 – DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC UTILITIES
129.01   Division of Cleveland Public Power
129.02   Duties of Commissioner of Light and Power
129.03   Bureau of Street Lighting
129.04   Duties of Chief of Bureau of Street Lighting
129.05   Division of Water
129.06   Duties of Commissioner of Water
129.07   Control of Sewage Disposal Plants and Sewer System
129.08   Division of Water Pollution Control
129.09   Duties of Commissioner of Water Pollution Control
129.10   Division of Utilities Engineering
129.11   Duties of Commissioner of Utilities Engineering
129.12   Division of Utilities Fiscal Control
129.13   Duties of Commissioner of Utilities Fiscal Control
129.14   Division of Administrative Services
129.15   Duties of the Executive Commissioner of Administration
129.151   Office of Telecommunications
129.153   Regulation of Tree Trimming
129.16   Contracts for Utilities Services
129.17   Contracts for Painting or Chlorinating Steel Reservoirs
129.18   Contracts for Disinfection of Water Mains – Repealed
129.19   Payment of Utilities Bills
129.20   Utility Easements Acceptance and Release
129.21   Contracts for Billing and Collection of Sewer Charges and Other Fees
129.22   Easement Acquisition
129.23   Expenditures for Professional Memberships
129.231   Purchase of Food and Beverages for Department of Public Utilities
129.24   Purchase of Water Treatment Chemicals
129.25   Purchase of Water System Maintenance Equipment
129.26   Purchase of Poles, Wire, Transformers, and Other Equipment
129.27   Purchase of Water Pollution Control System Maintenance Equipment
129.28   Purchase of Laboratory Equipment, Testing and Analytical Services
129.29   Purchase of Catch Basin Debris Disposal
129.291   Purchase of Repair and Construction of Catch Basins and Manholes
129.292   Purchase of Construction and Installation of Replacement Sewers and
Repair and Rehabilitation of Existing Sewers
129.293   Purchase of Maintenance and Repair of Detention Basins, Detention
Facilities, and Structures
129.294   Professional Services for General Engineering, Architectural,
Environmental, Geotechnical Engineering, and Other Services
129.295   Applying for and Accepting Grants and Loans for the Department of
Public Utilities
129.296   Acceptance of Gifts or Awards
129.30   Payment of Clothing Allowance
129.31   Payment of Clothing Allowance
129.32   Payment of Clothing Allowance
129.33   Contracts for Purchase of Electric Power and Energy
129.331   Contracts for the Provision of Retail Electric Aggregation Services
and Power Supply
129.34   Contracts with State for Reimbursement for Betterments – Expired
129.35   Office of Radio Communications System Management
129.36   Permits
129.361   Agreements for the Use of the City’s 800 MHz Radio System
129.37   Uniforms and Equipment for Security Officers in the Department of
Public Utilities; Maintenance Allowance
Charter reference:
   Accounts of publicly owned utilities, Charter §
113
   Fixation of utility rates, Charter §
112
   General powers and duties, Charter §
111
   Provisions for public utility grants, Charter §
181 et seq.
Cross-reference:
   Recording public utilities documents, CO
113.04
Statutory reference:
   Laying pipes in highway, RC 743.23
   Water pollution, RC 715.08
§ 129.01 Division of Cleveland Public Power
   There is hereby established a Division of Cleveland Public Power in the
Department of Public Utilities, to be administered and controlled by a
Commissioner of Cleveland Public Power, subject to the provisions of the
Charter and ordinances of the City and to the supervision and direction of the
Director of Public Utilities.
(Ord. No. 2826-90. Passed 1-28-91, eff. 2-5-91)
   Note: Pursuant to Section 2 of Ord. No. 2826-90, any references in the
Codified Ordinances to Division of Light and Power and Commissioner of Light
and Power shall be amended to read Division of Cleveland Public Power and
Commissioner of Cleveland Public Power, respectively.
§ 129.02 Duties of Commissioner of Light and Power
   The Commissioner of Light and Power shall have charge and management of all
plants owned and operated by the City for the purposes of generating and
distributing electric current for the use of the City and its inhabitants, or
of others to whom such current may be sold. The Commissioner shall provide
general management supervision and the executive direction necessary to
control, administer, develop and maintain a reliable and efficient electric
power system and all services and functions associated therewith. The
Commissioner shall also see that the streets of the City are properly and
adequately lighted.
(Ord. No. 1629-73. Passed 1-28-74, eff. 1-28-74)
§ 129.03 Bureau of Street Lighting
   There is hereby established in the Division of Light and Power, in the
Department of Public Utilities, a Bureau of Street Lighting, to be administered
and controlled by a Chief of the Bureau of Street Lighting subject to the
provisions of the Charter and ordinances of the City, and to the supervision
and direction of the Director of Public Utilities.
(Ord. No. 579-68. Passed 4-8-68, eff. 4-10-68) (BOC Res. No. 236-68. Adopted 4-
24-68)
§ 129.04 Duties of Chief of Bureau of Street Lighting
   The Chief of the Bureau of Street Lighting shall determine, within the
appropriation made by Council for street lighting, the number, size and
location of all street lights and he or she shall authorize the installation,
removal, transfer or relocation of street lights. He or she shall supervise the
lighting of gas lamps in the parks and prepare specifications for contracts for
the operation and maintenance of such lights; he or she shall participate in
negotiating all contracts between the City and the privately owned public
utilities for street lighting; he or she shall have authority to make or cause
to be made surveys of street lighting when requested to do so by Council. He or
she shall have such other and further duties as may from time to time be
required of him or her by the Director of Public Utilities, the Commissioner of
Light and Power or Council.
(Ord. No. 579-68. Passed 4-8-68, eff. 4-10-68) (BOC Res. No. 236-68. Adopted 4-
24-68)
§ 129.05 Division of Water
   There is hereby established in the Department of Public Utilities a Division
of Water, to be controlled and administered by a Commissioner of Water, subject
to the provisions of the Charter and ordinances of the City, and to the
supervision and direction of the Director of Public Utilities.
(Ord. No. 2754-89. Passed 12-4-89, eff. 12-11-89)
§ 129.06 Duties of Commissioner of Water
   The Commissioner of Water shall have the charge and management of all assets
and facilities owned and operated by the City for the furnishing of water for
the use of the City and its inhabitants or for the use of others to whom water
may be sold.
(Ord. No. 2754-89. Passed 12-4-89, eff. 12-11-89)
§ 129.07 Control of Sewage Disposal Plants and Sewer System
   The Director of Public Utilities, either directly or through the proper
division established in the Department of Public Utilities, shall manage and
supervise the planning, construction, improvement and maintenance of the sewage
disposal plants of the City, and manage and supervise the operation and
maintenance of the sewer system of the City. The Director or Department shall
also manage and supervise all matters relating to the elimination, control or
regulation of water pollution in or upon watercourses, rivers, streams or lakes
bounding upon or within the City, and enforce all ordinances or regulations
relating thereto.
(Ord. No. 1599-65. Passed 6-18-65, eff. 6-21-65)
§ 129.08 Division of Water Pollution Control
   There is hereby established a Division of Water Pollution Control in the
Department of Public Utilities of the City, which shall be administered and
controlled by a Commissioner of Water Pollution Control, subject to the
provisions of the Charter and ordinances of the City, and to the direction of
the Director of Public Utilities.
(Ord. No. 1599-65. Passed 6-18-65, eff. 6-21-65)
§ 129.09 Duties of Commissioner of Water Pollution Control
   The Commissioner of Water Pollution Control shall manage and supervise the
disposal of sewage; manage and supervise the operation of such plant as the
City may maintain for the treatment and disposal of sewage; cause to be
prepared plans, drawings, estimates and engineering specifications necessary
for construction and repair of sewers; construct and repair sewers; and have
charge of the operation and maintenance of the sewer system of the City,
including catch basins, and manage and supervise the elimination, control or
regulation of any matter relating to the pollution of watercourses, rivers,
streams or lakes bounding upon or within the City.
(Ord. No. 2111-A-69. Passed 3-9-70, eff. 3-11-70)
§ 129.10 Division of Utilities Engineering
   There is hereby established in the Department of Public Utilities a Division
of Utilities Engineering to be administered and controlled by a Commissioner,
who shall be known as the Commissioner of Utilities Engineering, subject to the
Charter and ordinances of the City, and to the supervision and direction of the
Director of Public Utilities.
(Ord. No. 739-48. Passed 5-17-48) (BOC Res. No. 568-48. Adopted 6-2-48)
§ 129.11 Duties of Commissioner of Utilities Engineering
   The Commissioner of Utilities Engineering shall administer and supervise the
consolidated engineering services of the three (3) divisions of the Department
of Public Utilities, including surveys, plans and supervision of construction;
plans specifications and design of improvements; records and research and
supervision and control of skilled workmen of construction and major
maintenance within the Department. He or she shall perform such other and
further duties as may from time to time be required of him or her by ordinance
or by the Director of Public Utilities.
(Ord. No. 739-48. Passed 5-17-48) (BOC Res. No. 568-48. Adopted 6-2-48)
§ 129.12 Division of Utilities Fiscal Control
   There is hereby established in the Department of Public Utilities, a
Division of Utilities Fiscal Control, to be administered and controlled by a
Commissioner who shall be known as the Commissioner of Utilities Fiscal
Control, subject to the Charter and ordinances of the City, and to the
supervision and direction of the Director of Public Utilities.
(Ord. No. 739-48. Passed 5-17-48) (BOC Res. No. 568-48. Adopted 6-2-48)
§ 129.13 Duties of Commissioner of Utilities Fiscal Control
   The Commissioner of Utilities Fiscal Control shall administer and supervise
the fiscal affairs of the Department of Public Utilities generally, except as
to such matters specifically placed under the supervision and control of other
officers by the Charter, and control the meter readings, stores, billing,
collections and other commercial and control functions; supervise in conformity
with all Charter requirements the accounts required to be kept for the
utilities operations of the Department of Public Utilities or required under
the provisions of any indenture of mortgage securing the issuance of bonds for
improvements constructed by the Department and perform such other and further
duties as may from time to time be required of him or her by ordinance or by
the Director of Public Utilities.
(Ord. No. 739-48. Passed 5-17-48) (BOC Res. No. 568-48. Adopted 6-2-48)
§ 129.14 Division of Administrative Services
   There is hereby established in the Department of Public Utilities, a
Division of Administrative Services to be under the authority of, and
controlled by a Commissioner who shall be the Executive Commissioner of
Administration, subject to the Charter and ordinances of the City, and to the
supervision and direction of the Director of Public Utilities.
(Ord. No. 2180-73. Passed 12-26-73, eff. 12-26-73) (BOC Res. No. 726-73.
Adopted 12-19-73)
§ 129.15 Duties of the Executive Commissioner of Administration
   The Executive Commissioner of Administration shall control and supervise the
consolidated functions of the five (5) divisions of the Department of Public
Utilities, including consumer service, safety, health, personnel management and
training, legislation and employee and labor relations within the Department.
any change in duties as enunciated herein and in Section
129.14 shall be subject to approval of Council.
(Ord. No. 2180-73. Passed 12-17-73, eff. 12-26-73)
§ 129.151 Office of Telecommunications
   There is hereby established in the Office of the Director of Public
Utilities an Office of Telecommunications to be administered and controlled by
the Director of Public Utilities or his or her designee, subject to the
provisions of the Charter and Codified Ordinances of Cleveland, Ohio, 1976, and
to the supervision of the Director of Public Utilities. The Director of Public
Utilities, or his or her designee, shall oversee, monitor and regulate cable
television systems and fiber optic communications systems operating within the
City.
(Ord. No. 2225-93. Passed 11-8-93, eff. 11-10-93)
§ 129.153 Regulation of Tree Trimming
   The Chief of the Bureau of Urban Forestry shall promulgate and enforce rules
and regulations for the trimming of trees in the public rights-of-way in the
City of Cleveland. All persons or entities, including the City of Cleveland,
who own utility poles, wires, or street lighting facilities in the public
rights-of-way shall trim trees located in the right-of-way in their respective
service areas in accordance with such rules and regulations and in accordance
with such schedules as are approved by the Chief of the Bureau of Urban
Forestry. The Chief of the Bureau of Urban Forestry may, after notification to
the owner of failure to comply with the rules for the regulation of tree
trimming and a reasonable time to cure such deficiencies, perform any tree
trimming activities which, in the discretion of the Chief of the Bureau of
Urban Forestry, are necessary for the public health, safety and welfare. The
cost of such services shall be charged to the owner of the facilities.
(Ord. No. 1439-94. Passed 6-18-96, eff. 6-26-96)
§ 129.16 Contracts for Utilities Services
   Contracts for the service or products of public utilities, providing for
payment to the City of the established rates for such service or products may
be signed and executed in behalf of the City by any person designated for that
purpose by Director of Public Utilities, provided that contracts with other
municipal corporations or public authorities for the disposal of sewage by the
City and for the furnishing of water by the City to be distributed by or in
such other municipal corporation or public authority shall be executed by the
Mayor, after the substance of each such proposed contract has been communicated
to Council and published in the City Record.
(Ord. No. 63410-A. Passed 9-22-24)
§ 129.17 Contracts for Painting or Chlorinating Steel Reservoirs
   The Director of Public utilities is hereby authorized to enter into and sign
contracts for the furnishing to any municipality which has contracted for the
supplying of water by the City, either directly with such municipality or
through a contractor employed by such municipality for constructing steel
reservoirs or water mains, of services for preparation for painting, painting
and chlorinating surfaces of newly constructed steel reservoirs, which
contracts shall provide for payment to the City for labor and materials
furnished, plus fifteen percent (15%).
(Ord. No. 1148-65. Passed 5-17-65, eff. 5-20-65)
§ 129.18 Contracts for Disinfection of Water Mains – Repealed
(Ord. No. 778-06, § 3. Passed 6-5-06, eff. 6-9-06)
§ 129.19 Payment of Utilities Bills
   The Director of Public Utilities shall have authority to make provision for
the payment of utilities bills for products or services of the Department of
Public Utilities, through conveniently located branches of banks, savings and
loan associations and bonded check cashing agencies. Bonds proffered by check
cashing or money order agencies shall be subject to approval of the Director.
Such provision for the payment of bills shall provide that no charge shall be
made to the City for this service nor to any customer.
(Ord. No. 1501-74. Passed 11-18-74, eff. 11-25-74)
§ 129.20 Utility Easements Acceptance and Release
   The Director of Public Utilities shall have the authority to accept on
behalf of the City, a grant of easement from any person, firm, corporation or
political subdivision for the purpose of installing and for maintaining water
mains, sewer lines or any other type of utility appurtenances. The Director of
Public Utilities is further authorized to release on behalf of the City any
easement acquired pursuant to this section no longer needed for the purposes
for which it was acquired. All such easements and releases of easements must be
approved by the Director of Law and filed with the County Recorder.
(Ord. No. 408-91. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 6-26-91)
§ 129.21 Contracts for Billing and Collection of Sewer Charges and Other Fees
   The Director of Public Utilities is authorized to enter into contracts with
municipalities and other political subdivisions for the billing and collection
of sewer charges and other fees levied by the municipality or political
subdivision.
   All contracts authorized by this section shall provide for the equitable
distribution of the cost of maintaining the City's billing and collection
system among all of the municipalities and political subdivisions using the
City's billing and collection services.
   All contracts authorized by this section shall be prepared by the Director
of Law and shall contain such provisions as shall protect the interests of the
City, including but not limited to, appropriate hold harmless clauses.
(Ord. No. 984-15. Passed 9-21-15, eff. 9-23-15)
§ 129.22 Easement Acquisition
   The Director of Public Utilities is authorized to purchase easements,
permits, licenses and other interests in real property necessary for the
operation of the various divisions of the Department of Public Utilities,
provided that the cost of each such easement, permit, license or other interest
in real property does not exceed three thousand five hundred dollars
($3,500.00).
(Ord. No. 1548-84. Passed 10-8-84, eff. 10-15-84)
§ 129.23 Expenditures for Professional Memberships
   The Director of Public Utilities is authorized to expend funds for
membership and other related expenses for employee participation in
professional and trade organizations and associations deemed by the Director of
Public Utilities to be necessary to the operations of the various Divisions of
the Public Utilities Department, including but not limited to membership dues,
program registration fees, research, expenses related to participation in
professional meetings and events, and other related expenses.
(Ord. No. 127-92. Passed 3-16-92, eff. 3-24-92)
§ 129.231 Purchase of Food and Beverages for Department of Public Utilities
   (a)   The Director of Public Utilities is authorized to expend funds in
order to provide food and non-alcoholic beverages for the following:
      (1)   Engagement, informational, or learning programs and events for the
community sponsored by the Department of Public Utilities;
      (2)   Informational or learning programs and events for Department of
Public Utility employees;
      (3)   Emergency operations or other events requiring Department of Public
Utility employees to work overtime or provide coverage outside of the normal
working conditions to ensure uninterrupted utility services provided by the
divisions; and
      (4)   Department of Public Utility programs and events for employees and/
or non-employees in connection with and in furtherance of the department's
objectives.
   (b)   The total amount of funds expended under this section shall not exceed
fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) per year.
(Ord. No. 294-2023. Passed 5-15-23, eff. 5-16-23)
§ 129.24 Purchase of Water Treatment Chemicals
   The Director of Public Utilities is authorized to enter into one (1) or more
standard purchase or requirement contracts duly let to the lowest and best
bidder after competitive bidding for water treatment chemicals deemed by the
Director of Public Utilities to be necessary to the operations of the Division
of Water, including, but not limited to, alum polymer coagulant, high calcium
quicklime, aluminum sulfate, chlorine, sodium silicofluoride, hydroflurosilific
acid, and corrosion inhibitors. Any purchase made pursuant to this section
shall be made by the Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies and paid from the
annual appropriations made for such purpose.
(Ord. No. 1630-92. Passed 9-21-92, eff. 9-25-92)
§ 129.25 Purchase of Water System Maintenance Equipment
   The Director of Public Utilities is authorized to enter into one (1) or more
standard purchase or requirement contracts duly let to the lowest and best
bidder after competitive bidding for Water system maintenance equipment deemed
by the Director of Public Utilities to be necessary to the operations of the
Division of Water, including, but not limited to: meters and meter parts;
manhole covers, rings, and manholes; ductile iron pipe and fittings; copper
pipe and tubing; parts for pumps, engines and saws; service fittings and pipe
couplings; lining cement, mortar cement and sand; valves, valve boxes, and
appurtenances; bypass piping, fittings and valves; fire hydrants and fire
hydrant parts; pipe repair clamps; and stop cock boxes. Any purchase made
pursuant to this section shall be made by the Commissioner of Purchases and
Supplies and paid from the annual appropriations made for such purpose.
(Ord. No. 1630-92. Passed 9-21-92, eff. 9-25-92)
§ 129.26 Purchase of Poles, Wire, Transformers, and Other Equipment
   The Director of Public Utilities is authorized to enter into one (1) or more
standard purchase or requirement contracts duly let to the lowest and best
bidder after competitive bidding for utility poles and crossarms, cable and
wire, transformers, high voltage switching equipment, meters and metering
equipment, streetlighting materials, manholes, rings and covers, all as deemed
by the Director of Public Utilities to be necessary to the operations of the
Division of Cleveland Public Power. Any purchase made pursuant to this section
shall be made by the Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies and paid from the
annual appropriations made for such purpose.
(Ord. No. 1630-92. Passed 9-21-92, eff. 9-25-92)
§ 129.27 Purchase of Water Pollution Control System Maintenance Equipment
   The Director of Public Utilities is authorized to enter into one (1) or more
standard purchase or requirement contracts duly let to the lowest and best
bidder after competitive bidding for Water Pollution Control system maintenance
equipment deemed by the Director of Public Utilities to be necessary to the
operations of the Division of Water Pollution Control, including, but not
limited to, catch basins, spacers, manhole covers, vitrified clay pipe, and
equipment for sewer cleaning. Any purchase made pursuant to this section shall
be made by the Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies and paid from the annual
appropriations made for such purpose.
(Ord. No. 1630-92. Passed 9-21-92, eff. 9-25-92)
§ 129.28 Purchase of Laboratory Equipment, Testing and Analytical Services
   The Director of Public Utilities is authorized to enter into one (1) or more
standard purchase or requirement contracts duly let to the lowest and best
bidder after competitive bidding for the purchase of laboratory testing
equipment and related items and to enter into one (1) or more professional
services contracts for the purchase of laboratory testing and analytical
services, deemed by the Director of Public Utilities to be necessary to the
operations of the Division of Water for compliance with applicable regulatory
agency requirements, including, but not limited to, the United States and Ohio
Environmental Protection Agencies.
   Any purchase made by standard purchase or requirement contract pursuant to
this section shall be made by the Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies and
paid from the annual appropriations made for such purpose. The selection of a
professional consultant or consultants made pursuant to this section shall be
made by the Board of Control upon the nomination of said Director of Public
Utilities from a list of qualified consultants available for such employment as
may be determined after a full and complete canvass by the Director of Public
Utilities for the purpose of compiling such a list. The compensation to be paid
for such services shall be fixed by the Board of Control. Professional services
contracts herein authorized shall be prepared by the Director of Law, approved
by the Director of Public Utilities, certified by the Director of Finance, and
paid from the annual appropriations made for such purpose.
(Ord. No. 485-96. Passed 5-6-96, eff. 5-14-96)
§ 129.29 Purchase of Catch Basin Debris Disposal
   (a)   That the Director of Public Utilities is authorized to enter into
standard purchase or requirement contracts duly let to the lowest and best
bidders after competitive bidding, for the labor and materials necessary to
dispose of catch basin debris citywide, for terms of one (1) year as determined
by the Director of Public Utilities to be necessary to the operation of the
Division of Water Pollution Control. Any purchases made under this section
shall be made by the Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies and paid from the
annual appropriations made for this purpose.
   (b)   As to requirement contracts, alternate bids for a period less than the
specified term may be taken if desired by the Commissioner of Purchases and
Supplies until provision is made for the requirements for the entire term. The
Director of Public Utilities is authorized to enter into one (1) or more
contracts with a term of two (2) years instead of one (1) year when there is a
financial advantage to the City. For purposes of this section, a financial
advantage shall be determined by the Director of Public Utilities by comparing
the bids received for both terms.
(Ord. No. 996-03. Passed 7-16-03, eff. 7-23-03)
§ 129.291 Purchase of Repair and Construction of Catch Basins and Manholes
   (a)   That the Director of Public Utilities is authorized to enter into
public improvement by requirement contracts of constructing and repairing catch
basins and manholes duly let to the lowest responsible bidder, after
competitive bidding on a unit basis for the improvement for terms of one (1)
year. Bids shall be taken in a manner that permits an award to be made for all
items as a single contract, or by separate contract for each or any combination
of the items as the Board of Control determines. Any purchases made under this
section shall be made by the Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies and paid
from the annual appropriations made for this purpose.
   (b)   Alternate bids for a period less than the specified term may be taken
if desired by the Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies until provision is
made for the requirements for the entire term. The Director of Public Utilities
is authorized to enter into one (1) or more requirement contracts with a term
of two (2) years instead of one (1) year when there is a financial advantage to
the City. For purposes of this section, a financial advantage shall be
determined by the Director of Public Utilities by comparing the bids received
for both terms.
(Ord. No. 996-03. Passed 7-16-03, eff. 7-23-03)
§ 129.292 Purchase of Construction and Installation of Replacement Sewers and
Repair and Rehabilitation of Existing Sewers
   (a)   That the Director of Public Utilities is authorized to enter into
public improvement contract by requirement contracts for the public improvement
of constructing and installing replacement sewers and repairing and
rehabilitation of existing sewers duly let to the lowest responsible bidder,
after competitive bidding on a unit basis for the improvement for terms of one
(1) year. Bids shall be taken in a manner that permits an award to be made for
all items as a single contract, or by separate contract for each or any
combination of the items as the Board of Control determines. Any purchases made
under this section shall be made by the Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies
and paid from the annual appropriations made for this purpose.
   (b)   Alternate bids for a period less than the specified term may be taken
if desired by the Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies until provision is
made for the requirements for the entire term. The Director of Public Utilities
is authorized to enter into one (1) or more requirement contracts with a term
of two (2) years instead of one (1) year when there is a financial advantage to
the City. For purposes of this section, a financial advantage shall be
determined by the Director of Public Utilities by comparing the bids received
for both terms.
(Ord. No. 996-03. Passed 7-16-03, eff. 7-23-03)
§ 129.293 Purchase of Maintenance and Repair of Detention Basins, Detention
Facilities, and Structures
   (a)   That the Director of Public Utilities is authorized to enter into
public improvement contract by requirement contracts for the public improvement
of maintaining and repairing detention basins, detention facilities, and
structures duly let to the lowest responsible bidder, after competitive bidding
on a unit basis for the improvement for terms of one (1) year. Bids shall be
taken in a manner that permits an award to be made for all items as a single
contract, or by separate contract for each or any combination of the items as
the Board of Control determines. Any purchases made under this section shall be
made by the Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies and paid from the annual
appropriations made for this purpose.
   (b)   Alternate bids for a period less than the specified term may be taken
if desired by the Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies until provision is
made for the requirements for the entire term. The Director of Public Utilities
is authorized to enter into one (1) or more requirement contracts with a term
of two (2) years instead of one (1) year when there is a financial advantage to
the City. For purposes of this section, a financial advantage shall be
determined by the Director of Public Utilities by comparing the bids received
for both terms.
(Ord. No. 651-09. Passed 6-8-09, eff. 6-12-09)
§ 129.294 Professional Services for General Engineering, Architectural,
Environmental, Geotechnical Engineering, and Other Services
   (a)   That the Director of Public Utilities is authorized to employ by
contract one (1) or more consultants or one (1) or more firms of consultants to
provide professional services for general engineering, architectural,
environmental, geotechnical engineering services necessary for environmental,
safety, sustainability and regulatory compliance for the various divisions of
the Department of Public Utilities regarding its operations, new projects, work
continuity, preventive maintenance, facility management, and utility
administration in accordance with federal and state regulations. The services
may include, but are not limited to, engineering design and construction
services, construction inspection and testing, geotechnical investigation,
testing analysis, environmental assessment, surveying, water quality services,
and sewer investigations and other related work.
   (b)   The selection of the consultants or firms of consultants for the
services shall be made by the Board of Control on the nomination of the
Director of Public Utilities from a list of qualified consultants or firms of
consultants available for employment as may be determined after a full and
complete canvass by the Director of Public Utilities for the purpose of
compiling a list. The compensation to be fixed by the Board of Control. The
contract or contracts authorized shall be prepared by the Director of Law,
approved by the Director of Public Utilities, and certified by the Director of
Finance.
   (c)   The Director of Public Utilities shall notify all members of Council
if the award of a contract under this section exceeds $50,000.
   (d)   The term of any contracts authorized under this section shall not
exceed two (2) years, with two (2) one (1) year options to renew.
Notwithstanding this section, the first of the one (1) year options to renew
may not be exercised without additional legislative authority. If such
additional legislative authority is granted and the first of the one (1) year
options to renew is exercised, then the second of the one (1) year options to
renew may be exercisable at the option of the Director of Public Utilities,
without the necessity of obtaining additional authority of this Council.
   (e)   The costs for the contracts shall be paid from funds appropriated for
the Department of Public Utilities for this purpose.
(Ord. No. 189-14. Passed 4-7-14, eff. 4-8-14)
§ 129.295 Applying for and Accepting Grants and Loans for the Department of
Public Utilities
   (a)   The Director of Public Utilities is authorized to apply for and accept
grants as they become available from the United States of America and its
agencies, the State of Ohio and its agencies, other public or private entities,
and/or pass-through entities approved by the grantor, for utility projects for
the various divisions of the Department of Public Utilities.
   (b)   The Director of Public Utilities and/or the Director of Finance, if
appropriate, is authorized to apply for and accept loans as they become
available from the United States of America and its agencies, the State of Ohio
and its agencies, other public entities, and/or pass-through entities approved
by the lender, for utility projects for the various divisions of the Department
of Public Utilities. The Director of Public Utilities is further authorized to
repay the loan funds in accordance with the terms and conditions of an
agreement entered into under the authority of this section from funds
appropriated for the use of the appropriate division of the Department of
Public Utilities.
   (c)   The Director of Public Utilities and/or the Director of Finance, if
appropriate, is further authorized to file all papers, execute all documents,
and enter into agreements necessary to apply for, accept, and receive the grant
and other funding authorized under this section, provided that the City shall
follow all applicable federal or state regulations.
   (d)   That any funds received under this section are appropriated for the
purposes described in the grant or funding applications, or any amendments made
to the applications.
   (e)   If required under an agreement that is entered into under the
authority of this section, matching funds shall be paid from funds appropriated
for the use of the appropriate division of the Department of Public Utilities,
and when permitted by law and indentures, from any existing or future revenue
bond funds if authorized for that purpose.
   (f)   The Director of Public Utilities shall notify this Council, through
its Clerk, of any funds accepted under the authority of this section, on
receipt of each award.
(Ord. No. 1232-2023. Passed 11-13-23, eff. 11-14-23)
§ 129.296 Acceptance of Gifts or Awards
   (a)   The Director of Public Utilities is authorized to accept gifts,
sponsorships or awards of money, property, or services, with or without
limitations imposed by the donor or public or private entity, that may be
accepted or donated for the use and benefit of the Department of Public
Utilities and its customers directly or indirectly. The Director is authorized
to file all papers and execute all documents necessary to receive gifts,
sponsorships and/or awards of money, property or services; and that gifts,
sponsorships and/or awards of money are appropriated for these purposes.
   (b)   That the Director of Public Utilities shall notify this Council,
through its Clerk, and the Chair of the Utilities Committee of any funds
accepted under the authority of this section, upon receipt of each award.
(Ord. No. 812-2024. Passed 10-28-24, eff. 10-30-24)
   Note: Section 2 of Ord. No. 812-2024 provides that this section shall expire
and be of no further force and effect on December 31, 2029.
§ 129.30 Payment of Clothing Allowance
   On September 1, 1985, and on September 2, 1986, every full-time City
employee in the Department of Public Utilities who is in the classification of
Water Pipe Repairman, Water Meter Repairman, Water Hydraulic Repairman, Sewer
Serviceman, Water Pipe Repairman Foreman, Water Meter Repairman Foreman, and
Water Hydraulic repairman Foreman shall be entitled to payment of two hundred
twenty-five dollars ($225.00) per year for the purchase of safety shoes and
protective clothing for work in inclement weather.
(Ord. No. 2290-85. Passed 9-23-85, eff. 9-27-85)
§ 129.31 Payment of Clothing Allowance
   Every full-time City employee who is in the classification of Security
Officer shall be entitled to a uniform allowance payment of two hundred
seventy- five dollars ($275.00) during the employee’s first year of employment
and a payment of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) each year of employment
thereafter.
(Ord. No. 2325-85. Passed 9-16-85, eff. 9-23-85)
§ 129.32 Payment of Clothing Allowance
   Every full-time City employee in the Department of Public Utilities in the
classifications set forth below shall be entitled to reimbursement for purchase
of authorized items of clothing in an amount not to exceed two hundred fifteen
dollars ($215.00) per employee:
   Apprentice Cable Splicer;
   Apprentice Lineman;
   Cable Foreman;
   Cable Splicer;
   Cable Splicer I;
   Cable Splicer II;
   Cable Splicer Helper;
   Dispatcher Electric System Operator;
   Electric Meter Industrial Installer;
   Electric Meter Instrument Specialist and General Tester;
   Electric Meterman Apprentice;
   Electric Meter Service Foreman;
   Electric Meter Service Installer I;
   Electric Meter Service Installer II;
   Electric Motor & Transformer Repairman;
   Electric Switchboard Operator Foreman;
   Electric Transmission & Distribution Inspector;
   Foreman Low Tension;
   Gas Turbine Mechanic;
   Gas Turbine Mechanic Apprentice;
   Junior Electric Switchboard Operator;
   Line Clearance Man;
   Line Foreman;
   Line Helper Driver;
   Lineman;
   Lineman Leader;
   Line Switchman;
   Low Tension Lineman;
   Low Tension Lineman Apprentice;
   Safety Signal Trouble Lineman;
   Senior Electric Switchboard Operator;
   Senior Lineman;
   Signal System Powerman;
   Traffic Signal Control Technician;
   Traffic Signal Trouble Lineman;
   Transformer Repairman Foreman;
   Trouble Lineman;
   Underground Conduit Foreman.
(Ord. No. 3107-85. Passed 12-16-85, eff. 12-18-85)
§ 129.33 Contracts for Purchase of Electric Power and Energy
   Notwithstanding and as an exception to the Codified Ordinances of Cleveland,
Ohio, 1976, the Director of Public Utilities, or any person designated for this
purpose by the Director, is hereby authorized to enter into contracts for the
wholesale purchase and sale of electric power and energy, as needed, for the
Division of Cleveland Public Power.
(Ord. No. 906-2000. Passed 6-12-00, eff. 6-22-00)
§ 129.331 Contracts for the Provision of Retail Electric Aggregation Services
and Power Supply
   Notwithstanding and as an exception to the Codified Ordinances of Cleveland,
Ohio, 1976, the Director of Public Utilities is hereby authorized to enter into
contracts for the provision of retail electric aggregation services and power
supply, following express legislative approval by Cleveland City Council
authorizing such contract or contracts, in order to provide for the delivery of
retail electric power to the customers of The Cleveland Electric Illuminating
Company in the City pursuant to a City-wide aggregation program adopted
pursuant to RC 4928.20.
(Ord. No. 1390-2000. Passed 10-2-00, eff. 10-11-00)
§ 129.34 Contracts with State for Reimbursement for Betterments – Expired
(Ord. No. 1838-93. Passed 11-8-93, eff. 11-17-93)
   Note: As of 11-17-95, this section is no longer effective.
   The Director of Public Utilities is hereby authorized to enter into
contracts with the State of Ohio to reimburse the State for the cost of
betterments of Cleveland Public Power electric facilities constructed as part
of State roadway improvement projects, provided that the cost of all of the
betterments on a particular State roadway improvement project does not exceed
one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). This section shall be repealed and
be of no further force and effect two (2) years after the effective date of
this section.
§ 129.35 Office of Radio Communications System Management
   There is hereby established in the Office of the Director of Public
Utilities an Office of Radio Communications System Management to be
administered and controlled by the Director of Public Utilities or that
Director’s designee, subject to the provisions of the Charter and Codified
Ordinances of Cleveland, Ohio, 1976, and to the supervision of the Director of
Public Utilities. The Director of Public Utilities, or that Director’s
designee, shall oversee, monitor and regulate the City’s radio communications
system.
(Ord. No. 1227-95. Passed 6-18-96, eff. 6-26-96) (BOC Res. No. 601-96. Adopted
9-11-96)
§ 129.36 Permits
   The Director of Public Utilities is hereby authorized to issue permits to
parties wishing access to the City’s radio communications system as follows:
   (a)   Upon receipt of an application for a permit to listen to radio
channels approved by the Office of Radio Communications System Management for
listening by the general public, and payment of the fee fixed pursuant to
division (c) of this section, the Director of Public Utilities shall issue the
permit on a form promulgated by the Director for that purpose.
   (b)   All permits issued pursuant to this section shall be issued for a
period of one (1) year commencing November 1. Permits may be renewed if an
application for renewal on a form promulgated by the Director of Public
Utilities for that purpose is submitted to the Director of Public Utilities not
less than ninety (90) days before termination of the previous permit. If an
application for renewal is timely submitted to the City and the City does not
take action to approve or deny the renewal prior to the expiration of the
permit, the Director of Public Utilities shall extend the permit on a month-by-
month basis until the City has taken action as required by this chapter.
   (c)   Each application for a new or renewal permit shall be accompanied by a
fee, which shall be fixed by the Board of Control.
   (d)   The Director of Public Utilities may at any time revoke or suspend
permits granted under the authority of this chapter for failure to comply with
the terms of the permit.
(Ord. No. 1227-95. Passed 6-18-96, eff. 6-26-96)
§ 129.361 Agreements for the Use of the City’s 800 MHz Radio System
   (a)   The Director of Public Utilities is authorized to enter into
agreements, including but not limited to participant agreements, with other
entities, including private entities for the use of the City’s MHz Radio System
and to charge fees for its use.
   (b)   The fees for use of the City’s MHz Radio System shall be set by the
Board of Control. The Director of Public Utilities shall deposit the fees
collected under this section into the fund or funds designated to pay the costs
of system improvements and maintenance requirements. The fees collected may be
used for and are appropriated for this purposes.
   (c)   The agreements authorized by this section shall be prepared by the
Director of Law.
(Ord. No. 1325-2024. Passed 1-13-24, eff. 1-14-24)
§ 129.37 Uniforms and Equipment for Security Officers in the Department of
Public Utilities; Maintenance Allowance
   (a)   The Director of Public Utilities is authorized in the manner
prescribed by the Charter to enter into one (1) or more requirement contracts,
or such other contracts as may be necessary for the furnishing of the necessary
equipment, uniforms, and parts thereof for the Department of Public Utility
security officers during each year, chargeable to the appropriation annually
made for such purpose.
   (b)   The Director of Public Utilities is authorized to issue purchase
requisition to the Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies, against any
requirements or other contract, for uniforms for security officers located in
the Department of Public Utilities for which a collective bargaining agreement
establishes a uniform allowance, in the amount established in the applicable
agreements.
   (c)   In addition, the Director of Public Utilities is authorized to issue
purchase requisitions to the Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies, against
any requirements or other contract, for an annual uniform allowance for these
uniformed employees in supervisory positions not covered under a collective
bargaining agreement. The uniform allowance shall be in the same amount as the
amount established by the collective bargaining agreement determined by the
Director to be most closely related to the supervisory position.
   (d)   The Director of Public Utilities is authorized to cause payment for a
uniform maintenance allowance to security officers in the Department of Public
Utilities for which the applicable collective bargaining agreement establishes
a maintenance allowance, in the amount established in the agreements.
(Ord. No. 184-15. Passed 3-23-15, eff. 3-25-15)
CHAPTER 131 – DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
131.01   Establishment of the Department of Public Works
131.02   Duties of the Director of Public Works
131.021   Downtown Parking Lot Landscaping Encroachment Permits – Repealed
131.03   Office of Administration
131.04   Duties of the Manager of Administration
131.05   Office of Special Events and Marketing – Repealed
131.06   Duties of the Manager of Special Events and Marketing – Repealed
131.061   Agreements with Cuyahoga County for Annual Bridge Inspections –
Repealed
131.07   Special Event Permits – Repealed
131.08   Special Event Concession Agreement and Charges – Repealed
131.081   Rental Fees for City Hall Rotunda – Repealed
131.09   Exempted Special Events – Repealed
131.10   Purchase of Food and Beverages for the Public Who Are Attending
Activities or Events Sponsored by the Division of Recreation – Repealed
131.11   Purchase of Hot and Cold Beverages and Ice for Departmental Employees
Working to Alleviate an Emergency
131.12   Reserved
131.13   Division of Motor Vehicle Maintenance; Duties of Commissioner –
Repealed
131.14   Division of Waste Collection and Disposal – Repealed
131.15   Concession Agreements for Rental of the Public Auditorium Building –
Repealed
131.151   Division of Traffic Engineering – Repealed
131.152   Duties of Commissioner of Traffic Engineering – Repealed
131.16   Rules and Regulations of the Manager of Special Events and Marketing –
Repealed
131.17   Moneys From Operation of Public Auditorium Building and Cleveland
Browns Stadium – Repealed
131.18   Accounting for Cleveland Browns Stadium – Repealed
131.19   Withdrawal of Funds by the Director of Public Works – Repealed
131.20   Accrued Interest from Public Auditorium Building and Stadium Funds –
Repealed
131.21   Rental of Market Stalls – Repealed
131.22   Manager of West Side Market – Repealed
131.23   Property Adoption and Licensing
131.24   Deposits for Use of Property – Repealed
131.25 to 131.28   Reserved
131.29   Division of Recreation – Repealed
131.30   Duties of the Commissioner of Recreation – Repealed
131.31   Highland Park Golf Course and Banquet Room Rates – Repealed
131.32   Rental Fees for Camp George Forbes – Repealed
131.33   Rental of Halloran Skating Rink – Repealed
131.34   Rental Fees for Recreation Center Use – Repealed
131.35   Rental of Athletic Complexes; Fee – Repealed
131.36   Lease of the Hough Multi-Service Center – Repealed
131.37   Rental of League Park Baseball Field and League Park Visitors Center;
Fee – Repealed
131.38   Reserved
131.381   Purchase of City-related Merchandise, Souvenirs, Food, and Beverages
for Resale at City Parks, Recreational Facilities, and the West Side Market –
Repealed
131.39   Division of Park Maintenance and Properties – Repealed
131.40   Duties of the Commissioner of Park Maintenance and Properties –
Repealed
131.41   Greenhouse, Rockefeller Park and Cultural Gardens; Fees – Repealed
131.42   Cemetery Rates – Repealed
131.43 to 131.45   Reserved
131.46   Division of Streets
131.47   Duties of the Commissioner of Streets
131.48   Street Cleaning
131.49 to 131.51   Reserved
131.52   Division of Traffic Engineering
131.53   Duties of the Commissioner of Traffic Engineering
131.54 to 131.56   Reserved
131.57   Division of Waste Collection and Disposal
131.58   Duties of the Commissioner of Waste Collection and Disposal
131.59 to 131.61   Reserved
131.62   Division of Motor Vehicle Maintenance
131.63   Duties of the Commissioner of Motor Vehicle Maintenance
131.64   Shop Supplies and Equipment, Vehicle Maintenance Materials, Equipment,
Services, and Supplies
131.65   Fuel, Fuel Dispensing Equipment, and Storage Tank Removal
131.66   Software and Hardware, Including Upgrades, Technical Support, and
Maintenance, and Repair Agreements for the Fleet Management Information System
and the Automated Fuel Dispensing System
131.67   Labor and Materials for Capital Maintenance and Repair of City
Facilities
131.68 to 131.69   Reserved
131.70   Division of Property Management
131.71   Duties of the Commissioner of Property Management
131.72 to 131.74   Reserved
131.75   Division of Parking Facilities
131.76   Duties of Commissioner of Parking Facilities
131.77   Municipal Lakefront Lot: Special Event Rate
131.78   Parking Fees
131.79   Parking Fees for Community Development and Public Works Surface Lots
131.80 to 131.82   Reserved
131.83   Licensing Advertising Space on Public Recreational Property – Repealed
131.84   Acceptance of Gifts
131.85   Agreements for the Loan of Statues, Busts, or other Personal Property
for Public Display – Repealed
131.86   Tree Commission Grants and Contributions – Repealed
131.87   Reserved
131.88   Director to Hire Truck Owner Drivers
131.99   Penalty – Repealed
   Note: Unless otherwise noted at the end of a section, the department,
divisions and duties established in this chapter met with Board of Control
concurrence pursuant to BOC Res. No. 561-10, adopted 12-29-10.
Charter reference:
   Duty to keep streets in repair and free from nuisance, Charter §
173
Cross-reference:
   Director to examine and recommend plats,CO
307.04
Statutory reference:
   Collection and disposal of garbage, RC 715.43
   Contracts, RC 733.22, 735.05 et seq.
   General duties and records, RC 735.02
   Legislative authority to have care, supervision and control of streets, RC
723.01
   Power to establish and care for streets, RC 715.19
   Power to regulate building numbering, RC 715.26
   Powers of municipal corporations, RC 717.01
   Street Commissioner, RC 735.31 et seq.
§ 131.01 Establishment of the Department of Public Works
   There is established a Department of Public Works to be controlled and
administered by a Director of Public Works, subject to the provisions of the
Charter and ordinances of the City, and to the direction of the Mayor. The
Director may appoint and employ Assistant Directors, a secretary who may be in
the unclassified service, and such other officers and employees as maybe
necessary for the operation of his or her office and the several divisions and
activities comprising the Department, except officers and employees appointed
by commissioners of the several divisions in accordance with the provisions of
Charter Section
79.
(Ord. No. 1330-A-10. Passed 12-6-10, eff. 12-6-10)
§ 131.02 Duties of the Director of Public Works
   The Director of Public Works either directly or through the appropriate
divisions established in the Department of Public Works, shall have charge of
the planning, construction, improvement, repair and maintenance of streets,
boulevards, sidewalks, alleys, lanes and other public highways; of the
planning, construction, improvement, repair and maintenance and the operation
of bridges and viaducts; of drains, ditches, culverts; the cleaning and
sprinkling of streets, boulevards and public places; the collection and
disposal of waste; the preservation of tools, equipment and other property
belonging to the City and pertaining to the Department of Public Works; charge
and management of City Hall buildings; all City off-street parking facilities
not under the jurisdiction of another department; all other real estate
belonging to the City and not under the jurisdiction of another department; the
installation and maintenance of parking meters in parking meter zones
established by the Commissioner of Traffic Engineering; and the issuance of
parking infraction tickets and the impoundment of vehicles to the extent that
the Codified Ordinances specifically authorize employees of the Division of
Parking Facilities to perform said tasks.
   The Director of Public Works and his or her designees, which shall include
only supervisory or higher ranking officials in the Department of Public Works,
when commissioned by the Director of Public Safety as special police, may
enforce minor misdemeanor offenses related to solid waste collection and
disposal through the issuance of citations in accordance with Rule 4.1 of the
Rules of Criminal Procedure. He or she shall further perform all other duties
pertaining to the Department which may be required of him or her by ordinance
or by the Mayor.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 131.021 Downtown Parking Lot Landscaping Encroachment Permits – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1330-A-10. Passed 12-6-10, eff. 12-6-10)
§ 131.03 Office of Administration
   There is established in the Department of Public Works an Office of
Administration to be administered and controlled by a Manager of
Administration, subject to the provisions of the Charter and Codified
Ordinances of Cleveland, Ohio 1976 and the supervision of the Director of
Public Works.
(Ord. No. 1330-A-10. Passed 12-6-10, eff. 12-6-10)
§ 131.04 Duties of the Manager of Administration
   The Manager of Administration shall control and supervise all activities and
personnel of the Office of Administration; shall coordinate departmental
support for the various divisions of the Department of Public Works in the
areas of personnel, legislation, budgeting, purchasing, information technology
and in such additional areas as are determined to be necessary by the Director
of Public Works for the efficient operation of the Department; and shall
perform such other duties as may from time to time be required by ordinance or
by the Director of Public Works.
(Ord. No. 1330-A-10. Passed 12-6-10, eff. 12-6-10)
§ 131.05 Office of Special Events and Marketing – Repealed
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 131.06 Duties of the Manager of Special Events and Marketing – Repealed
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 131.061 Agreements with Cuyahoga County for Annual Bridge Inspections –
Repealed
(Ord. No. 1330-A-10. Passed 12-6-10, eff. 12-6-10)
§ 131.07 Special Event Permits – Repealed
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 131.08 Special Event Concession Agreement and Charges – Repealed
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 131.081 Rental Fees for City Hall Rotunda – Repealed
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 131.09 Exempted Special Events – Repealed
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 131.10 Purchase of Food and Beverages for the Public Who Are Attending
Activities or Events Sponsored by the Division of Recreation – Repealed
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 131.11 Purchase of Hot and Cold Beverages and Ice for Departmental Employees
Working to Alleviate an Emergency
   The Director of Public Works is authorized to purchase hot and cold
beverages and ice for employees of the various divisions of the Department of
Public Works who are working required continued service and prevented from
taking their normal meal and other breaks while alleviating an emergency
resulting from weather conditions, catastrophe, or other similar occurrence
affecting the safety of City residents or the traveling public. The total
amount of funding expended annually shall not exceed ten thousand dollars
($10,000).
(Ord. No. 1328-18. Passed 11-19-18, eff. 11-21-18)
§ 131.12 Reserved
§ 131.13 Division of Motor Vehicle Maintenance; Duties of Commissioner –
Repealed
(Ord. No. 1330-A-10. Passed 12-6-10, eff. 12-6-10)
§ 131.14 Division of Waste Collection and Disposal – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1330-A-10. Passed 12-6-10, eff. 12-6-10)
§ 131.15 Concession Agreements for Rental of the Public Auditorium Building –
Repealed
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 131.151 Division of Traffic Engineering – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1330-A-10. Passed 12-6-10, eff. 12-6-10)
§ 131.152 Duties of Commissioner of Traffic Engineering – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1330-A-10. Passed 12-6-10, eff. 12-6-10)
§ 131.16 Rules and Regulations of the Manager of Special Events and Marketing –
Repealed
(Ord. No. 1516-11. Passed 12-5-11, eff. 12-9-11)
§ 131.17 Moneys From Operation of Public Auditorium Building and Cleveland
Browns Stadium – Repealed
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 131.18 Accounting for Cleveland Browns Stadium – Repealed
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 131.19 Withdrawal of Funds by the Director of Public Works – Repealed
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 131.20 Accrued Interest from Public Auditorium Building and Stadium Funds –
Repealed
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 131.21 Rental of Market Stalls – Repealed
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 131.22 Manager of West Side Market – Repealed
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 131.23 Property Adoption and Licensing
   The Director may agree to allow, with the approval of the Board of Control,
any business or other entity to maintain, improve, and adopt real estate
belonging to the City and not in charge of another department; provided,
however, that such real estate is no greater in area than two hundred (200)
square feet and that the improvements are for solely for beautification of the
real estate. Any business or entity adopting property shall be entitled to have
such property designated in its name and the Director is authorized to evaluate
and present awards to the best maintained property. The Director shall
establish rules and regulations for property adoption. A copy of each proposed
Property Adoption Agreement is to be provided to the Clerk of Council at least
fourteen (14) days prior to approval by the Board of Control. Any such adoption
shall not be construed as the conveyance of any right, title or interest in
public property but merely as the grant of a privilege, revocable at will.
(Ord. No. 1330-A-10. Passed 12-6-10, eff. 12-6-10)
§ 131.24 Deposits for Use of Property – Repealed
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§§ 131.25 to 131.28 Reserved
§ 131.29 Division of Recreation – Repealed
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 131.30 Duties of the Commissioner of Recreation – Repealed
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 131.31 Highland Park Golf Course and Banquet Room Rates – Repealed
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 131.32 Rental Fees for Camp George Forbes – Repealed
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 131.33 Rental of Halloran Skating Rink – Repealed
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 131.34 Rental Fees for Recreation Center Use – Repealed
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 131.35 Rental of Athletic Complexes; Fee – Repealed
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 131.36 Lease of the Hough Multi-Service Center – Repealed
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 131.37 Rental of League Park Baseball Field and League Park Visitors Center;
Fee – Repealed
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 131.38 Reserved
§ 131.381 Purchase of City-related Merchandise, Souvenirs, Food, and Beverages
for Resale at City Parks, Recreational Facilities, and the West Side Market –
Repealed
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 131.39 Division of Park Maintenance and Properties – Repealed
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 131.40 Duties of the Commissioner of Park Maintenance and Properties –
Repealed
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 131.41 Greenhouse, Rockefeller Park and Cultural Gardens; Fees – Repealed
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 131.42 Cemetery Rates – Repealed
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§§ 131.43 to 131.45 Reserved
§ 131.46 Division of Streets
   There is established a Division of Streets in the Department of Public
Works, which shall be administered and controlled by a commissioner to be known
as the Commissioner of Streets, subject to the provisions of the Charter and
ordinances of the City, and to the direction of the Director of Public Works.
(Ord. No. 1330-A-10. Passed 12-6-10, eff. 12-6-10)
§ 131.47 Duties of the Commissioner of Streets
   The Commissioner of Streets shall supervise the work of other officers and
employees in the Division of Streets; see that the streets and boulevards
belonging to the City are kept clean and passable; repair and maintain all
pavements and roadways in the streets and boulevards belonging to the City;
clean gutters; preserve and care for all equipment, apparatus, supplies and
other property of the City used in the operation of the Division; keep such
records pertaining to the work of the Division as may be specifically required
by ordinance or rule, or as may be necessary or useful in the efficient
management of the Division.
(Ord. No. 1330-A-10. Passed 12-6-10, eff. 12-6-10)
§ 131.48 Street Cleaning
   The Director of Public Works shall initiate a program to provide for the
cleaning of streets in the City once each thirty (30) days between March 1 and
October 31 of each year. In cooperation with the Director of Public Safety, the
Director of Public Works, notwithstanding any other provision in these Codified
Ordinances, shall cause to be erected temporary signs notifying the operators
of vehicles twelve (12) hours in advance that parking on the streets upon which
the same are erected shall be prohibited during the necessary time required for
the cleaning of such streets.
(Ord. No. 1330-A-10. Passed 12-6-10, eff. 12-6-10)
§§ 131.49 to 131.51 Reserved
§ 131.52 Division of Traffic Engineering
   There is established in the Department of Public Works, a Division of
Traffic Engineering to be administered and controlled by a Commissioner of
Traffic Engineering, subject to the provisions of the Charter and ordinances of
the City, and to the supervision and direction of the Director of Public Works.
(Ord. No. 1330-A-10. Passed 12-6-10, eff. 12-6-10)
§ 131.53 Duties of the Commissioner of Traffic Engineering
   The Commissioner of Traffic Engineering shall administer and supervise the
affairs of the Division of Traffic Engineering and prepare drawings, standards
and specifications; determine parking restrictions; set up time-space
progressive movement signal charts; lay out parking restriction zones
including, but not limited to, establishing parking meter zones on streets or
parts thereof where parking meters shall be installed; lay out roadway
markings; check plans for street changes, permits and all matters bearing on
traffic safety; receive complaints and suggestions; make personal observations
of traffic confusion and hazards; make factual studies from spot maps,
collision and condition diagrams; make vehicle studies, speed studies,
pedestrian studies, obedience checks, special observations, and parking
studies; prepare and disseminate accident statistics; watch accident records,
spot maps and high accident area lists; cooperate with safety organizations;
submit detailed recommendations; prepare detailed plans and specifications;
prepare publicly for proposed changes; follow through to see that
recommendations are carried out; and make rechecks after changes have been
made. The Commissioner of Traffic Engineering shall perform such other and
further duties as Council or the Mayor from time to time require of him or her.
(Ord. No. 1330-A-10. Passed 12-6-10, eff. 12-6-10)
§§ 131.54 to 131.56 Reserved
§ 131.57 Division of Waste Collection and Disposal
   There is established in the Department of Public Works, a Division of Waste
Collection and Disposal which shall be administered and controlled by a
Commissioner of Waste Collection and Disposal subject to the provisions of the
Charter and ordinances of the City, and to the direction of the Director of
Public Works.
(Ord. No. 1330-A-10. Passed 12-6-10, eff. 12-6-10)
§ 131.58 Duties of the Commissioner of Waste Collection and Disposal
   The Commissioner of Waste Collection and Disposal shall supervise the work
of other officers and employees in the Division of Waste Collection and
Disposal; collect and dispose of waste and refuse as defined in Section
551.01 of the Codified Ordinances; provide for the collection of street and
public waste from public receptacles; keep such records pertaining to the
Division as may be necessary or useful in the efficient management of the
Division.
(Ord. No. 1330-A-10. Passed 12-6-10, eff. 12-6-10)
§§ 131.59 to 131.61 Reserved
§ 131.62 Division of Motor Vehicle Maintenance
   There is established in the Department of Public Works, a Division of Motor
Vehicle Maintenance, to be administered and controlled by a Commissioner of
Motor Vehicle Maintenance, subject to the Charter and ordinances of the City,
and to the supervision and direction of the Director of Public Works.
(Ord. No. 1330-A-10. Passed 12-6-10, eff. 12-6-10)
§ 131.63 Duties of the Commissioner of Motor Vehicle Maintenance
   The Commissioner shall control and supervise the procurement, custody,
maintenance, repair and assignment for use of all motorized equipment of the
Department, and render similar service to all other departments of the City
government upon order of the Mayor or the written request of the director of
such department. He or she shall keep all motorized equipment of the Department
and of such other departments as ordered or requested under his or her custody
and shall make such equipment available to the proper City employee under such
rules and regulations as shall be established by the Board of Control, except
that all motorized equipment of the Department of Public Utilities shall be
subject to such rules and regulations as may be established by the Director of
Public Utilities with the approval of the Mayor. He or she shall perform such
further duties as may from time to time be required of him or her by ordinance
or by the Director of Public Works.
(Ord. No. 1330-A-10. Passed 12-6-10, eff. 12-6-10)
§ 131.64 Shop Supplies and Equipment, Vehicle Maintenance Materials, Equipment,
Services, and Supplies
   (a)   The Director of Public Works is authorized to enter into one (1) or
more standard purchase or requirement contracts duly let to the lowest and best
bidder after competitive bidding for vehicle maintenance materials, equipment,
services, and supplies that the Director of Public Works considers necessary to
the operation of the Division of Motor Vehicle Maintenance, including but not
limited to: shop supplies and shop equipment, vehicle parts and equipment,
lubricants, fluids, tires, tubes, tire recapping, vehicle and equipment
batteries, remanufactured power trains or sections, generators, generator
parts, and labor, materials, and installation, if necessary, to repair or
maintain existing equipment. Any purchase made under this section shall be made
by the Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies and paid from the annual
appropriations made for this purpose.
   (b)   That under Section
108(b) of the Charter, the purchases authorized by this ordinance may be made
through cooperative arrangements with other governmental agencies. The Director
of Public Works may sign all documents that are necessary to make the
purchases, and may enter into one (1) or more contracts with the vendors
selected through that cooperative process.
(Ord. No. 1330-A-10. Passed 12-6-10, eff. 12-6-10)
§ 131.65 Fuel, Fuel Dispensing Equipment, and Storage Tank Removal
   (a)   The Director of Public Works, or other appropriate director, is
authorized to enter into one (1) or more standard purchase or requirement
contracts duly let to the lowest and best bidder after competitive bidding for
fuel and fuel dispensing and storage equipment, including but not limited to:
fuel, fuel dispensing equipment, fuel dispensing pumps and systems necessary
for fuel operations, fuel tankers, hydraulic lifts, oil and grease dispensing
equipment, stationary air compressors, and for emergency cleanup and
replacement of leaking underground and above-ground storage tanks and systems,
and labor, materials, and installation, if necessary, to repair or maintain
existing equipment for the various Departments of the City. Any purchase made
under this section shall be made by the Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies
and paid from the annual appropriations made for this purpose. The Commissioner
of Purchases and Supplies shall combine the requirements for each item into a
single contract or contracts, as determined by the Commissioner of Purchases
and Supplies to be practicable, in order to maximize the City's buying power
through aggregation of citywide demand. Under Section
181.20, the Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies may require such technical
assistance from the Directors necessary to prepare the combined specifications.
   (b)   That under Section
108(b) of the Charter, the purchases authorized by this ordinance may be made
through cooperative arrangements with other governmental agencies. The Director
of Public Works, or other appropriate director, may sign all documents that are
necessary to make the purchases, and may enter into one (1) or more contracts
with the vendors selected through that cooperative process.
(Ord. No. 1083-12. Passed 10-15-12, eff. 10-17-12)
§ 131.66 Software and Hardware, Including Upgrades, Technical Support, and
Maintenance, and Repair Agreements for the Fleet Management Information System
and the Automated Fuel Dispensing System
   (a)   The Director of Public Works is authorized to enter into one (1) or
more standard purchase or requirement contracts duly let to the lowest and best
bidder after competitive bidding for software, hardware, upgrades, technical
support, maintenance, and repair for the Fleet Management Information System
and the Automated Fuel Dispensing System that the Director of Public Works
considers necessary to the operation of the Division of Motor Vehicle
Maintenance.
   (b)   The Director of Public Works is authorized to acquire by contract or
contracts with one (1) or more software developers or vendors or one (1) or
more firms of software developers or vendors, the software licenses, upgrades,
technical support, and maintenance necessary for the Fleet Management
Information System and the Automated Fuel Dispensing System.
   The selection of the computer software developers or vendors shall be made
by the Board of Control on the nomination of the Director of Public Works from
a list of qualified persons or firms available for employment as may be
determined after a full and complete canvass by the Director of Public Works
for the purpose of compiling a list. The compensation to be paid for the
licenses shall be fixed by the Board of Control. Each contract shall be
prepared by the Director of Law, certified by the Director of Finance, approved
by the Director of Public Works.
   (c)   The Director of Public Works is authorized to execute, in connection
with a purchase of computer hardware under this section, one (1) or more
license agreements for software required for use of that hardware, directly
with a firm or firms other than the hardware vendor.
   (d)   Any purchase made under this section shall be made by the Commissioner
of Purchases and Supplies and paid from the annual appropriations made for this
purpose.
   (e)   That under Section
108(b) of the Charter, the purchases authorized by this ordinance may be made
through cooperative arrangements with other governmental agencies. The Director
of Public Works may sign all documents that are necessary to make the
purchases, and may enter into one (1) or more contracts with the vendors
selected through that cooperative process.
(Ord. No. 1330-A-10. Passed 12-6-10, eff. 12-6-10)
§ 131.67 Labor and Materials for Capital Maintenance and Repair of City
Facilities
   (a)   The Director of Public Works is authorized to enter into one (1) or
more standard purchase or requirement contracts duly let to the lowest and best
bidder after competitive bidding for materials, equipment, services, and
supplies necessary for capital maintenance and repair of City facilities, and
labor and installation, if necessary. Any purchase made under this section
shall be made by the Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies and paid from the
annual appropriations made for this purchase.
   (b)   That under Section
108(b) of the Charter, the purchases authorized by this ordinance may be made
through cooperative arrangements with other governmental agencies. The Director
of Public Works may sign all documents that are necessary to make the
purchases, and may enter into one (1) or more contracts with the vendors
selected through that cooperative process.
(Ord. No. 855-14. Passed 9-22-14, eff. 9-25-14)
§§ 131.68 to 131.69 Reserved
§ 131.70 Division of Property Management
   There is established in the Department of Public Works, a Division of
Property Management to be administered and controlled by a Commissioner of
Property Management, subject to the provisions of the Charter and the Codified
Ordinances of Cleveland, Ohio, 1976, and to the supervision of the Director of
Public Works.
(Ord. No. 1330-A-10. Passed 12-6-10, eff. 12-6-10)
§ 131.71 Duties of the Commissioner of Property Management
   The Commissioner of Property Management shall be responsible for the
listing, maintenance and utility servicing of all city-owned or leased real
property and buildings, including without limitation:
   (a)   Construction services, including general maintenance, warehouse and
inventory, contracted services, heating, ventilation, air conditioning and
mechanical work;
   (b)   Building services, including custodial, space utilization, energy,
environmental affairs, security and control, City Hall building, and multi-use
facilities; and
   (c)   Charge and management of the City’s East Side Market, including
responsibility for maintenance of the Market.
(Ord. No. 1330-A-10. Passed 12-6-10, eff. 12-6-10)
§§ 131.72 to 131.74 Reserved
§ 131.75 Division of Parking Facilities
   There is established in the Department of Public Works, a Division of
Parking Facilities to be administered and controlled by a Commissioner of
Parking Facilities, subject to the provisions of the Charter and the Codified
Ordinances of Cleveland, Ohio, 1976, and to the supervision and direction of
the Director of Public Works.
(Ord. No. 1330-A-10. Passed 12-6-10, eff. 12-6-10)
§ 131.76 Duties of Commissioner of Parking Facilities
   The Commissioner of Parking Facilities shall be responsible for the
construction, maintenance and operation of all City off-street parking
facilities, including the Willard Park Garage, Burke Lakefront Airport parking
facilities and all other such facilities not in charge of another department.
He or she shall cause to be collected such charges and fees as may be
established by the Board of Control and perform such other duties as Council or
the Mayor may from time to time require of him or her.
(Ord. No. 1330-A-10. Passed 12-6-10, eff. 12-6-10)
§ 131.77 Municipal Lakefront Lot: Special Event Rate
   In the event that a special event is held within the Central Business
District, as that term is defined in Section
325.12 of these Codified Ordinances, and the sponsors of said event have made
arrangements with the Regional Transit Authority (“RTA”) or its successors
wherein RTA will provide transit service free of charge from the Municipal
Lakefront Lot to the vicinity of said event, the Commissioner of Parking
Facilities is authorized to charge one dollar ($1.00) per day at the Municipal
Lakefront Lot throughout the duration of said event.
(Ord. No. 1330-A-10. Passed 12-6-10, eff. 12-6-10)
§ 131.78 Parking Fees
   (a)   The Commissioner of Parking Facilities shall cause to be collected
fees and charges, which include tax and exclude charges assessed by a New
Community Authority, at the following parking facilities under the following
schedule:
    Willard Park Garage:
    A. First hour or portion thereof                              Up to $5.00
    B. Each additional half hour or portion                       Up to $2.00
    C. Daily maximum rate from 5:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.            Up to $20.00
    D. Additional overnight charge from 11:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m.   Up to $20.00
    E. General monthly rate                                       Up to $175.00
    F. 1. Special monthly rate for City employees                 $55.00
    2. Special monthly rate for federal, state and county         Up to $200.00
(1) employees
    G. Special events (flat rate)                                 Up to $60.00
    H. Charge for lost or stolen key card                         $50.00
    I. Late payment charge                                        $5.00
    J. Early Bird Rate (time to be determined by the Director of  Up to $15.00
    Public Works)
    K. Special Event flat rate in conjunction with City Hall
    Rotunda rental                                                Up to $600.00
    (for weekend wedding events only)
    Canal Basin Lot:
(2) A. Daily rate from 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. (flat rate)         Up to $10.00
    B. Special events, weekdays between 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.,  Up to $50.00
    weekends and holidays (flat rate – pay enter)
    North Coast Municipal Parking Lot:
    A. Daily rate (flat rate) (cars, SUVs, small trucks)          Up to $10.00
    B. Daily rate (flat rate) (RVs, buses, oversize trucks,       Up to $50.00
    trailers)
    C. City of Cleveland employees                                no charge
(3) D. General monthly rate – non-City of Cleveland employees   Up to $100.00
    E. Special events (flat rate)                                 Up to $50.00
    F. Charge for lost or stolen key card                         $50.00
    G. Late payment fee                                           $5.00
    H. Overnight Rate (RVs, buses, oversize trucks, trailers)     $80.00
    I. Overnight Rate (cars, SUVs, small trucks)                  $30.00
    If the West Side Market is leased or managed by a third-party
    operator, then that operator shall assess and collect fees
    for the West Side Market Parking Lot, including the Hicks
    Lot. If the West Side Market is operated exclusively by the
    City of Cleveland, then the following rates for the West Side
    Market Parking Lot, including the Hicks Lot, shall apply:
(4) A. First sixty (60) minutes or portion thereof between 6:00   Free
    a.m. to 6:00 p.m
    B. Each additional hour or portion thereof                    Up to $3.00
    C. Daily maximum rate. Day concludes at 3:00 a.m.             Up to $20.00
    D. General monthly rate                                       Up to $150.00
    E. Charge for lost or stolen key card                         $50.00
    F. Late payment fee                                           $5.00
 
   (b)   Wherever the schedule contained in division (a) of this section
specifies a maximum fee, the fee to be charged shall be fixed by the
Commissioner of Parking Facilities with the consent of the Director of Public
Works up to the maximum specified.
   (c)   Monthly rate customer parking privileges at Willard Park Garage, Canal
Basin Lot, and North Coast Municipal Parking Lot do not include entry to these
garages and lots for special events held on weekends, holidays or after 5:00
p.m. on weekdays.
   (d)   Fees and charges collected from the Willard Park Garage, Canal Basin
Lot, West Side Market Parking Lot, and North Coast Municipal Parking Lot shall
be credited to the Division of Parking Facilities Enterprise Fund for general
operations, except for any charges assessed by a New Community Authority.
   (e)   If the West Side Market is leased or managed by a third-party
operator, then this division shall not apply: After expenses are paid for both
the West Side Market Parking Lot and the Hicks Lot, net fees collected from the
Hicks Lot shall be credited to the Division of Parking Facilities Enterprise
Fund for capital expenses at the West Side Market Parking Lot, market house and
arcade.
   (f)   The Commissioner of Parking Facilities shall fix and collect the fees
and charges as the Commissioner shall determine at parking facilities not
identified in division (a) of this section but under the Commissioner’s control
until the Council and the Board of Control fix fee schedules for the parking
facilities.
   (g)   Notwithstanding any provision in this section to the contrary, the
Commissioner of Parking Facilities shall:
      (1)   Designate ten (10) parking spaces in Willard Garage located as
close as practical to the entrance to City Hall to be assigned by the Director
of Public Works to City employees with the greatest number of years seniority
as a City employee; and
      (2)   Designate a sufficient number of parking spaces located either in
the North Mall Lot or in Willard Garage for City employees who are employed to
clean City Hall and who begin work at 3:00 p.m. or later and work later than
the closing of Willard Garage.
   (h)   In addition to the schedule contained in division (a) of this section,
the Commissioner of Parking Facilities may enter into agreements with the
sponsors of events that wish to reserve specific parking spaces in the Willard
Park Garage, or the North Coast Municipal Parking Lot that provide for the
payment by the sponsor of up to sixty dollars ($60.00) per parking space.
   (i)   Notwithstanding any provision in this chapter to the contrary and to
the extent a New Community Authority operating within the City includes the
territory of a New Community District any parking facilities, the Commissioner
of Parking Facilities may collect and remit to said New Community Authority all
charges assessed by the New Community Authority under its authority granted by
RC Chapter 349 and any agreements between the City and the New Community
Authority. These Community Authority charges are in addition to and separate
from any fees assessed by the City under this section.
(Ord. No. 1061-2024. Passed 3-3-25, eff. 3-4-25)
§ 131.79 Parking Fees for Community Development and Public Works Surface Lots
   The Commissioner of Parking Facilities shall collect fees and charges at
surface parking lots under the control of the Department of Community
Development and Public Works under the following schedule:
 
Daily rate (flat rate-pay enter)   Up to $20.00
Special rate (flat rate-pay enter) Up to $60.00
Monthly rate (flat rate-pay enter) Up to $200.00 per month
 
(Ord. No. 817-2023. Passed 9-18-23, eff. 9-21-23)
§§ 131.80 to 131.82 Reserved
§ 131.83 Licensing Advertising Space on Public Recreational Property – Repealed
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 131.84 Acceptance of Gifts
   (a)   The Director of Public Works is authorized to accept gifts of money,
material, or services, for the various divisions of the department
unconditionally given or limited by conditions as the donor may impose. The
Director shall report the acceptance of each gift to the Clerk of the City
Council.
   (b)   All moneys accepted under this section shall be placed to the credit
of the Department of Public Works in a special revenue fund. The moneys
deposited in the special revenue fund shall be expended for the benefit of the
Department of Public Works, or in the manner and for the specific purpose named
in the gift. If the donor has imposed limitations to their gift, then separate
subfunds may be created in the special revenue fund to deposit the gifts.
   (c)   Expenditures from the fund or subfunds created by this section shall
be made on vouchers signed by the Director of Public Works, or the director's
designee, when the amount is less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00);
otherwise such expenditure shall first be authorized by ordinance of Council in
the manner provided in Charter Section
108.
   (d)   No part of any funds credited to the accounts shall be paid to or for
the benefit of any officer or employee, either as additional compensation or as
reimbursement for expenses incurred, or paid for purposes other than those
directly benefiting the Department of Public Works. The funds received under
this section shall be expended in the same manner as other public funds, unless
specifically provided for in the terms of the gift, or authorized by resolution
or ordinance of Council.
(Ord. No. 648-16. Passed 10-3-16, eff. 10-5-16)
§ 131.85 Agreements for the Loan of Statues, Busts, or other Personal Property
for Public Display – Repealed
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 131.86 Tree Commission Grants and Contributions – Repealed
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 131.87 Reserved
§ 131.88 Director to Hire Truck Owner Drivers
   It is determined that it is not feasible to procure the proper type of truck
and driver by the ordinary processes of competitive bidding because of the
qualifications of the drivers and the variance in types of trucks available,
and it is in the public interest to secure owner drivers because of the
advantage to the City from such operation. Therefore, the Director of Public
Works is authorized to employ owner drivers with trucks as he or she deems
necessary, at not to exceed the following rates for the services of the owner
driver and the truck:
 
Truck Capacity                Rate per hour
Two tons or less              $20.00
Two and one-half tons or more $23.00
 
(Ord. No. 1330-A-10. Passed 12-6-10, eff. 12-6-10)
§ 131.99 Penalty – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1330-A-10. Passed 12-6-10, eff. 12-6-10)
CHAPTER 133 – DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION
133.01   Establishment of the Department of Parks and Recreation
133.02   Duties of the Director of Parks and Recreation
133.03   Office of Administration
133.04   Duties of the Manager of Administration
133.05   Office of Special Events and Marketing
133.06   Duties of the Manager of Special Events and Marketing
133.07   Special Event Permits
133.08   Special Event Concession Agreement and Charges
133.081   Rental Fees for City Hall Rotunda
133.09   Exempted Special Events
133.10   Purchase of Food and Beverages for the Public Who Are Attending
Activities or Events Sponsored by the Division of Recreation
133.11   Division of Urban Forestry
133.12   Duties of the Commissioner of Urban Forestry
133.13   Reserved
133.14   Division of Public Auditorium
133.141   Duties of the Commissioner of Public Auditorium
133.15   Concession Agreements for Rental of the Public Auditorium Building
133.16   Reserved
133.17   Moneys from Operation of Public Auditorium Building and Cleveland
Browns Stadium
133.18   Accounting for Cleveland Browns Stadium
133.19   Withdrawal of Funds by the Director of Parks and Recreation
133.20   Accrued Interest from Public Auditorium Building and Stadium Funds
133.21   Rental of Market Stalls
133.22   Manager of West Side Market
133.23   Property Adoption and Licensing
133.24   Deposits for Use of Property
133.25 to 133.28   Reserved
133.29   Division of Recreation
133.30   Duties of the Commissioner of Recreation
133.31   Highland Park Golf Course and Banquet Room Rates
133.32   Rental Fees for Camp George Forbes
133.33   Rental of Halloran Skating Rink
133.34   Rental Fees for Recreation Center Use
133.35   Rental of Athletic Complexes; Fee
133.36   Reserved
133.37   Rental of League Park Baseball Field and League Park Visitors Center;
Fee
133.38   Purchase of City-Related Merchandise, Souvenirs, Food, and Beverages
for Resale at City Parks, Recreational Facilities, and the West Side Market
133.39   Division of Park Maintenance
133.40   Duties of the Commissioner of Park Maintenance
133.41   Greenhouse, Rockefeller Park and Cultural Gardens; Fees
133.42   Cemetery Rates
133.43   Licensing Advertising Space on Public Recreational Property
133.44   Acceptance of Gifts
133.45   Agreements for the Loan of Statues, Busts, or other Personal Property
for Public Display
133.46   Tree Commission Grants and Contributions
   Note: Former Chapter 133, Department of Parks, Recreation and Properties,
was repealed by Ord. No. 1330-A-10. Passed 12-6-10, eff. 12-6-10.
Cross-reference:
   City Hall office space allotments, CO
111.01
Statutory reference:
   Assessments for tree planting or maintenance, RC 727.011
   Bonds for recreational facilities, RC 755.17
   Cemeteries, RC Ch. 759
   Land appropriation for parks, RC 715.21, 719.01
   Parks; Recreation, RC Ch. 755
   Playgrounds, RC 755.12 et seq.
   Power to construct recreation centers, RC 717.01
   Power to regulate shade trees and shrubbery, RC 715.20
   Power to regulate vehicle speed in parks, RC 4511.07
   Power to regulate weights and measures, RC 715.45
   Weights and measures, RC Ch. 1327
§ 133.01 Establishment of the Department of Parks and Recreation
   There is established a Department of Parks and Recreation to be controlled
and administered by a Director of Parks and Recreation, subject to the
provisions of the Charter and ordinances of the City, and to the direction of
the Mayor. The Director may appoint and employ Assistant Directors, a secretary
who may be in the unclassified service, and such other officers and employees
as maybe necessary for the operation of his or her office and the several
divisions and activities comprising the Department, except officers and
employees appointed by commissioners of the several divisions in accordance
with the provisions of Charter Section
79.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 133.02 Duties of the Director of Parks and Recreation
   The Director of Parks and Recreation either directly or through the
appropriate divisions established in the Department of Parks and Recreation,
shall manage and supervise all public improvements, works and undertakings of
the City except as otherwise provided by the Charter and ordinances of the
City. He or she shall have charge of the preservation of tools, equipment and
other property belonging to the City and pertaining to the Department of Parks
and Recreation; charge and management of the Public Hall, the Music Hall, the
Little Theater, the main arena, Mall Units 1 and 2 (Malls B and C), and all
meeting rooms which shall comprise and be known as “The Public Auditorium
Building”, and Cleveland Browns Stadium; all City parks, recreation facilities
and markets. He or she shall further perform all other duties pertaining to the
Department which may be required of him or her by ordinance or by the Mayor.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 133.03 Office of Administration
   There is established in the Department of Parks and Recreation an Office of
Administration to be administered and controlled by a Manager of
Administration, subject to the provisions of the Charter and Codified
Ordinances of Cleveland, Ohio 1976 and the supervision of the Director of Parks
and Recreation.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 133.04 Duties of the Manager of Administration
   The Manager of Administration shall control and supervise all activities and
personnel of the Office of Administration; shall coordinate departmental
support for the various divisions of the Department of Parks and Recreation in
the areas of personnel, legislation, budgeting, purchasing, information
technology and in such additional areas as are determined to be necessary by
the Director of Parks and Recreation for the efficient operation of the
Department; and shall perform such other duties as may from time to time be
required by ordinance or by the Director of Parks and Recreation.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 133.05 Office of Special Events and Marketing
   There is established in the Department of Parks and Recreation an Office of
Special Events and Marketing to be administered and controlled by a Manager of
Special Events and Marketing, subject to the provisions of the Charter and the
Codified Ordinances of Cleveland, Ohio, 1976, and to the supervision of the
Director of Parks and Recreation.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 133.06 Duties of the Manager of Special Events and Marketing
   The Manager of Special Events and Marketing shall:
   (a)   Make recommendations to the Director regarding the issuance and
conditions of issuance for all permits governing special events occurring
within the corporate boundaries of the City;
   (b)   Prior to and during every special event, coordinate the permitting
process of all City departments providing services to the special event;
   (c)   Provide technical assistance and information to special event
applicants;
   (d)   Recommend to the Director appropriate risk management measures to
protect the City during each special event;
   (e)   Administer all special event concession agreements and all special
event permits under this chapter excepting only those concession agreements
which apply to property under the control of the Directors of Port Control and
Public Utilities;
   (f)   Have the authority to determine and require events promoters to
provide essential services, including but not limited to, adequate on-site
safety and traffic control, fire protection, first- aid services, sanitation
and cleanup, except that the hiring of police officers or private security
personnel shall not be required for any block party or any small neighborhood-
based community event when the anticipated attendees will not exceed one
hundred (100) persons; and
   (g)   Preside over such special events steering committees of City personnel
from more than one (1) City department as may be appointed by the directors of
the affected City departments and record all actions taken by the committees.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 133.07 Special Event Permits
   For purposes of this chapter, “special event” means a preplanned event or
series of events of less than a week’s duration, including block parties or any
small neighborhood-based community events, sponsored by a public or private
person or entity, which is: (1) located wholly or partially on property which
is owned or maintained by the City of Cleveland; or (2) located on any other
property and requires for its successful execution, the provision and
coordination of municipal services to a degree significantly over and above
that which the City of Cleveland routinely provides under ordinary everyday
circumstances.
   City buildings, parks and all other real estate under control of the
Director which have been constructed or maintained for the benefit of the
public shall be for the use of the public in general under the Charter and
ordinances of the City of Cleveland. To that end, no person or entity shall be
given any special or exclusive privilege to use any public property under the
control of the Director without first obtaining a permit under this section.
Additionally, the Director shall ensure that proper coordination occurs among
necessary City departments to facilitate the use of City streets for special
event activities including parades, marathons, foot races/bike-a-thons, and all
other events requiring closure of a right-of-way.
   All closures of City streets in conjunction with a special event shall be
approved by the Police Traffic Commissioner, Commissioner of Streets, and
Manager of Special Events and Marketing.
   (a)   The Director may establish rules and regulations for the use of public
property under his or her control. Such rules and regulations shall become
effective ten (10) days after publication in the City Record and shall be
enforced as ordinances of the City. The Director of Parks and Recreation shall
have the authority to make, amend, alter or rescind rules and regulations
governing use of the facilities of the Public Auditorium Building and Cleveland
Browns Stadium not in conflict with the ordinances or laws regulating such
conduct. The Director may require in any rental agreement that the event be
required to pay for or provide security personnel within and without the rental
premises. The Director or designee shall not require any permit applicant to
hire police officers or private security personnel for any block party or any
small neighborhood-based community event when the anticipated attendees will
not exceed one hundred (100) persons.
   (b)   The Director may place reasonable time restrictions on the issuance of
special event permits, including without limitation a prior notice requirement,
first-come, first-served scheduling, limitations on frequency of use, and
limitation of permits to normal operating hours for City property. Use of the
City Hall Rotunda for events other than City-sponsored events shall be limited
to after normal business hours and weekends. The Director’s prior notice
requirement may not exceed five (5) days for special event permits not subject
to the requirements of Section
133.08.
   (c)   The Director may place reasonable place restrictions on the issuance
of special event permits, which restrictions may consider the historic use of
the property, recreational use policies adopted in the Director’s rules and
regulations, the size of the property and the degree to which the special event
would interfere with the historic use and adopted recreational use policies for
the property.
   (d)   The Director may deny or revoke a special event permit whenever he or
she finds:
      (1)   The applicant person or entity has previously violated the
provisions of a special event permit or has submitted materially false or
incomplete information on any special event permit application; or
      (2)   The special event would unreasonably interfere with the movement of
or service capability of police vehicles, firefighting equipment or ambulance
service; or
      (3)   The special event would unreasonably interfere with the historic
recreational use and the adopted recreational use policies for a neighborhood
park; or
      (4)   The special event would unreasonably interfere with another special
event for which a permit has been issued; or
      (5)   The special event would unreasonably interfere with the City
activities that occur on or at the property.
      (6)   The applicant person or entity has failed to keep detailed records
of all vendors, as defined in Section
675.01(a)(3) of the Codified Ordinances, associated with a special event in
accordance with divisions (e) and (f) of this section.
   The Director may charge a permit application fee, subject to approval of
Board of Control, in an amount not to exceed the Director’s cost in
administering such application.
   (e)   The applicant, person, or entity shall do the following:
      (1)   maintain records of all vendors associated with the event,
including the name, address, phone number, and description of all items to be
sold; and
      (2)   maintain records that demonstrate compliance with Section
675.09(n) and (o) by vendors of prepackaged frozen desserts associated with the
event.
   (f)   All special events and vendors associated with special events shall
comply with applicable vendor regulations in Section
675.09 of the Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 133.08 Special Event Concession Agreement and Charges
   Every person or entity sponsoring a special event involving sale of items,
admission for which a charge or ticket is required or limited to invitation
only, or closure of more than one-half (1/2) linear mile of City streets shall
comply with the following requirements:
   (a)   Obtain a permit under Section
133.07, provided, however, that prior to the issuance of a permit to use City
property managed by a City department other than the Department of Parks and
Recreation, the director of the affected department must consent to the
issuance of the permit;
   (b)   Submit an application in a form approved by the director of the
affected department or his or her designee within such time period prior to the
special event as may be established by the Director;
   (c)   If the special event is to be located wholly or partially on property
which is owned, leased or maintained by the City of Cleveland, pay property
rent in scheduled amounts determined from time to time by the Board of Control;
in setting rents, the Board of Control may consider without limitation the
following considerations entitling the applicant to a reduced or abated rent:
      (1)   The economic impact of the special event on the Greater Cleveland
economy as reflected in sales taxes, transient occupancy taxes, and admission
taxes;
      (2)   The extent to which the special event will preserve the City’s
recreational use Immunity provided in RC 1533.181 on all property used for the
special event;
      (3)   The percentage of the special event gross revenues which will
accrue to a charity or charities qualifying under Section 501(c)(3) of the
Internal Revenue Code.
   (d)   Pay all costs, at scheduled rates as determined from time to time by
the director of the affected department or designee and approved by the Board
of Control, for services and equipment exceeding normal service levels incurred
during a special event by the City’s Department of Parks and Recreation;
   (e)   Pay such additional costs for services exceeding normal service levels
incurred during the special event by other City departments at scheduled rates
determined by the director of the affected department or his or her designee
and approved from time to time by the Board of Control;
   (f)   Provide such services at the applicant’s sole cost, including without
limitation security and traffic control, crowd management, fire protection,
food service control and inspection, waste and litter control, and any other
services necessary to ensure than an event is conducted in a safe manner to
protect the safety, health, property and general welfare of the City’s
citizens, as determined by the director of the affected department or his or
her designee and approved by the Board of Control; and
   (g)   Submit an independently audited statement of gross revenues derived
from the special event within such time period after the special event as may
be specified by the director of the affected department or his or her designee.
   (h)   After January 1, 1992, each annual Board of Control resolution
establishing special event rental rates and service cost recovery amounts shall
only become effective sixty (60) days after publication in the City Record.
Notwithstanding any provision of the Codified Ordinances to the contrary, the
councilmember of each ward may designate one (1) special event per year to be
exempt from either (a) the payment of any sums described herein; and the
submission of an audited statement under division (g) of this section, or
division (b) if the special event is located in the ward of the councilmember
requesting exemption, has gross revenues of under twenty-five thousand dollars
($25,000.00), and at least ninety percent (90%) of its gross special event
revenues accrue to a community-based organization or to a charity qualifying
under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, the payment of any sums
described herein, the submission of an audited statement under division (g) of
this section, and the payment of any permit fees to the City. The Director of
Parks and Recreation shall submit a report on the City costs and charges for
special events to the Clerk of Council at the end of each calendar year.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 133.081 Rental Fees for City Hall Rotunda
   (a)   The Director of Parks and Recreation may allow private parties to rent
the City Hall Rotunda after normal business hours and on weekends provided that
said parties secure a permit from the Director under Section
133.07 and pay the fees specified in division (b) of this section.
   (b)   Rental rates for the Rotunda shall be based on a four (4) hour period.
The Director of Parks and Recreation shall assess and collect the following
fees for the rental of the City Hall Rotunda:
      (1)   A five hundred dollar ($500.00) non-refundable deposit; and
      (2)   One thousand three hundred seventy-five dollars ($1,375.00) per
four (4) hours of use.
   (c)   The City Hall Rotunda closes at 12:00 a.m. All events shall end by 11:
30 p.m. at the latest.
   (d)   When a private party obtains banquet food and beverage service from a
person or firm under contract with the City to provide concession services in
the Rotunda, rental of the Rotunda shall be included in the price that the
private party pays for such concession services, and no other charges for
rental shall be imposed. When a private party obtains banquet food and beverage
service from a person or firm other than one under contract with the City for
those services, Rotunda rental shall be assessed and collected in accordance
with division (b) of this Section.
   (e)   Net proceeds from fees collected from the rental shall be deposited
into the fund or funds which are designated for use by the Office of Special
Events and Marketing for Special Events and Marketing purposes.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 133.09 Exempted Special Events
   Notwithstanding division (h) of Section
133.08 or any provision of the Codified Ordinances of Cleveland, Ohio, 1976, to
the contrary, a member of Council may request an exemption for a special event
for an event located outside of the members’ ward if there is not a location in
the members’ ward suitable for the special event. This exemption shall not be
considered as the exemption designated under division (h) of Section
133.08 of the Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 133.10 Purchase of Food and Beverages for the Public Who Are Attending
Activities or Events Sponsored by the Division of Recreation
   The Director of Parks and Recreation is authorized to purchase food and
beverages for the public who are attending activities or events sponsored by
the Division of Recreation. The total amount of funding expended annually shall
not exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00).
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 133.11 Division of Urban Forestry
   There is established a Division of Urban Forestry in the Department of Parks
and Recreation which shall be administered and controlled by a Commissioner of
Urban Forestry and subject to the provisions of the Charter and ordinances of
the City, and to the direction of the Director of Parks and Recreation.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 133.12 Duties of the Commissioner of Urban Forestry
   The Commissioner of Urban Forestry shall, with the approval of the Director
of Parks and Recreation, appoint all officers and employees in his or her
division. The Commissioner of Urban Forestry shall control and manage the
removal of dead and hazardous trees; prevent unsafe conditions relating to tree
growth; trim trees for clearance of streetlights, traffic signals and signs,
pedestrian and vehicular traffic, and building clearance; remove overgrown tree
roots that cause raised sidewalks, and overgrown tree lawns; develop,
coordinate, and implement the City’s tree canopy; and provide public
information regarding the care of trees.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 133.13 Reserved
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 133.14 Division of Public Auditorium
   There is established a Division of Public Auditorium in the Department of
Parks and Recreation, to be controlled and administered by a Commissioner of
Public Auditorium, subject to Charter and ordinances of the City, and to
direction of the Director of Parks and Recreation. As provided in Section
133.02, the “Public Auditorium Building” is comprised of the Public Hall, the
Music Hall, the Little Theater, the main arena, Mall Units 1 and 2 (Malls B &
C) and all meeting rooms.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 133.141 Duties of the Commissioner of Public Auditorium
   The Commissioner of Public Auditorium shall have control and supervise all
activities and personnel of the Division of Public Auditorium; coordinate the
scheduling, use and rental of any portion of the Public Auditorium Building;
and perform such other and further duties as may from time to time be required
of him or her by the Director of Parks and Recreation.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 133.15 Concession Agreements for Rental of the Public Auditorium Building
   (a)   The Director of Parks and Recreation shall have the authority to enter
into contracts to rent all or any portion of the Public Auditorium Building or
Cleveland Browns Stadium. Every contract for renting all or any portion of the
Public Auditorium Building shall be reduced to writing and shall contain all
the terms and conditions of the agreement including without limitation, the
exact amount and location of space to be granted, the amount of the rental
therefor, and a separate charge or rate for any labor, materials, or equipment
which is to be supplied by the City to the grantee.
   (b)   Every grant or concession agreement for the use of the Public
Auditorium Building shall be reduced to writing and shall be executed by the
parties thereto at least thirty (30) days prior to the scheduled opening date
of the event or show, except in emergencies; the Director of Parks and
Recreation shall review and approve each concession agreement.
   (c)   No grant or concession agreement for the use of the Public Auditorium
Building shall be modified or changed in any manner, after it is signed by the
parties, except if such modification or change is in writing and signed by the
parties and is in all respects clear, complete and in conformity with all
existing laws of the City of Cleveland including the rules and regulations of
the Director of Parks and Recreation and applicable resolutions of the Board of
Control.
   (d)   Every such grant or concession agreement for the use of the Public
Auditorium Building shall also be approved in writing by the Director of Law.
   (e)   All deposits required of any person to secure the use of the Public
Auditorium Building shall be nonreturnable.
   (f)   Every person, firm, company or organization using or renting space at
the Public Auditorium Building shall be required to pay for such use at the
rates established by the Board of Control.
   (g)   The Director of Parks and Recreation may offer to grantees the
acceptance of Mastercard and Visa and other credit cards for ticket purchases.
   The Director of Finance may contract for credit card services with any
financial institution designated as a depository for active funds of the City
of Cleveland. The Director of Finance is authorized to pay all credit card fees
and enter into a contract for credit card services and purchase or lease of
equipment. The Director of Parks and Recreation shall charge any grantee
requesting credit card services all costs of such services including but not
limited to bank handling fees to recover for the City the costs of the
contracts executed by the Director of Finance.
   The Director of Parks and Recreation is authorized to impose on ticket
purchases a one dollar and fifty cent ($1.50) service charge on all telephone
and mail order charge purchases to cover Public Auditorium Building costs.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 133.16 Reserved
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 133.17 Moneys from Operation of Public Auditorium Building and Cleveland
Browns Stadium
   All money which may be advanced by parties holding concession agreements,
contracts or leases in the nature of concessions, and all other miscellaneous
deposits, made in connection with the operation of the Public Auditorium
Building and Cleveland Browns Stadium, and all moneys received from tickets
shall be collected by the Public Auditorium Building under the supervision of
the Director of Finance. All such moneys shall be brought to the office of the
City Treasurer in City Hall.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 133.18 Accounting for Cleveland Browns Stadium
   Notwithstanding any Codified Ordinances of Cleveland, Ohio, 1976 to the
contrary, all revenues derived from Cleveland Browns Stadium received by the
City of Cleveland shall be deposited into a separate fund created by the
Department of Finance solely for the purpose of accounting for all expenses and
revenues associated with Cleveland Browns Stadium and all expenses to be paid
by the City of Cleveland for the operation or maintenance of Cleveland Browns
Stadium shall be paid from that separate fund.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 133.19 Withdrawal of Funds by the Director of Parks and Recreation
   All money deposited in a special trust fund account shall be withdrawn only
on a warrant executed and approved by the Director of Parks and Recreation,
under which warrant a check may be drawn on the depository in which the special
trust fund account is placed, in the manner prescribed by ordinance for the
withdrawal of City funds from City depositories.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 133.20 Accrued Interest from Public Auditorium Building and Stadium Funds
   Interest accruing on all such deposits, if any, shall be paid to the City
Treasurer by the depository in which the same may be deposited at the same rate
and in accordance with the terms of the depository agreement.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 133.21 Rental of Market Stalls
   (a)   If the West Side Market is leased or managed by a third-party
operator, then that operator shall assess and collect rent for the use of space
at the West Side Market at the operator’s discretion. If the West Side Market
is operated exclusively by the City, then the Director of Parks and Recreation
(the “Director”) shall assess and collect rent for the use of space at the West
Side Market as provided herein. The rent for leases renewed in the year 2022
shall remain the same as the rent charged in 2020, and the rent for a new
tenant lease shall be calculated by inserting the new tenant into the formula
set forth below (“Fee Formula”) that was calculated for 2022. Except as
otherwise provided and beginning in 2023, the Director shall assess and collect
rent on the lesser of a three percent (3%) increase from the rent assessed the
previous year or the rent calculated by using the then current Fee Formula. New
tenants’ rent for the first year of their leases shall be calculated solely on
the Fee Formula. The Director shall use the following Fee Formula for rent
assessment and collection:
      (1)   By November 1st of each year, the Director shall prepare and submit
for review to the Budget Committee of the Tenant’s Association, a schedule of
expenses for the ensuing year (the “Director’s Schedule”). The Director shall
have the discretion to increase the total amount of expenses in the Director’s
Schedule (the “Schedule Amount”) so that the Schedule Amount is not greater
than the previous year’s Schedule Amount plus ten percent (10%) plus a
percentage equal to the percentage increase in wages negotiated by the City
with its union employees.
      In the event that the Schedule Amount exceeds the amount referred to in
the preceding sentence, the excess amount may serve as the basis for the
calculations set forth herein only with the prior approval of the Budget
Committee, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. The decision of
the Budget Committee as to any such excess amount shall be made within twenty-
five (25) days after submittal of the Director’s Schedule to the Budget
Committee. If the Budget Committee has failed to act at the expiration of this
twenty-five (25) day period, the Schedule Amount shall be deemed approved as
submitted.
      In the event that the Schedule Amount for the ensuing year is less than
the previous year’s Schedule Amount, the Schedule Amount which shall serve as
the basis for calculation of Rent for the ensuing year shall be the Schedule
Amount as submitted for review to the Budget Committee plus thirty percent
(30%) of the difference between the previous year’s Schedule Amount and the
Schedule Amount submitted for review to the Budget Committee for the ensuing
year.
      (2)   By December 1st of each year, the Director shall make available to
Tenant the calculation of Rent for the ensuing year, based on the formula set
forth herein.
      (3)   Tenant shall be assigned an occupancy factor which shall be
determined by multiplying the total amount of occupied square footage, as
evidenced the market Plan, times a location factor times a use factor.
         A.   The location factor shall be:
            1.   One and eight-tenths (1.8) for stands located in the Market
House; or
            2.   One and two-tenths (1.2) for stands located outside the Market
House.
         B.   The use factor associated with the designated Use Category as
defined in the Market Rates shall be:
            1.   Two (2.0) for any stand selling any amount of spirituous
liquor, beer, wine, mixed beverages or other intoxicating beverages;
            2.   One (1.0) for “fast food”, “specialty” and “traditional”
stand;
            3.   Five-tenths (0.5) for “grocery” stands; or
            4.   Three-tenths (0.3) for “restaurant” stands.
      (4)   The occupancy factors for all stands upon the Market Grounds shall
be added together. The result of that addition shall be “Total Occupancy
Factor”. The Total Occupancy Factor shall be multiplied by five percent (5%) to
reflect average vacancy rates from year to year. This calculation shall result
in the “Vacancy Factor”.
      (5)   The aggregate of all revenue reasonably anticipated in the upcoming
year from event rental, leases with terms for less than a year, and Storage
Lockers shall be deducted from the Schedule Amount. The result of this
calculation shall be the “Adjusted Schedule Amount”.
      (6)   The Adjusted Schedule Amount shall be multiplied by a fraction, the
numerator of which is Tenant’s occupancy factor and the denominator of which is
the Total Occupancy factor minus the Vacancy Factor. This calculation shall
result in the “Annual Rent”, which shall then be divided by twelve (12) to
determine the Rent due on the first day of each month.
      (7)   A fee for energy consumption for the outdoor heating system will be
assessed to each Tenant of the Arcade. A fee for maintenance and repair
services for the refrigerated display cases will be assessed to each Tenant of
the Market House. Such payments are deemed part of the rental obligation.
   (b)   The Director may rent such spaces or parts or grant the right to use
the same for a period not to exceed three (3) years. Rent for a lease term of
more than one (1) year shall be recalculated in accordance with division (a) of
Section 131.21 each year regardless of the lease term. He or she may make such
provision for renewal or extension of the rental right or grant as he or she
may deem advisable from time to time for additional periods not exceeding three
(3) years each, providing that the option or right of renewal shall be
exercisable only by the Director and not by the grantee.
   (c)   The Director may rent such spaces for terms less than one (1) year for
the amounts established from time to time by the Board of Control.
   (d)   The Director is authorized to provide in the renting or granting of
rights to the use of such part or space that the rental right or grant shall
not be transferred or assigned by the grantee thereof to any other person
without the consent, in writing, of the Director. Such right or grant may be
revoked by the Director upon conviction of the grantee of violation of law or
ordinances relating to weights and measures. Provisions shall be made by the
Director for the payment of such rental at such regular times and at such place
as may be by him or her deemed most advisable.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 133.22 Manager of West Side Market
   The Director of Parks and Recreation may appoint a Manager of the West Side
Market, subject to the provisions of the Charter and the Codified Ordinances of
Cleveland, Ohio, 1976, and to the supervision of the Director of Parks and
Recreation, who shall be responsible for the management and administration of
the City’s West Side Market.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 133.23 Property Adoption and Licensing
   The Director may agree to allow, with the approval of the Board of Control,
any business or other entity to maintain, improve, and adopt real estate
belonging to the City and not in charge of another department; provided,
however, that such real estate is no greater in area than two hundred (200)
square feet and that the improvements are for solely for beautification of the
real estate. Any business or entity adopting property shall be entitled to have
such property designated in its name and the Director is authorized to evaluate
and present awards to the best maintained property. The Director shall
establish rules and regulations for property adoption. A copy of each proposed
Property Adoption Agreement is to be provided to the Clerk of Council at least
fourteen (14) days prior to approval by the Board of Control. Any such adoption
shall not be construed as the conveyance of any right, title or interest in
public property but merely as the grant of a privilege, revocable at will.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 133.24 Deposits for Use of Property
   The issuance of a permit for the use of Municipal property under the
supervision and control of the Department of Parks and Recreation or the use of
such equipment or property, both real and personal, shall be secured by a
deposit, in an amount equal to at least ten percent (10%) of the value of the
equipment used and sufficient to guarantee performance or reimbursement for
estimated costs of repair, replacement or return of secured property to its
condition prior to use by the permittee, except where by reason of the nature
of the project to be undertaken, the respective commissioner or manager of the
division affected, with the approval of the Director of Parks and Recreation
has determined that it is impractical or unnecessary to require a deposit.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§§ 133.25 to 133.28 Reserved
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 133.29 Division of Recreation
   There is established a Division of Recreation in the Department of Parks and
Recreation, to be administered and controlled by a Commissioner of Recreation,
subject to the Charter and ordinances of the City, and to the direction of the
Director of Parks and Recreation.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 133.30 Duties of the Commissioner of Recreation
   The Commissioner of Recreation shall have charge and management of all
recreational property and activities of the City, including without limitation,
yoga, gaming tournaments, tennis, pickleball, volleyball, or any other sports
played at City recreation centers or Cleveland Public Auditorium and
playgrounds, ballfields, tennis courts, skating rinks, Camp George L. Forbes
and the operation and maintenance of all City golf courses. The Commissioner
shall administer permits under the same terms and conditions as those set forth
in Section
133.07 for the use of any property under his or her charge and management which
is not subject to the authority of the Manager of Special Events under Sections
133.07 and
133.08. The Commissioner may enter into agreements with the owners of premises
in the vicinity of City playgrounds for the storage of playground equipment on
such terms and conditions as may be approved by the Board of Control.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 133.31 Highland Park Golf Course and Banquet Room Rates
   (a)   The Director of Parks and Recreation is authorized to collect, or
cause to be collected, the following rates set forth below at Highland Park
Golf Course:
   In-Season Rates (April 1st through October 15th of each year and dependent
on the weather/market):
      (1)   Monday through Thursday.
 
                 Current Rate 2025 2026
18 holes riding* up to $36    $39  $42
18 holes walking up to $23    $26  $29
9 holes riding   up to $24    $26  $28
9 holes walking  up to $17    $19  $21
 
* As used in this ordinance, riding shall mean the player will use a power
cart.
      (2)   Friday.
 
                 Current Rate 2025 2026
18 holes riding  up to $36    $42  $45
18 holes walking up to $23    $29  $32
9 holes riding   up to $24    $26  $28
9 holes walking  up to $17    $19  $21
 
      (3)   Saturday, Sunday and Holidays.
 
                 Current Rate 2025 2026
18 holes riding  up to $45    $48  $51
18 holes walking up to $32    $35  $38
9 holes riding   up to $26    $28  $30
9 holes walking  up to $19    $21  $23
 
      (4)   Senior - Junior* (Monday through Thursday before 3:00 p.m. and
Friday, Saturday, Sunday, and Holidays after 2:00 p.m.).
 
                 Current Rate 2025                  2026
                              Mon - Thurs Fri - Sun Mon - Thurs Fri - Sun
18 holes riding  up to $33    $35         $37       $37         $39
18 holes walking up to $20    $22         $24       $24         $26
9 holes riding   up to $19    $21         $23       $23         $25
9 holes walking  up to $12    $14         $16       $16         $18
 
* Senior players must be at least sixty (60) years old and Junior players must
be under the age of eighteen (18).
   (b)   Residential Discounts and Discount Card. A residential discount on
rates is available to all Cleveland residents with non-expired photo
identification demonstrating current Cleveland proof of residency. Cleveland
residents qualify for and may obtain an annual discount card at no cost. Non-
residents can obtain this annual discount card for a twenty dollar ($20.00)
fee. The card is not valid on outings, special or discounted rates, or special
events. The card provides the following discounts:
 
         Current Rate 2025 2026
18 holes up to $6     $6   $6
9 holes  up to $2     $2   $2
 
   (c)   Additional Rates/Charges:
 
                                                    Rate
League rate 9 holes walking / riding (a.m. hours)   up to $12 / $18
League rate 9 holes walking / riding (p.m. hours)   up to $16 / $22
In-Season Power Cart Fee (9 holes / 18 holes)       up to $8 / $13
Pull Cart                                           $5
Replay (9 holes / 18 holes)                         up to $9 / $18
High School / College students (9 holes / 18 holes) up to $9 / $15
 
   (d)   Banquet Room Rental at Highland Park Golf Course.
      (1)   All rental rates for the banquet room shall be set by the Board of
Control, which shall include rental schedules for City residents and non-City
residents.
      (2)   Rental rates shall be based on a four (4) hour period, which will
include at no charge up to one (1) hour before the event for set-up and up to
one (1) hour after the event for clean- up. Any events, not including the
above-referenced set-up and clean-up times, exceeding the four (4) hour period,
shall be charged for each additional hour, or portion of an hour, used. Rental
rates for the room, including additional charges for exceeding the four (4)
hour period, shall be set by the Board of Control. The banquet room closes at
12:00 a.m. on Friday through Sunday and Holidays and at times determined by the
Commissioner of Recreation on Monday through Thursday. All events shall end
one-half hour before the facility closes. The City’s Concessionaire shall be
used exclusively to provide food and beverages for all catered events, unless
the Director approves the use of an independent caterer. All beverages,
including alcoholic beverages, shall be purchased from the City or the City’s
Concessionaire. Security is to be provided through the Village of Highland
Hills Police Department and it is the responsibility of the group renting the
banquet room to arrange and pay for such security, as billed by the Village of
Highland Hills Police Department.
      (3)   Rental of the banquet room for golf outings. The golf outing must
conclude one-half hour before the golf course closing time. Events exceeding
the four (4) hour rental period described above, are subject to additional
charges. If the event is to be catered by the City’s Concessionaire, the rental
fee for the room for a maximum period of four (4) hours, shall be included in
the caterer’s per-person meal cost.
      (4)   Golf leagues established for the season at Highland Park Golf
Course may use the banquet room at no charge once per golf season. Events shall
be held Monday through Friday and shall conclude by 5:00 p.m.
   (e)   Net proceeds from fees collected at the Highland Park Golf Course
shall be expended for facility improvements therein.
(Ord. No. 243-2025. Passed 5-12-25, eff. 5-13-25)
§ 133.32 Rental Fees for Camp George Forbes
   (a)   The Commissioner of Recreation may allow private parties to rent Camp
George Forbes provided that said parties secure a permit from the Director
under Section
133.07 and pay the fees specified in division (b) of this section.
   (b)   The Director of Parks and Recreation shall assess and collect the
following fees for the rental of Camp George Forbes:
 City Residents Non-City Residents
                                                                   City      Non-City
                                                                   Residents Residents
(1)   Great Room Rental:
   Monday - Friday: 9:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.                      $250.00   $275.00
   Monday - Friday: 5:00 p.m. to 12:00 a.m.                     $400.00   $440.00
   Saturday - Sunday: All Day                                   $400.00   $440.00
(2)   Great Room and Class Room A Rental:
   Monday - Friday: 9:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.                      $300.00   $330.00
   Monday - Friday: 5:00 p.m. to 12:00 a.m.                     $500.00   $550.00
   Saturday - Sunday: All Day                                   $500.00   $550.00
(3)   Class Room A Rental:
   Monday - Friday: 9:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.                      $250.00   $275.00
   Monday - Friday: 5:00 p.m. to 12:00 a.m.                     $400.00   $440.00
   Saturday - Sunday: All Day                                   $400.00   $440.00
(4)   Class Room B or C Rental:
   Monday - Friday: 9:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.                      $250.00   $275.00
   Monday - Friday: 5:00 p.m. to 12:00 a.m.                     $400.00   $440.00
   Saturday - Sunday: All Day                                   $400.00   $440.00
(5)   Dining Hall Room Rental:
   Monday - Friday: 9:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.                      $300.00   $330.00
   Monday - Friday: 5:00 p.m. to 12:00 a.m.                     $550.00   $605.00
   Saturday - Sunday: All Day                                   $550.00   $605.00
(6)   Picnic Shelter Rental                                     $220.00   $265.00
(7)   Cabin Rental:
   A.   Friday 5:00 p.m. through Saturday 12:00 p.m.
      Minimum of 6 cabins                                    $730.00   $805.00
      Each additional cabin                                  $100.00   $100.00
      10 cabin package                                       $1,000.00 $1,100.00
   B.   Saturday 12:00 p.m. through Sunday 12:00 p.m.
      Minimum of 6 cabins                                    $880.00   $970.00
      Each additional cabin                                  $125.00   $125.00
      10 cabin package                                       $1,100.00 $1210.00
   C.   Friday 5:00 p.m. through Sunday 12:00 p.m.
      Minimum of 6 cabins                                    $1,370.00 $1,510.00
      Each additional cabin                                  $125.00   $125.00
      10 cabin package                                       $1,700.00 $1,870.00
   D.   Weekend package: Includes 10 cabins and use of Dining$2,000.00 $2,200.00
(8)   Swimming Pool Rental:
   A.   Pool only                                            $300.00   $300.00
   B.   Pool with a room or cabin rental                     $150.00   $150.00
   (c)   City of Cleveland certified lifeguards must be provided by the parties
renting the pool with minimum of one (1) lifeguard per thirty-five (35)
participants. Lifeguard rate is thirty-two dollars ($32.00) per guard.
   (d)   Rental of any part of the facility is based on a four (4) hour period
including two (2) hours prior to event for set up. There is a charge of fifty
dollars ($50.00) per hour for each additional hour.
   (e)   In instances where private security services are required, it is the
responsibility of the party renting the facility to provide such service.
Security guards may be a member of a police department as defined in RC 4117.01
(M) or be a person engaged for hire as a watchman, guard, private policeman or
other person whose primary duty is to protect persons or property or both and
is a class A or C licensee under RC Chapter 4749 or a registered employee of
the same and meets all requirements imposed by that chapter, and also meets all
requirements that may be imposed by RC Chapter 109 and Chapter 709 of the
Codified Ordinances of Highland Hills. It is the responsibility of the party
renting the facility to ensure that such requirements are met.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 133.33 Rental of Halloran Skating Rink
   (a)   The Commissioner of Recreation may allow private parties to rent
Halloran Skating Rink during any period when Division of Recreation programs
are not scheduled or in progress provided that said parties secure a permit
from the Director under Section
133.07 and pay the fees specified in division (b) of this section.
   (b)   The Director of Parks and Recreation shall assess and collect the
following fees and charges for the rental of Halloran Skating Rink:
 
Permit application, under Section  $10.00
133.07
Fee for rental of rink             N/A
Personnel and operating expenses   $88.00 per hour
Utility charges                    $32.00 per hour
 
   (c)   The Director of Parks and Recreation shall deposit the fees and
charges collected for the rental of Halloran Skating Rink into the fund or
funds designated to pay the costs of the general operation of the skating rink,
the equipment and maintenance costs associated with maintaining the skating
rink, and for skating rink facility improvements and that these funds collected
may be used for and are appropriated for these purposes.
   (d)   During any period when Division of Recreation programs are not
scheduled or in progress, the Commissioner of Recreation shall allow branches,
departments, offices, and groups of the City of Cleveland to use Halloran
Skating Rink provided that such groups pay one-half (1/2) of the permit
application, personnel and operating expenses, and utility charge fees
specified in division (b) of this section. The Director of Parks and Recreation
shall not require more than five (5) days prior notice to obtain the permit
required by Section
133.07.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 133.34 Rental Fees for Recreation Center Use
   (a)   The Commissioner of Recreation may allow private parties to rent
recreation center community or meeting rooms or outdoor pools during regular
operational hours provided that the parties pay the fees specified in division
(c) of this section. The Commissioner of Recreation may allow the following
private groups to rent at no cost recreation center community or meeting rooms
or outdoor pools during regular operational hours provided that the room will
not be used to raise money for political campaigns or political issues:
      (1)   Branches, departments or offices of the City of Cleveland if the
event furthers the functions or goals of that branch, department or office;
      (2)   Non-profit organizations and neighborhood organizations, such as
block clubs, street clubs and ward clubs, located within the City of Cleveland
if the purpose of the event is to address providing or supporting direct health
and welfare services to individuals or to address safety, building or housing
issues; and
      (3)   Schools located within the City of Cleveland if the event furthers
an educational or recreational purpose.
   (b)   The Commissioner of Recreation may allow private parties to rent
recreation center community or meeting rooms or outdoor pools before or after
regular operational hours provided that the parties pay the fees specified in
division (c) of this section.
   (c)   The Director of Parks and Recreation shall assess and collect the
following fees for rental of recreation center community or meeting rooms or
outdoor pools:
      (1)   During regular operational hours, sixty-eight dollars ($68.00) per
hour per staff person required.
      (2)   Before or after regular operational hours, eighty-four dollars
($84.00) per hour per staff person required.
   (d)   The Commissioner of Recreation may allow private parties to rent
portions of the recreation centers for recreation uses before or after regular
operational hours provided that the parties pay the fees specified in division
(f) of this section.
   (e)   The Commissioner of Recreation may allow the groups identified in
division (a) of this section to rent portions of the recreation centers for
recreation uses before or after regular operational hours provided that the
parties pay one-half (1/2) of the fees specified in division (f) of this
section.
   (f)   The Director of Parks and Recreation shall assess and collect a fee of
eighty-four dollars ($84.00) per hour per staff person required fees for the
rental of portions of the recreation centers for recreation uses.
   (g)   The Commissioner of Recreation may allow the Cuyahoga County Board of
Elections to rent at no cost recreation center community or meeting rooms or
any portions of the recreation centers before, during or after regular
operational hours for voting purposes.
   (h)   Any party renting a portion of a recreation center or outdoor pool
under this section shall also secure a permit from the Director under Section
133.07 and shall pay any fee required for that permit.
   (i)   Net proceeds from fees collected under this section shall be deposited
into a fund or funds which are designated for use by the Division of Recreation
for its goods, services, activities, and programs.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 133.35 Rental of Athletic Complexes; Fee
   (a)   The Director of Parks and Recreation, or his or her designee, may rent
the Collinwood Athletic Complex, the Morgana Athletic Complex, League Park
Baseball Field; and any other City of Cleveland athletic complexes, when
available, as long as a permit is secured under Section
133.07 and the fees specified in this section are paid. This section shall not
apply to the rental of the League Park Complex which is subject to the
provisions of Section
133.37.
   (b)   The Director, or his or her designee, shall assess and collect the
following fees and charges for the rental of athletic complexes:
      (1)   Athletic complex base rental: one thousand dollars ($1,000.00);
         A.   Base rental of the complex is based on a six (6) hour period.
         B.   The six (6) hour base rental period includes set up, event,
dismantle, and the exit of the organizers and their participants and guests,
and general clean-up.
         C.   Each additional hour or fraction thereof exceeding the six (6)
hour base rental will cost an additional two hundred dollars ($200.00) per
hour.
         D.   During the six (6) hour base rental, if lights are required
during any portion of the sporting or athletic event, an additional one hundred
dollars ($100.00) per hour or fraction thereof will be charged at the time the
permit is issued. The City will bill for any additional lighting costs at one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per hour or fraction thereof.
         E.   Party renting the complex is responsible for general clean-up of
the area.
      (2)   All fees are due and payable prior to the issuance of a permit.
      (3)   Rentals not requiring lights are to conclude thirty (30) minutes
prior to dusk.
      (4)   Rentals requiring lights must conclude no later than 11:00 p.m.
   (c)   In cases where private security services are determined to be
necessary by the Director, or his or her designee, it is the responsibility of
the party renting the complex to provide the services, using a security service
approved by the Director, or his or her designee.
   (d)   Any party renting the complex is responsible for damages incurred
during rental period and will be required to provide one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) liability and property damage insurance which includes the City
of Cleveland as an additional insured.
   (e)   Any party renting the complex will be required to provide emergency
medical personnel for any athletic competition.
   (f)   All proceeds from gate collections will go to the party renting the
facility.
   (g)   All concessions will be operated by the City of Cleveland or its
designated vendor.
   (h)   The Director shall deposit the fees and charges collected for the
rental of the complex into the fund or funds designated to pay the costs of the
general operation of the complex, the equipment and maintenance costs
associated with maintaining the complex, and for improvements to the complex.
The funds collected may be used for and are appropriated for these purposes.
Any funds received through the renting of the League Park complex shall be used
only for the operation and maintenance of, and equipment and improvements for,
the League Park complex.
   (i)   After securing the necessary permit under Section
133.07 of these Codified Ordinances, the Director, or his or her designee, may
allow the Cleveland Muny Football League and the Cleveland Metropolitan School
District to rent athletic complexes for games, scrimmages, or practices,
without being assessed the fees and charges specified in division (b) of this
section.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 133.36 Reserved
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 133.37 Rental of League Park Baseball Field and League Park Visitors Center;
Fee
   (a)   The Director of Parks and Recreation, or his or her designee, may rent
the League Park Baseball Field or the Visitors Center, collectively known as
the League Park Complex, when available, as long as a permit is secured under
Section
133.07 and the fees specified in this section are paid. Rentals secured under
this section shall be for a minimum base rental period of four (4) hours and
include set-up, event, dismantle, exit of the organizers and their participants
and guests, and general clean-up of the rented area.
   (b)   The Director, or his or her designee, shall assess and collect the
following fees and charges for the rental of the following:
      (1)   League Park Baseball Field rental:
         A.   Not-for-profit rental:
            1.   Three hundred dollars ($300.00) for the base rental period of
four (4) hours.
            2.   Thirty-seven dollars and fifty cents ($37.50) for each half
hour the event extends beyond the four (4) hour base rental period, and any
remaining minutes past any half-hour increment shall be prorated using the rate
of thirty-seven dollars and fifty cents ($37.50) per half hour.
         B.   For-profit rental:
            1.   Six hundred dollars ($600.00) for the base rental period of
four (4) hours.
            2.   Seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for each half hour the event
extends beyond the four (4) hour base rental period, and any remaining minutes
past any half-hour increment shall be prorated using the rate of seventy-five
dollars ($75.00) per half hour.
      (2)   League Park Visitors Center rental:
         A.   Not-for-profit rental:
            1.   Three hundred forty dollars ($340.00) for the base rental
period of four (4) hours.
            2.   Forty-two dollars and fifty cents ($42.50) for each half hour
the event extends beyond the base rental period of four (4) hours, and any
remaining minutes past a half-hour increment shall be prorated at the rate of
forty-two dollars and fifty cents ($42.50) per half hour.
         B.   For-profit rental:
            1.   Four hundred dollars ($400.00) for the base rental period of
four (4) hours.
            2.   Fifty dollars ($50.00) for each half hour the event extends
beyond the base rental period of four (4) hours, and any remaining minutes past
a half-hour increment shall be prorated at the rate of fifty dollars ($50.00)
per half hour.
   (c)   The party renting either portion of the League Park Complex is
responsible for general clean-up of the area.
   (d)   Rentals are to conclude thirty (30) minutes before dusk.
   (e)   All fees are due and payable prior to the issuance of a permit.
   (f)   In cases where off-duty commissioned officers or private security
services are determined to be necessary by the Director, or his or her
designee, it is the responsibility of the party renting either portion of the
League Park Complex to provide the services, using a security service approved
by the Director, or his or her designee.
   (g)   Any party renting either portion of the League Park Complex is
responsible for damages incurred during the rental period and will be required
to provide one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) liability and property damage
insurance and include the City of Cleveland as an additional insured.
   (h)   Any party renting either portion of the League Park Complex will be
required to provide emergency medical personnel for any athletic competition or
other event as determined to be necessary by the Director, or his or her
designee.
   (i)   All proceeds from gate collections will go to the party renting the
facility.
   (j)   All concessions will be operated by the City of Cleveland or its
designated vendor.
   (k)   The Director shall deposit the fees and charges collected for the
rental of either portion of the League Park Complex into the fund or funds
designated to pay the costs of the general operation of the Complex, the
equipment and maintenance costs associated with maintaining the Complex, and
for insert improvements to the Complex and for City events held at the Complex.
The funds collected may be used for and are appropriated for these purposes.
   (l)   After securing the necessary permit under Section
133.07 of these Codified Ordinances, the Director, or his or her designee, may
allow the Cleveland Metropolitan School District to rent the baseball field for
games or practices, without being assessed the fees and charges specified in
division (b) of this section.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 133.38 Purchase of City-Related Merchandise, Souvenirs, Food, and Beverages
for Resale at City Parks, Recreational Facilities, and the West Side Market
   (a)   The Director of Parks and Recreation is authorized to enter into one
(1) or more standard purchase or requirement contracts duly let to the lowest
and best bidder after competitive bidding for merchandise, souvenirs, food, and
beverages for resale at a price set by the Director, at City parks,
recreational facilities, and the West Side Market, for a period of time to be
determined by the Director.
   (b)   Any purchase made under this section shall be made by the Commissioner
of Purchases and Supplies and paid from the annual appropriations made for that
purpose.
   (c)   That under Section
108(b) of the Charter, the purchases authorized by this ordinance may be made
through cooperative arrangements with other governmental agencies. The Director
of Parks and Recreation may sign all documents that are necessary to make the
purchases, and may enter into one (1) or more contracts with the vendors
selected through that cooperative process.
   (d)   That the proceeds from the sale of the merchandise, souvenirs, food,
and beverages shall be deposited into a fund or funds designated by the
Director of Finance to provide support for programs and services to benefit the
public in the use of parks, recreational facilities, and programs and services
of the West Side Market, and are appropriated for that purpose.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 133.39 Division of Park Maintenance
   There is established a Division of Park Maintenance in the Department of
Parks and Recreation, which shall be administered and controlled by a
Commissioner of Park Maintenance, subject to the provisions of the Charter and
ordinances of the City, and to the direction of the Director of Parks and
Recreation.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 133.40 Duties of the Commissioner of Park Maintenance
   The Commissioner of Park Maintenance shall direct and assist managers and
assistant managers in the Division of Park Maintenance in scheduling daily
operations in all phases of ground maintenance for park and recreational areas
and all other properties designated by the Director of Parks and Recreation.
The Commissioner shall have charge and management of the City greenhouse,
nurseries and cultural gardens, the operation and maintenance of all City
cemeteries, and all aspects of the planting, maintenance, removal and disposal
of trees, grass, shrubs, ground covers and other vegetation, except at the City
golf courses.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 133.41 Greenhouse, Rockefeller Park and Cultural Gardens; Fees
   (a)   The Director of Parks and Recreation shall assess and collect fees for
the use of the City Greenhouse, Rockefeller Park and Cultural Gardens under the
following schedule for City Residents:
 
Photo shoots (a maximum of 4 hours)                        $75.00
Wedding ceremonies and photo shoots (a maximum of 4 hours) $150.00
 
   (b)   The Director of Parks and Recreation shall assess and collect fees for
the use of the City Greenhouse, Rockefeller Park and Cultural Gardens under the
following schedule for non-City Residents:
 
Photo shoots (a maximum of 4 hours)                        $100.00
Wedding ceremonies and photo shoots (a maximum of 4 hours) $175.00
 
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 133.42 Cemetery Rates
   The Commissioner of Park Maintenance shall collect the following charges for
services, space, and supplies at City-owned cemeteries:
 Tues. - Fri. Sat.
                                                                                      Tues. -     Sat.
                                                                                      Fri. 
(a)   Single Grave Section
   (1)   Adult grave                                                            $501.00     $501.00
      Open & close                                                              $464.00     $647.00
      Total                                                                     $965.00     $1,148.00
   (2)   Infant grave (4 feet or less)                                          $116.00     $116.00
      Open & close                                                              $102.00     $153.00
      Total                                                                     $218.00     $269.00
   (3)   Oversized Grave                                                        $1,002.00   $1,002.00
      Open & close                                                              $464.00     $647.00
      Total                                                                     $1,466.00   $1,649.00
(b)   Flush Marker Lot Sections
   (1)   One grave                                                              $743.00     $743.00
      Open & close                                                              $647.00     $921.00
      Total                                                                     $1,390.00   $1,664.00
   (2)   Family lot (two graves)                                                $1,486.00   $1,486.00
      Open & close                                                              $647.00     $921.00
      Total                                                                     $2,133.00   $2,407.00
   (3)   Oversized grave                                                        $1,486.00   $1,486.00
      Open & close                                                              $647.00     $921.00
      Total                                                                     $2,133.00   $2,407.00
(c)   Raised Marker Lot Sections
   (1)   One grave                                                              $873.00     $873.00
      Open & close                                                              $647.00     $921.00
      Total                                                                     $1,520.00   $1,794.00
   (2)   Family lot (two graves)                                                $1,746.00   $1,746.00
      Open & close                                                              $647.00     $921.00
      Total                                                                     $2,393.00   $2,667.00
   (3)   Oversized grave                                                        $1,746.00   $1,746.00
      Open & close                                                              $647.00     $921.00
      Total                                                                     $2,393.00   $2,667.00
(d)   Open & Closing for Lot Sections
   (1)   Adult grave                                                            $647.00     $921.00
   (2)   Extra deep adult grave (depth of 8 feet)                               $872.00     $1,207.00
   (3)   On top of extra deep adult grave                                       $872.00     $1,207.00
   (4)   Infant grave or still born on top                                      $102.00     $153.00
   (5)   Cremated remains in urn                                                $334.00     $450.00
   (6)   Cremated remains in vault                                              $392.00     $538.00
(e)   Urn Garden Section
   Grave                                                                           $363.00     $363.00
   Open & close (includes marker setting and vault)                                $421.00     $589.00
   Total                                                                           $784.00     $952.00
(f)   Veterans’ Sections
   (1)   Full body open & close                                                 $464.00     $647.00
   (2)   Cremains in urn                                                        $334.00     $450.00
   (3)   Cremains in vault                                                      $392.00     $538.00
(g)   Memorial Park Indigent Burial
   (1)   Adult                                                                  $464.00     NA
   (2)   Infant                                                                 $102.00     NA
(h)   Additional Services Available
   (1)   Disinterments
      A.   Adult grave                                                       $2,500.00   NA
      B.   Adult grave-extra deep                                            $2,700.00   NA
      C.   Infant grave                                                      $700.00     NA
      D.   Cremated remains - located in urn garden                          $700.00     NA
      E.   Cremated remains - located other than urn garden                  $600.00     NA
   (2)   Setting and Foundation Charges
      A.   Headstones
         1.   18" × 10" (Infant)                                         $160.00     $160.00
         2.   2' × 1' (Single)                                           $260.00     $260.00
         3.   3' × 1' or 4' × 1' (Double)                               $350.00     $350.00
                                                                                      1/2 of
                                                                                      price
                                                                                      listed
         4.   Resetting                                                   above for
                                                                                      replacement
                                                                                      of same
                                                                                      size
                                                                                      markers
         5.   Foundation (per cubic ft)                                   $28.00      $28.00
         6.   Veteran stones                                              $260.00     $260.00
         7.   Veteran stones resetting                                    $75.00      NA
      B.   Flower container
         1.   Purchase                                                    $40.00      $40.00
         2.   Installation                                                $30.00      $30.00
         3.   Purchase & Installation                                     $70.00      $70.00
   (3)   Miscellaneous Services
      A.   Opening and closing grave for inspection
         1.   Identify without disturbing remains                         $1,185.00   NA
         2.   Remove for autopsy; replace in open grave                   $1,273.00   NA
      B.   Private mausoleums: receipt and discharge                         $667.00     NA
      C.   Highland Chapel Park Mausoleum
         1.   Crypts: seal or unsealed                                    $587.00     $587.00
         2.   Niches: seal or unsealed                                    $448.00     $448.00
      D.   Resale of repurchased niches and crypts
         1.   Niches in Highland Park Mausoleum                           $1,415.00   $1,415.00
         2.   Crypts In Highland Park Mausoleum                           $3,575.00   $3,575.00
      E.   Placement of additional remains in casket at time of burial (recor$150.00     $150.00
fee)
(i)   Administrative Charges
   (1)   Bad Check Charge                                                       $30.00      $30.00
   (2)   Late Payments
      A.   Payments received after interment including checks that cannot be $65.00      $65.00
processed because of errors
      B.   Late/same day interment orders                                    $100.00     $100.00
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 133.43 Licensing Advertising Space on Public Recreational Property
   Upon the approval of the Board of Control, the Director of Parks and
Recreation may license space on recreational or real or personal property under
the control of said Director to businesses for advertising purposes for fees
determined by the Board of Control. Any such license shall not be construed as
the conveyance of any right, title or interest in public property but merely as
the grant of a privilege, revocable at will.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 133.44 Acceptance of Gifts
   (a)   The Director of Parks and Recreation is authorized to accept gifts of
money, material, or services, for the various divisions of the department
unconditionally given or limited by conditions as the donor may impose. The
Director shall report the acceptance of each gift to the Clerk of the City
Council.
   (b)   All moneys accepted under this section shall be placed to the credit
of the Department of Parks and Recreation in a special revenue fund. The moneys
deposited in the special revenue fund shall be expended for the benefit of the
Department of Parks and Recreation, or in the manner and for the specific
purpose named in the gift. If the donor has imposed limitations to their gift,
then separate subfunds may be created in the special revenue fund to deposit
the gifts.
   (c)   Expenditures from the fund or subfunds created by this section shall
be made on vouchers signed by the Director of Parks and Recreation, or the
director’s designee, when the amount is less than ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00); otherwise such expenditure shall first be authorized by ordinance
of Council in the manner provided in Charter Section
108.
   (d)   No part of any funds credited to the accounts shall be paid to or for
the benefit of any officer or employee, either as additional compensation or as
reimbursement for expenses incurred, or paid for purposes other than those
directly benefiting the Department of Parks and Recreation. The funds received
under this section shall be expended in the same manner as other public funds,
unless specifically provided for in the terms of the gift, or authorized by
resolution or ordinance of Council.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 133.45 Agreements for the Loan of Statues, Busts, or other Personal Property
for Public Display
   (a)   The Director of Parks and Recreation may enter into one (1) or more
agreements to loan statues, busts or other personal property under the control
of the Department of Public Works to a person or entity for public display for
a period not to exceed five (5) years, with one (1) option to renew for an
additional five (5) year term, exercisable by the Director of Parks and
Recreation
   (b)   The agreements shall, among other things, itemize the personal
property, specify all conditions of the display, require restoration of any
damaged City property, require insurance coverage acceptable to the Director of
Parks and Recreation and the Director of Law, and contain additional terms and
conditions as required to protect the interests of the City.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 133.46 Tree Commission Grants and Contributions
   The Director of Parks and Recreation is authorized to apply for and accept
from various entities, both public and private, such grants and contributions
as the Tree Commission solicits under division (e) of Section
163.03; provided that such contributions may be in the form of money, material
or services. The Director is further authorized to file all papers and execute
all documents necessary to receive the funds under any grant or contribution,
and upon acceptance of any grant or contribution by the Director, the funds
shall be appropriated in the case of grants, for the purposes set forth in the
grant agreement, and in the case of contributions, for the purposes designated
by the donors. The Director shall report the acceptance of any grant or
contribution to the Clerk of Council. Funds accepted under this section shall
be deposited to Fund No. 20 SF 038 and used solely for the purpose of
furthering the case, preservation and enhancement of the urban forest and
education of the public with respect thereto.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
CHAPTER 135 – DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY
135.01   Establishment; Duties of Director
135.02   Monthly Crime Statistics Report to Council
135.021   Annual Reports of the Safety Director
135.03   Medical Reports and Fees
135.04   Administrative Assistants
135.041   Superintendent of Safety Buildings
135.042   Reserved
135.043   Notification of Sexual Offenders
135.05   Injured or Disabled Firemen and Policemen
135.06   Uniform and Equipment for Police and Fire Forces and Civilian
Employees
135.061   Uniform Allowances
135.062   Police Promotional Uniform Allowances
135.063   Uniform Maintenance Allowance
135.064   Payment of Clothing Allowance
135.065   Purchase of Firearms, Ammunition, Helmets, Tasers, and K-9 Police
Dogs, for the Department of Public Safety
135.07   Compulsory Retirement of Members of Police and Fire Forces
135.071   Maximum Age for Original Appointment to the Divisions of Police and
Fire
135.08   Police Division Vacancies; Council Approval of Promotions
135.09   Division of Police
135.091   Expense Fund for Chief of Police
135.092   Agreements with the State of Ohio to Receive Reimbursement for Police
Training Programs
135.10   Traffic Control Unit
135.11   Use of the Division of Police’s Firing Range; Fee
135.12   Police Escorts; Fee
135.13   Disclosure of Police Use of Deadly Force Recordings
135.14   Division of Police, Various Positions
135.15   Secretary of Police
135.16   Division of Animal Care and Control; Animal Control Officer; Spay and
Neuter Clinic; Fee
135.17   Acceptance of Gifts and Services for the Division of Animal Care and
Control
135.18   Special Revenue Fund Established for the Division of Animal Care and
Control
135.180   Expenditure of Donated Funds for the Division of Animal Care and
Control
135.181   Application for and Acceptance of Rewards under the BP Oil Shield
Program
135.19   Refusal to Obey Subpoena or Produce Evidence
135.20   Special Policemen
135.21   Division of Fire
135.22   Reserved
135.23   Secretary of Fire
135.24   Fire Protection outside Territorial Limits
135.25   Application for Fire Protection
135.26   Intermunicipal Fire Protection Agreements
135.27   Other Fire Protection Agreements
135.28   Fee for Fire Protection
135.29   Renewal of Fire Protection Agreements
135.30   Providing Fire Protection to Other Political Subdivisions Upon
Authorization of the Director of Public Safety or His or Her Designee
135.31   Location and Assignment of Fire Companies
135.32   Fire Division Working Hours
135.33   Division of Emergency Medical Service
135.331   Duties of Commissioner of Emergency Medical Service
135.332   Emergency Medical Service Charges; Fees
135.34   Police and Fire Forces Wearing Uniforms at Polling Places
135.35   Fire Communication Service for Hospitals, Nursing Homes
135.36   Physical Examination for All Ranks of Police
135.37   Annual Police In-service Training Program
135.38   Attendance Records for In-service Training Program
135.39   Personnel Counselor; Duties and Functions
135.40   Using Services of Local Colleges and Universities
135.41   Medical Assistance to Victims of Sexual Assault
135.42   Contracts for Towing, Storage and Disposal of Impounded Motor Vehicles
135.43   Employment of Licensed Medical Professionals
135.44   Safety Reports and Fees
135.45   Motor Vehicle Lease Agreements
135.46   Veterinary Services Agreements
135.47   Emergency Medical Service Clinical Agreements
135.471   College Credit for Police and Fire Personnel
135.48   Charge for County Prisoners Held in City Jail Facilities – Repealed
135.49   Agreements with Cuyahoga County for Shared Use of Criminal Justice-
Oriented Information Systems
135.50   Application and Acceptance of Annual Marine Patrol Grant
135.501   Application and Acceptance of Annual Drug Abuse Resistance Education
Grant
135.51   Collection of Fees for Training Classes Conducted by the Department of
Public Safety
135.52   Rental of Site and Purchase of Refreshments and Mementos for Safety
Programs and Events
135.53   Safety Department Call Histories
135.531   Agreements to Share Crime and Safety Information with Residents and
Solicit Access and Store Home Camera Footage and Images
135.54   Law Enforcement Automated Data System (LEADS)
135.55   Jail Population Reduction Project – Repealed
135.56   Third Grade Safety Belt Program
135.57   Division of Correction; Duties of Commissioner – Repealed
135.58   Reimbursement for Confinement Costs – Repealed
135.59   Inmate Labor – Repealed
135.60   Contracts with Governments for Care of Persons at Institutions –
Repealed
135.61   Home Detention Program; Contract Authority – Repealed
135.62   Uniforms for Correctional Officers – Repealed
135.63   Uniform Maintenance Allowances for the Division of Correction –
Repealed
135.64   Treatment of Indigent Alcoholics, Drug Addicts – Repealed
135.65   Correctional Officer Training – Repealed
135.66   Purchase of Clothing, Bedding, and Shoes for Inmates – Repealed
135.67   Purchase of Prescription and Non- prescription Drugs for Inmates –
Repealed
135.68   Acceptance of Gifts and Services for the Division of Correction –
Repealed
135.69   Establishment of Special Accounts for the Division of Correction –
Repealed
135.70   Expenditure of Donated Funds for the Division of Correction – Repealed
135.99   Penalty
Charter reference:
   Classification of police and fire service, Charter §
122
   General provisions for police and fire service, Charter §
115 et seq.
   Powers of Chief of Police, Charter §
116
   Powers of Fire Chief, Charter §
118
   Relief of police and firemen, Charter §
123
   Special policemen, Charter §
117
Cross-reference:
   Copying police and fire uniforms, CO
615.14
   Failure to aid a law enforcement officer, CO
615.05
   Impersonating a law enforcement officer to defraud, CO
615.09
Statutory reference:
   Appointment of emergency firemen and patrolmen, RC 737.10
   Assistance of State Criminal Bureau, RC 109.51 et seq.
   Composition and control of Fire Division, RC 737.08
   Composition and control of Police Division, RC 737.05
   Contracts, RC 733.22
   Fire protection contracts, RC 307.05, 505.44, 717.02
   General duties and records, RC 737.02 et seq.
   Hours and leave for Police Division, RC 737.07
   Police and fire departments, RC 715.05
   Reductions, suspensions, removals in Police and Fire Divisions, RC 124.34 et
seq., 737.12
§ 135.01 Establishment; Duties of Director
   There is established a Department of Public Safety, to be controlled and
administered by a Director of Public Safety, subject to the provisions of the
Charter and ordinances of the City, and to the direction of the Mayor. The
Director shall be the executive head of the police and fire forces of the City
under the direction of the Mayor and shall be the appointing authority. The
Director may appoint and employ officers and employees as may be necessary for
the operation of this office and the several divisions and activities
comprising the Department, except officers and employees appointed by division
heads other than the Chiefs of Police and Fire under the provisions of Charter
Section
79.
(Ord. No. 1115-18. Passed 10-15-18, eff. 3-6-19) (BOC Res. No. 83-19. Adopted
3-6-19)
§ 135.02 Monthly Crime Statistics Report to Council
   The Director of Public Safety shall prepare and furnish each Councilman no
later than the fifteenth day of each month a report listing the number of
arrests made in his or her ward during the previous month for felonies and
misdemeanors, enumerating the arrest for each crime therein and excluding
therefrom arrests for minor traffic violations.
(Ord. No. 1441-67. Passed 12-11-67, eff. 12-14-67)
§ 135.021 Annual Reports of the Safety Director
   The Director of Public Safety shall present and submit to the Clerk of
Council on or before January 1st of each calendar year a report outlining the
goals and objectives for the Division of Police for the coming year and also
including plans and programs proposed to be implemented during the coming year
or in future years for the improvement of police department performance,
productivity and efficiency.
(Ord. No. 1436-86. Passed 12-15-86, eff. 12-17-86)
§ 135.03 Medical Reports and Fees
   The Director of Public Safety is authorized to furnish medical information
upon the receipt of a written request and release from a member of the
department and the payment of the following fees:
   (a)   Fifteen dollars ($15.00) for a letter consisting of “time lost and
rate of pay” of member;
   (b)   Thirty dollars ($30.00) for a letter consisting of the member’s
“medical history”.
(Ord. No. 717-83. Passed 5-9-83, eff. 5-11-83)
§ 135.04 Administrative Assistants
   The Director of Public Safety shall assign not more than five (5) members
from the Division of Police or the Division of Fire to the position of
Administrative Assistant, Department of Public Safety at the compensation for
which shall be at the rate fixed for the rank of Captain of Police. The status
within the uniform ranks of such member while so serving in such assignment
shall remain unchanged and, notwithstanding the compensation fixed for such
position, he or she shall not acquire any right to promotion other than such
rights to promotion which apply to the rank held at the time of assignment.
(Ord. No. 1833-A-83. Passed 10-17-83, eff. 10-20-83)
§ 135.041 Superintendent of Safety Buildings
   The Director of Public Safety shall assign one (1) member of the Division of
Police or the Division of Fire to the position of Superintendent of Safety
Buildings, Department of Public Safety. The compensation of the member serving
in such assignment shall be fixed by the Director at not less than twenty-eight
thousand four hundred twenty dollars and forty-eight cents ($28,420.48) and not
more than twenty-eight thousand four hundred twenty dollars and forty-eight
cents ($28,420.48) per annum. The status within the uniform ranks of such
member, while so serving in such assignment, shall remain unchanged and,
notwithstanding the compensation fixed for such position, he or she shall not
acquire any right to promotion other than such rights to promotion which apply
to the rank held at the time of assignment.
(Ord. No. 1130-80. Passed 6-16-80, eff. 6-18-80)
§ 135.042 Reserved
§ 135.043 Notification of Sexual Offenders
   Upon receiving notice of the residency of a sexual offender in the City of
Cleveland pursuant to the Ohio Revised Code, the Chief of Police, unless
prohibited by state or federal law, shall provide written notification of the
residency of a sexual offender, as defined by the Ohio Revised Code, to the
District Commander and member of Council in whose ward the sexual offender is
located. The notice shall include the following information: (1) the offender’s
name; (2) the address or addresses at which the offender resides; (3) the
sexually oriented offense of which the offender was convicted or to which the
offender pleaded guilty; and (4) a statement that the offender has been
adjudicated as being a sexual predator and that, as of the date of the notice,
the court has not entered a determination that the offender no longer is a
sexual predator, or a statement that the sentencing or reviewing judge has
determined that the offender is a habitual sexual offender.
(Ord. No. 1873-2000. Passed 12-18-00, eff. 12-27-00)
§ 135.05 Injured or Disabled Firemen and Policemen
   In accordance with the provisions of Charter Section
123, members of the Division of Police or of the Division of Fire, disabled or
injured in any way in the discharge of their duties, may be treated for such
disability or injury at any hospital. Such disabled fireman or policeman
requiring treatment outside of such hospital care shall be entitled to be
furnished with all devices for rehabilitation, including artificial eyes,
artificial limbs and all other such items. Such care and treatment and the cost
of such other items required for rehabilitation of such injured fireman or
policeman shall be paid from funds established for such purpose in the
Department of Public Safety.
(Ord. No. 2073-38. Passed 12-12-38)
§ 135.06 Uniform and Equipment for Police and Fire Forces and Civilian
Employees
   (a)   The Director of Public Safety shall prescribe the uniform to be worn
by the members of the police and fire forces and civilian tow trucks, ambulance
drivers and other civilian employees as the Director shall determine. He or she
shall provide by rule for the regular inspection and proper maintenance of all
such uniforms in a neat, clean and serviceable condition. However, all uniform
police personnel below the rank of Lieutenant shall have one (1) permanent
identification or badge number assigned to them, which number the Director
shall require to be permanently sewn or otherwise affixed to all outer shirts,
jackets and coats worn by such uniform police personnel. The identification or
badge number shall also be placed on such uniforms and apparel as to be clearly
visible and legible, in numerals not less than one-half (1/2) inch in height
nor less than one-half (1/2) inch in width, and numbers shall be affixed to a
patch or emblem not less than two (2) inches in width and not less than two and
three-fourths (2-3/4) inches in height. Such patch or emblem shall be
permanently sewn or otherwise affixed to all outer shirts, jackets and coats
worn by uniform personnel, and be of such contrasting color as to set off the
numerals from the background color of the uniforms or apparel to which they are
permanently sewn or otherwise affixed.
   (b)   The City shall bear the cost of permanent identification or badge
number as required herein.
   (c)   The failure of any police personnel required by this section to wear
any shirt, jacket or coat all times while on duty, permanently displaying his
or her identification or badge number, as required by this section, shall
constitute gross neglect of duty and failure to obey orders given by proper
authority, and subject such officer to disciplinary action as provided by law.
   (d)   The Director is hereby authorized and directed in the manner
prescribed by the Charter to enter into one (1) or more requirement contracts,
or such other contracts as may be necessary for the furnishing of the
prescribed uniform and parts thereof during each year, chargeable to the
appropriation annually made for such purpose.
(Ord. No. 1667-83. Passed 6-19-84, eff. 6-22-84)
§ 135.061 Uniform Allowances
   (a)   The Director of Public Safety is authorized to issue purchase
requisitions to the Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies, against any
requirements or other contract for uniforms for employees in the
classifications in the Safety Department for which a collective bargaining
agreement establishes a uniform allowance, in the amount established in the
applicable agreements.
   (b)   In addition, the Director of Public Safety is authorized to issue
purchase requisitions to the Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies, against
any requirements or other contract for an annual uniform allowance for those
uniformed employees in supervisory positions not covered under a collective
bargaining agreement. The uniform allowance shall be in the same amount as the
amount established by the collective bargaining agreement determined by the
Director to be most closely related to the supervisory position.
(Ord. No. 293-11. Passed 3-28-11, eff. 4-1-11)
§ 135.062 Police Promotional Uniform Allowances
   The Director is hereby authorized to issue purchase requisitions to the
Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies, against any requirements or other
contract for uniforms, in the amount of two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00)
for any officer in the Division of Police upon promotion.
(Ord. No. 1667-83. Passed 6-19-84, eff. 6-22-84)
§ 135.063   Uniform Maintenance Allowance
   (a)   The Director of Public Safety is authorized to cause payment for a
uniform maintenance allowance to employees in the classifications in the Safety
Department for which the applicable collective bargaining agreement establishes
a maintenance allowance, in the amount established in the agreements.
   (b)   In addition, the Director of Public Safety is authorized to cause
payment for an annual uniform maintenance allowance for those uniformed
employees in supervisory positions not covered under a collective bargaining
agreement. The uniform allowance shall be in the same amount as the amount
established by the collective bargaining agreement determined by the Director
to be most closely related to the supervisory position.
(Ord. No. 293-11. Passed 3-28-11, eff. 4-1-11)
§ 135.064 Payment of Clothing Allowance
   On October 1, 1985 and October 1, 1986 every full time employee in the
Department of Public Safety who is in the classification of Cable Splicer I,
Cable Splicer II, Lineman Helper Driver, Signal System Powerman, Traffic Signal
Control Technician and Trouble Lineman shall be entitled to payment of the two
hundred thirty dollars ($230.00) per year for the purchase of protective
clothing for work in inclement weather.
(Ord. No. 2463-85. Passed 10-28-85, eff. 10-31-85)
§ 135.065 Purchase of Firearms, Ammunition, Helmets, Tasers, and K-9 Police
Dogs, for the Department of Public Safety
   (a)   The Director of Public Safety is authorized to enter into one (1) or
more requirement or standard purchase contracts under the Charter and the
Codified Ordinances of Cleveland, Ohio, 1976, as may be necessary, from time to
time, for the purchase of each or all of the following items:
      (1)   Nine millimeter handguns, including magazine clips and holsters;
      (2)   Shotguns, including necessary appurtenances;
      (3)   Rifles, including necessary appurtenances;
      (4)   Ammunition, both service and reload;
      (5)   Helmets, including any necessary attachments;
      (6)   Tasers, including any necessary equipment; and
      (7)   K-9 police dogs, including any related equipment, supplies and
training.
   (b)   Any purchase made under this section shall be made by the Commissioner
of Purchases and Supplies and paid from the annual appropriation made for such
purpose.
   (c)   That under Section
108(b) of the Charter, the purchases authorized by this section may be made
through cooperative arrangements with other governmental agencies. The Director
of Public Safety may sign all documents that are necessary to make the
purchases, and may enter into one or more contracts with the vendors selected
through that cooperative process.
(Ord. No. 76-16. Passed 3-21-16, eff. 3-24-16)
§ 135.07 Compulsory Retirement of Members of Police and Fire Forces
   (a)   It is hereby declared to be in the interest of efficiency of the
Divisions of Police and Fire in the Department of Public Safety that members
thereof whose status as such has been established pursuant to the Charter, be
honorably retired. They shall be retired by the Director of Public Safety on
and after March 1, 1975, if then sixty-five (65) years of age or over, or at
such later date as such members attain the age of sixty- five (65) years.
However, anyone subject to retirement under these provisions, upon written
request of the Chief of Police or Fire, shall continue on active duty on a year
to year basis, subject to approval of the Director following an independent
medical evaluation.
   (b)   Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to apply to persons
who are members of the Public Employees Retirement System nor to the Chief of
Police. All members of the Division of Police and Fire retired under the
provisions of this section shall be entitled to such pensions as are provided
by the rules of the respective pension boards.
   (c)   The Director of Public Safety shall notify Council of persons
continuing on active duty within three (3) weeks after the written request is
approved.
(Ord. No. 676-09. Passed 6-1-09, eff. 6-5-09)
§ 135.071 Maximum Age for Original Appointment to the Divisions of Police and
Fire
   (a)   No person is eligible to receive an original appointment to the
Division of Police as a Police Trainee on or after the person’s fifty-fifth
birthday.
   (b)   No person is eligible to receive an original appointment to the
academy for the Division of Fire on or after the person’s fortieth birthday.
(Ord. No. 1298-2023. Passed 12-4-23, eff. 12-7-23)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to set maximum age limits, see RC 124.41 and 124.42
§ 135.08 Police Division Vacancies; Council Approval of Promotions
   Notwithstanding and as an exception to any other provision of the Codified
Ordinances to the contrary, on and after May 31, 1977, and thereafter, no
person shall be promoted within the uniformed ranks of the Division of Police
without the prior approval of Council being given to fill any such vacancy
resulting from any cause whatsoever in such promotional ranks.
(Ord. No. 3080-77. Passed 12-2-77, eff. 12-11-77)
§ 135.09 Division of Police
   (a)   There is established a Division of Police in the Department of Public
Safety, to be administered and controlled by a Chief of Police, subject to the
provisions of the Charter and ordinances of the City and to the direction of
the Director of Public Safety. The Division shall comprise the police force of
the City and shall consist of the ranks set forth in the table in this division
and not more persons per ranks than are designated in such table. Designation
of the number of persons in each rank constitutes the maximum authorized
strength for the rank and does not require, and shall not be construed as
requiring, the appointment of the number of officers and patrol officers so
designated, or of any specific lesser number. All members of the Division shall
be appointed by the Director of Public Safety, unless otherwise provided in the
Charter. The ranks of Deputy Chief of Police, Commander of Police and
Commissioner of Traffic Control shall include five (5) minority persons:
Rank Not to Exceed
Rank                            Not to Exceed
Chief of Police                 1
Deputy Chief of Police          4
Commander of Police             11
Commissioner of Traffic Control 1
Captain                         35
Lieutenant                      82
Sergeant                        211
Patrol Officer                  2,500
 
   (b)   No person holding any of the ranks set forth in the table in division
(a) of this section shall perform any work which is of the same nature as, or
included in the duties of any other classified employee of the City, except as
is immediately necessary to the performance of the duties of such rank and as
is necessarily incidental thereto.
(Ord. No. 408-08. Passed 4-28-08, eff. 5-2-08)
§ 135.091 Expense Fund for Chief of Police
   There shall be allowed annually to the Chief of Police, in addition to all
salary and allowances otherwise provided by law, the sum of two hundred fifty
thousand dollars ($250,000.00) to provide for expenses which may be incurred by
him or her in the performance of his or her official duties and in the
furtherance of justice. On order of the Chief of Police and the Director of
Public Safety, the Commissioner of Accounts shall draw his or her warrant on
the City Treasurer, payable to the Chief of Police or other person as the order
designates, for the amount as the order requires; the amounts, not exceeding
the amount provided by this section, to be paid out of the general fund of the
City.
   Nothing shall be paid under this section until the Chief of Police has given
bond to the City in the amount of two hundred fifty thousand dollars
($250,000.00), and the bond shall be conditioned that he or she will faithfully
discharge all the duties enjoined on him or her, and pay over all moneys
received by him or her in his or her official capacity. The bond shall be
deposited with the Commissioner of Accounts. The premium on the bond shall be
paid by the City.
   The Chief of Police shall annually, on the fifth business day of January,
file with the Commissioner of Accounts an itemized statement of the Chief’s
expense fund, verified by him or her as to the manner in which the fund has
been expended during the preceding year. If any part of the fund remains in his
or her hands unexpended, the funds shall be carried over to the following year
and noted on both the current and the following year’s itemized report.
(Ord. No. 1975-07. Passed 4-7-08, eff. 4-14-08)
§ 135.092 Agreements with the State of Ohio to Receive Reimbursement for Police
Training Programs
   (a)   That the Director of Public Safety is authorized to enter into
agreements with the State of Ohio to receive reimbursement for the costs of
police training programs, for the Division of Police, Department of Public
Safety.
   (b)   That the Director of Public Safety is authorized to accept
reimbursements from the State of Ohio for police training costs and to deposit
those funds into a revolving fund which will be used to provide additional
police training for the Division of Police, and the funds are appropriated for
that purpose.
(Ord. No. 1440-09. Passed 2-8-10, eff. 2-12-10)
§ 135.10 Traffic Control Unit
   (a)   There is hereby established a Traffic Control Unit within the Division
of Police to be headed by a member of the Division appointed as such head and
designated Commissioner of Traffic Control.
   (b)   The status within the uniform ranks of such member while serving as
the head of the Unit shall remain unchanged and no vacancy shall accrue to
uniform ranks thereby. Notwithstanding the compensation fixed by this section,
the Commissioner shall not acquire any rights to promotion other than such
rights to promotion which apply to the rank held at the time of appointment as
Commissioner.
   (c)   In addition to the Commissioner, the Unit shall consist of such
members of the police force as may be assigned to it.
(Ord. No. 1588-02. Passed 8-14-02, eff. 8-20-02)
§ 135.11 Use of the Division of Police’s Firing Range; Fee
   The Director of Public Safety is authorized to enter into contracts with and
collect fees from political subdivisions or other public or private entities to
allow its law enforcement officers to use the Division of Police’s firing range
during any period when available as determined by the Director. The fees for
use of the firing range shall be set by the Board of Control. The contracts
authorized by this section shall be prepared by the Director of Law. The
Director of Public Safety shall deposit the fees collected from the law
enforcement agencies into the fund or funds designated to pay the costs of
facility improvements. The fees collected may be used for and are appropriated
for this purposes.
(Ord. No. 355-09. Passed 6-1-09, eff. 6-5-09)
§ 135.12 Police Escorts; Fee
   (a)   When the Chief of Police determines it is necessary for the safety and
welfare of citizens and visitors for police escorts to be provided, including
but not limited to, police escorts for visiting sports teams, political
dignitaries, or other individuals or groups requesting or requiring a police
escort, the Director of Public Safety may charge and collect fees for the
police escort.
   (b)   A fee schedule for police escorts shall be established by the Board of
Control, and updated from time-to-time as necessary.
   (c)   The Director may establish rules and regulations regarding police
escorts, including staffing and vehicles for arrival escorts, departure
escorts, and other necessary escorts. Such rules and regulations shall become
effective ten (10) days after publication in the City Record.
   (d)   In addition to the police escorts provided under division (a) of this
section, if a police escort is required by state law, or at any other time that
the Director of Public Safety and the Traffic Commissioner determine that a
police escort is needed, the recipient of the police escort shall also
reimburse the City for the costs of the escort according to the fee schedule
established by the Board of Control under this section.
(Ord. No. 1593-11. Passed 12-5-11, eff. 12-9-11)
§ 135.13 Disclosure of Police Use of Deadly Force Recordings
   (a)   Definitions. As used in this section:
      (1)   "City recording device" means a wearable camera system, dashcam, or
other device capable of making a video recording that is issued to a police
officer for use in the course of the officer's official duties.
      (2)   "Dashcam" means a video-recording device installed in a City police
vehicle by the City, or a City-authorized party, for the purpose of recording
video in and around the vehicle.
      (3)   "Deadly force" means any action that is likely to cause or does
cause death or serious physical harm to any person.
      (4)   "Extraordinary circumstances" means, but is not limited to, any one
(1) of the following: terrorist attack; mass-shooting incident; cyberattack;
riot; strike; flooding; disruption of City operations by a natural disaster;
disruption of City operations through loss of electrical power or other utility
outage, or similar circumstances beyond the City's control.
      (5)   "Footage" means that portion of a video recording made by a City
recording device that documents an incident.
      (6)   "Incident" means a police officer's use of deadly force against a
person or use of force resulting in serious physical harm to a person.
      (7)   "Petition" means a written request for the release of footage made
pursuant to this section rather than the Ohio Public Records Act that
reasonably describes the incident for which the request was made.
      (8)   "Petitioner" means an individual who has submitted a petition
pursuant to this section.
      (9)   "Police officer" means any sworn law enforcement agent employed by
or volunteering for the Division of Police, Department of Public Safety of the
City of Cleveland, including a supervisor or reserve officer, that is engaged
in his or her official duties.
      (10)   "Serious physical harm" means: any physical harm that carries a
substantial risk of death; any physical harm that involves some permanent
incapacity, whether partial or total, or that involves some temporary
substantial incapacity; any physical harm that involves some permanent
disfigurement or that involves some temporary, serious disfigurement; or any
physical harm that involves acute pain of such duration as to result in
substantial suffering or that involves any degree of prolonged or intractable
pain.
      (11)   "Wearable Camera System" means a body worn digital recording
device with secured internal memory for storage of recorded video and audio,
which operates in two (2) modes, buffering and event, that is issued by the
City to a police officer, and that is designed to be worn or otherwise utilized
by the police officer in the course of the officer's duties.
   (b)   The Director of Public Safety, in consultation with the Chief of
Police, shall release footage, redacted as consistent with applicable state and
federal laws, within seven (7) days of any incident involving a police
officer's use of deadly force against a person or use of force causing serious
physical harm to a person. The released footage shall be from at least three
(3) City recording devices or, if the incident is recorded by fewer than three
(3) such devices, the released footage shall be from all City recording devices
that recorded the incident. The released footage shall begin at least sixty
(60) seconds prior to the incident or at the beginning of the recording,
whichever is shorter. Footage is released by making it publicly available on
the City website.
   (c)   In addition to the footage released pursuant to division (b) of this
section, the Director of Public Safety, in consultation with the Chief of
Police, shall release all remaining footage of the incident, redacted as
consistent with applicable state and federal laws, within thirty (30) days of
the incident. The released footage shall begin at least sixty (60) seconds
prior to the incident or at the beginning of the recording, whichever is
shorter. Footage is released by making it publicly available on the City
website.
   (d)   Any person allegedly aggrieved by the failure of the Director of
Public Safety and the Chief of Police to release footage as set forth in
divisions (b) or (c) of this section may file a written petition with the
Director of Law for the release of the footage. The petition shall include
contact information where the petitioner may receive written correspondence.
After receipt of the petition, the Director of Law shall determine whether the
requested footage exists, and if such footage exists, shall cause it to be
released within seven (7) days of receipt of the petition. Such release shall
be in the same manner as set forth in divisions (b) or (c) of this section. If
the requested footage does not exist or cannot be reasonably identified, the
Director of Law shall notify the petitioner in writing within seven (7) days of
receipt of the petition.
   (e)   The Director of Public Safety, the Chief of Police and the Director of
Law are not required to release footage of an incident when the release is
prohibited by court order or some other legal prohibition that requires denying
the release of the footage.
   A showing of the existence of a court order or other legal prohibition is a
complete defense to any action made to compel the release of footage under this
section.
   (f)   The requirement to release footage within the time frames set forth in
divisions (b), (c) and (d) of this section does not apply in extraordinary
circumstances, during which the release of requested footage shall be within a
reasonable time.
   (g)   If a petitioner is allegedly aggrieved by the failure of the Director
of Law to release footage as required under division (d) of this section, the
aggrieved petitioner may file an action in mandamus against the Director of
Law.
(Ord. No. 694-2021. Passed 8-10-22, eff. 8-17-22)
§ 135.14 Division of Police, Various Positions
   In addition to the ranks established by Section
135.09, the Division of Police shall include outside of said ranks the
positions of Junior Assistant Secretary of Police, Surgeon of Police, and
Superintendent of Criminalistics, which positions shall be in the classified
civil service.
(Ord. No. 1098-85. Passed 6-24-85, eff. 7-1-85)
§ 135.15 Secretary of Police
   (a)   There shall be in the Division of Police a position to be known as
Secretary of Police, the compensation for which shall be at the rate fixed for
the rank of Captain of Police.
   (b)   The position shall have the incidences prescribed by RC 124.51.
(Ord. No. 939-69. Passed 9-22-69, eff. 9-24-69)
§ 135.16 Division of Animal Care and Control; Animal Control Officer; Spay and
Neuter Clinic; Fee
   (a)   There is established in the Department of Public Safety, a Division of
Animal Care and Control, which shall consist of one (1) Chief Animal Control
Officer and at least one (1) animal control officer permanently assigned to
each of the five (5) police districts on a full-time basis, and other animal
control officers as the Director of Public Safety deems necessary. All of these
employees shall be uniformed employees under the control and management of the
Director, who shall designate the kind of uniform to be worn and direct the
operation of the Chief and other animal control officers.
   (b)   The Chief Animal Control Officer and all other animal control officers
are authorized to give notice and issue citations, in compliance with Rule 4.1
of the Ohio Rules of Criminal Procedure, to anyone found to be in violation of
Section
603.01, Section
603.02 or Section
603.04. The Chief Animal Control Officer and all other animal control officers
are hereby established as "dog wardens" for purposes of enforcing applicable
statutes pertaining to animals under the Ohio Revised Code. The Chief Animal
Control Officer and all other animal control officers are authorized with the
power and duty to enforce and prosecute the provisions of
Chapters 603 and
604.
   (c)   There is established in the Department of Public Safety, Division of
Animal Care and Control, a Spay and Neuter Clinic, to be administered and
controlled by a Veterinarian in Charge, subject to the direction of the
Director of Public Safety. City residents may neuter or spay dogs or cats for
the following fees:
 
Cat neuter $25.00
Cat spay   $30.00
Dog neuter $35.00
Dog spay   $40.00
 
   All fees shall be paid to the City of Cleveland at the time the neuter or
spay operation is performed.
(Ord. No. 1572-14. Passed 12-8-14, eff. 12-10-14)
§ 135.17 Acceptance of Gifts and Services for the Division of Animal Care and
Control
   The Director of Public Safety is authorized to accept, with the grateful
appreciation of the City, the funds, other personal properties, and services
unconditionally given as may from time to time be donated for the use and
benefit of the Division of Animal Care and Control.
   The Director of Public Safety is authorized, as part of general fundraising
efforts for the Division of Animal Care and Control, to recognize a donor for
their generosity and support by placing the donor's name in the interior of a
building owned or operated by the City for the Division of Animal Care and
Control and on outdoor animal cages. Donors shall not be conferred any legal
right or entitlement to the naming and the Director shall at all times retain
sole authority to select the donors to be so honored and the location, manner
and duration of the naming. Donor recognition posted on the premises must be
approved by the Director of Law. No donor's name shall be affixed to the
exterior of a building owned or operated by the City of Cleveland.
(Ord. No. 200-17. Passed 4-3-17, eff. 4-5-17)
§ 135.18 Special Revenue Fund Established for the Division of Animal Care and
Control
   All moneys accepted under Section
135.17 shall be placed to the credit of the Division of Animal Care and Control
in a special revenue fund. The moneys deposited in the special revenue fund
shall be expended for the benefit of the Division of Animal Care and Control at
the discretion of the Director of Public Safety, or in the manner and for the
specific purpose named in the gift.
(Ord. No. 1572-14. Passed 12-8-14, eff. 12-10-14)
§ 135.180 Expenditure of Donated Funds for the Division of Animal Care and
Control
   Expenditures from accounts shall be made on vouchers signed by the Director
of Public Safety, or his or her designee, when the amount is less than ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00); otherwise such expenditure shall first be
authorized by ordinance of Council in the manner provided in Charter Section
108. No part of any funds credited to the accounts shall be paid to or for the
benefit of any officer or employee, either as additional compensation or as
reimbursement for expenses incurred, or paid for purposes other than those
directly benefiting the Division of Animal Care and Control or in any manner
other than that applicable to the expenditure of other public funds, unless the
payment is specifically provided for in the terms of the gift or authorized by
resolution or ordinance of Council.
(Ord. No. 1572-14. Passed 12-8-14, eff. 12-10-14)
§ 135.181 Application for and Acceptance of Rewards under the BP Oil Shield
Program
   The Director of Public Safety is authorized to apply for and accept any
reward in the nature of money, property or services to which the Division of
Police may be entitled under the BP Oil Company Shield Program. The Director is
further authorized to file all papers and execute all documents necessary to
receive the rewards. Any such reward shall be used for the benefit of the
Division of Police, unconditionally or limited by such conditions as the donor
may impose, and any such reward monies are hereby appropriated for the benefit
of the Division of Police and for the purposes specified by the donor. The
Director shall report the acceptance of any such reward to the Clerk of
Council.
(Ord. No. 1703-91. Passed 7-24-91, eff. 7-31-91)
§ 135.19 Refusal to Obey Subpoena or Produce Evidence
   No person shall refuse to obey any subpoena issued under the authority of
Charter Section
115-3, nor refuse to produce books, papers or other evidence required by the
Police Review Board, or a committee or person authorized by it.
(Ord. No. 1256-99. Passed 7-14-99, eff. 7-14-99)
§ 135.20 Special Policemen
   (a)   The Director of Public Safety is authorized to commission as policemen
and policewomen, for a specified time but not to exceed six (6) months for any
one (1) commission:
      (1)   Such employees of the City as have the care and custody of public
property.
      (2)   Such persons as may be needed to transport and guard prisoners
committed to penal institutions of this State for violation of the ordinances
of the City.
   (b)   The Director shall prescribe such uniform and badge or distinguishing
mark for such policemen or policewomen as he or she may see fit. All persons so
commissioned shall have full police powers as prescribed by law.
(Ord. No. 67506. Passed 12-28-25)
§ 135.21 Division of Fire
   There is hereby established a Division of Fire in the Department of Public
Safety to be administered and controlled by a Fire Chief, subject to the
provisions of the Charter and ordinances of the City, and to the direction of
the Director of Public Safety.
   (a)   The Division of Fire shall comprise the fire force of the City and
shall consist of the ranks set forth in the table below and not more persons
per rank than are designated in such table. Designation of the number of
persons in each rank constitutes the maximum authorized strength for the ranks
and does not require, and shall not be construed as requiring, the appointment
of the number of officers so designated, or of any specific lesser number. All
members of the fire force shall be appointed by the Director of Public Safety
unless otherwise provided by Charter.
Rank Not to Exceed
Rank                 Not to Exceed
Fire Chief           1
Assistant Fire Chief 7
Battalion Chief      32
Captain              78
Lieutenant           173*
Firefighter          1500
* plus ten (10) lieutenant positions to be filled only in accordance with the
settlement agreement in Luke v. City of Cleveland, U.S.District Court Case No.
1:02 CV 1225.
 
   (b)   No person holding any of the above ranks in the Division of Fire shall
perform any work which is of the same nature as, or included within the duties
of, any other classified employee of the City, except as is immediately
necessary incident thereto.
   (c)   The provisions of Section
171.05 to the contrary notwithstanding, commencing January 1, 1981, the Fire
Chief shall not be entitled to compensation in money for hours worked on a
holiday, or in excess of eight (8) hours per day, or in excess of forty (40)
hours during any work week.
(Ord. No. 505-06. Passed 3-20-06, eff. 3-24-06)
§ 135.22 Reserved
§ 135.23 Secretary of Fire
   (a)   There shall be in the Division of Fire a position to be known as the
Secretary of Fire, the compensation for which shall be at the rate fixed for
the rank of Battalion Chief.
   (b)   The position shall have the incidences prescribed by RC 124.51.
(Ord. No. 939-69. Passed 9-22-69, eff. 9-24-69)
§ 135.24 Fire Protection outside Territorial Limits
   From and after June 1, 1943, no fire protection service shall be rendered
outside of territorial limits of the City of Cleveland by the Division of Fire
to persons, firms or corporations except pursuant to contracts entered into
with the City of Cleveland as hereinafter provided.
(Ord. No. 473-43. Passed 6-25-43)
§ 135.25 Application for Fire Protection
   Any person, firm or corporation desiring fire protection services from the
City of Cleveland shall make an application therefor in writing to the Director
of Public Safety. The application shall be accompanied by a plat showing the
location of the property and the location of all buildings thereon. Upon
receipt thereof the Director shall determine whether it is feasible for the
Division of Fire to render City fire protection to the property of the
applicant.
(Ord. No. 473-43. Passed 6-25-43)
§ 135.26 Intermunicipal Fire Protection Agreements
   The Director of Public Safety is hereby authorized to enter into agreements
to provide or accept services of fire forces, including the interchange of fire
forces, technical rescue, confined space rescue, and hazardous materials
response, or the use of fire apparatus with the county or any political
subdivision, state agency or instrumentality within Cuyahoga County as shall
request such agreements, or as agree to provide such services to the City of
Cleveland, in the interest of public safety. Any such agreements must be
authorized by the legislative body of the governing board of the entity
requesting service from or providing service to the City of Cleveland.
(Ord. No. 2005-98. Passed 12-14-98, eff. 12-24-98)
§ 135.27 Other Fire Protection Agreements
   The Director of Public Safety may enter into an agreement for a period not
to exceed one (1) year with any person, group of persons, firm or corporation,
owning or having an interest in property outside of the corporate limits of the
City, desiring to obtain fire protection for such property, if the Board of
Control shall determine such agreement to be desirable in the public interest.
No such contract shall be made for services to be rendered in any territory
outside the City within any municipality except with the consent and approval
of the legislative body of the municipality in which such service is to be
rendered. The contract shall in no event confer a right of action for damages
on any property owner or any other person, firm or corporation for the
operation or failure to operate thereunder. The City will not establish any
fire houses or fixed equipment outside of the City limits.
(Ord. No. 1941-54. Passed 11-15-54, eff. 11-22-54)
§ 135.28 Fee for Fire Protection
   The fee for fire protection pursuant to Section
135.27 shall be equal to six (6) mills per dollar on the total taxable value of
the property owned by the applicant. The total taxable value for the purposes
of this section shall be determined as that of December 31 of the preceding
calendar year. The fee for such service shall be paid quarterly in advance.
(Ord. No. 770-70. Passed 5-18-70, eff. 5-20-70)
§ 135.29 Renewal of Fire Protection Agreements
   Renewal of agreements for fire protection pursuant to Section
135.27 shall be made as in the case of original applications. Application for
renewal shall be made not less than thirty (30) days before the expiration of
the existing agreement.
(Ord. No. 1941-54. Passed 11-15-54, eff. 11-22-54)
§ 135.30 Providing Fire Protection to Other Political Subdivisions Upon
Authorization of the Director of Public Safety or His or Her Designee
   Pursuant to the authority of RC 9.60(D), the Division of Fire may provide
fire protection without a contract to any state agency or instrumentality,
county or political subdivision of the State upon authorization of the Director
of Public Safety or his or her designee, who is hereby designated pursuant to
Section 9.60(D) as the person who may authorize such action by the Division of
Fire
(Ord. No. 1168-97. Passed 8-13-97, eff. 8-20-97)
§ 135.31 Location and Assignment of Fire Companies
   (a)   It is the determination of Council that the health, safety and welfare
of all citizens require:
      (1)   That the present locations of fire companies and the present
assignment of fire fighting equipment established by the Division of Fire, and
for which Council allocated general funds in the budget and authorized capital
improvement funds by legislation, shall be maintained.
      (2)   That the existing assignment structure consisting of the following,
in addition to the Arson Squad, and other bureaus presently in existence, be
kept in service at all times:
         A.   Thirty-five (35) engine companies with a minimum of four (4) men
on regular duty per engine company per twenty-four (24) hour day;
         B.   Eighteen (18) hook and ladder units with a minimum of five (5)
men on regular duty per hook and ladder company per twenty-four (24) hour day;
         C.   The Fire Alarm Office with a minimum of seven (7) men on regular
duty per twenty- four (24) hour day;
         D.   Four (4) rescue squads with a minimum of five (5) men on regular
duty per rescue squad per twenty-four (24) hour day.
   (b)   The Director of Public Safety shall issue or cause to be issued such
rules, regulations or orders as may be necessary to implement the determination
of Council.
(Ord. No. 273-76. Passed 2-23-76, eff. 2-24-76)
§ 135.32 Fire Division Working Hours
   Except in case of extraordinary emergencies, not more than eight (8) hours
shall constitute a day’s work and not more than forty (40) hours shall
constitute a week’s work for any fireman or ranking officer in the Division of
Fire whose salary is provided for in Section
173.29. However, for the men and officers assigned to the Fire Alarm Office,
the Bureau of Emergency and Rescue Services, the Bureau of Equipment and
Apparatus Maintenance, the store room, engine companies, hook and ladder units,
the Arson Squad, the rescue squads, the heavy duty rescue squads and for all
shift battalion and assistant chiefs and drivers such work week shall be
extended not more than forty-eight (48) hours. It shall consist of one (1)
twenty-four (24) consecutive hour shift, followed by forty-eight (48)
consecutive hours off work with an additional twenty- four (24) consecutive
hours off work once every three (3) weeks, so that no person shall have
averaged more than forty-eight (48) hours of work per week within such three
(3) week period. Four (4) rescue squads on regular duty per twenty-four (24)
hour day shall be retained in addition to the Arson Squad, and other bureaus
presently in existence. Such services shall be maintained at all times.
(Ord. No. 148-76. Passed over Mayor’s veto 3-15-76, eff. 3-16-76)
§ 135.33 Division of Emergency Medical Service
   There is hereby established a Division of Emergency Medical Service in the
Department of Public Safety, which shall be administered and controlled by a
commissioner to be known as the Commissioner of Emergency Medical Service,
subject to the provisions of the Charter and ordinances of the City, and to the
direction of the Director of Public Safety.
(Ord. No. 2092-80. Passed 12-8-80, eff. 12-12-80)
§ 135.331 Duties of Commissioner of Emergency Medical Service
   The Commissioner of Emergency Medical Service shall supervise the work of
other officers and employees in the Division of Emergency Medical Service; have
charge of the planning, management, and operation of a system to provide
emergency medical services to persons in need of pre-hospital care; shall
collect duly established charges for such services and keep such records
pertaining to the Division as may be necessary or useful in the efficient
management of the Division.
(Ord. No. 2092-80. Passed 12-8-80, eff. 12-12-80)
§ 135.332 Emergency Medical Service Charges; Fees
   (a)   The Commissioner of Emergency Medical Service shall establish and
charge a fee for each of the following ambulance services:
      (1)   Basic Life Support;
      (2)   Advanced Life Support; and
      (3)   Advanced Life Support II.
   (b)   The Commissioner may adjust, establish and charge additional fees for
other services rendered, according to federal and State reimbursement fee
schedules, not to exceed the City’s cost.
   (c)   Any fee established under this section shall be published in the City
Record and become effective ten (10) days following the date first published,
or at such later date as provided by the Commissioner of Emergency Medical
Service. All members of City Council shall be notified of any changes to fees
established under this section.
(Ord. No. 600-10. Passed 6-7-10, eff. 6-11-10)
§ 135.34 Police and Fire Forces Wearing Uniforms at Polling Places
   No member of the Division of Police or the Division of Fire shall wear any
uniform or part thereof, or any badge or other insignia which is prescribed by
the Director of Public Safety as the official uniform or equipment for such
members of the police and fire forces, within five hundred (500) feet of any
polling place during the time of voting at any election in the City, except for
the purpose of voting at his or her assigned polling place or while performing
his or her official duties.
(Ord. No. 628-76. Passed 5-24-76, eff. 5-29-76)
§ 135.35 Fire Communication Service for Hospitals, Nursing Homes
   (a)   The Director of Public Safety shall, on request of the responsible
agent, authorize the direct connection of a local fire protective signaling
system with the Municipal Fire Division signal system to transmit an alarm from
hospitals, and nursing homes located within the City.
   (b)   Cost of equipment, installation and maintenance thereof required for
direct connection shall be borne by the recipient of the Municipal fire alarm
service, except that the Division of Fire shall install and maintain at its
expense a receiving console.
(Ord. No. 1017-76. Passed 7-19-76, eff. 7-21-76)
§ 135.36 Physical Examination for All Ranks of Police
   Each member of the uniform ranks in the Division of Police shall be required
to undergo a complete and thorough physical examination by the police surgeon
at least once every year. The police surgeon is required to keep a written
record of the results of his or her examination and to report to the Director
of Public Safety any physical or mental disabilities, or impairments, which in
his or her professional medical opinion, prevent any member of the uniform
ranks from performing his or her assigned tasks, or which might in all
probability tend to cause any such member to injure himself, herself or others
or otherwise cause him or her to become physically or mentally disabled. The
police surgeon may refer members of the Division of Police to such medical
specialists whom in his or her opinion are necessary to determine the physical
and mental capabilities of such members.
   The Director of Public Safety shall take appropriate action in cases of
physical or mental disability or impairment, as is within his or her authority
and according to his or her lawful duty.
(Ord. No. 968-77. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 135.37 Annual Police In-service Training Program
   There is hereby authorized and established an annual in-service training
program within the Police Academy, Division of Police, containing a maximum
forty (40) hours curricula, reflecting the activities and duties relating to
each separate rank within the Division of Police.
   The curricula and instruction shall be established by experts in their
respective fields, outside of the ranks of the Division of Police, and may
include private guest lecturers and instructors. Such curricula may also
contain any printed, graphic or electrically produced material.
   The curricula and instruction, within each respective rank, shall be free of
cultural, racial, and sexual bias and shall be job-related.
   In addition, such course instruction shall include, but not limited to, such
subjects as community relations, individual and group psychology, crowd
control, race relations, proper procedures in evidence gathering and
preservation, basic legal instruction regarding constitutional law and laws
relating to apprehension and arrest of persons and the lawful obtaining of
evidence, and such other job-related skill training and skill upgrading in
basic police crime prevention and detection techniques, utilizing the latest
available and most effective police science techniques.
   Whenever possible, such curricula and instruction shall include innovative
pilot projects and programs, approved by the Director of Public Safety, with
emphasis in the areas of crime prevention, and detection, including but not
limited to the use of police personnel in plain clothes or undercover
capacities, especially in the areas of violent crimes against the person and
all drug related offenses.
   Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the establishment of any
program of higher education for police personnel with any recognized
institution of higher learning.
(Ord. No. 1126-75. Passed 7-25-77, eff. 8-1-77)
§ 135.38 Attendance Records for In-service Training Program
   The Department of Public Safety shall keep records, according to rank for
all police personnel, indicating proper attendance as required in Section
135.37 in such annual in-service training program. Such program as established
in Section
135.37 may be supplemental to the requirements of the peace officers training
council, or may be submitted to the peace officers training council for its
approval, under RC Chapter 109.
(Ord. No. 1126-75. Passed 7-25-77, eff. 8-1-77)
§ 135.39 Personnel Counselor; Duties and Functions
   There is hereby established, within the office of the Director of Public
Safety a position to be known as Personnel Counselor. It shall be the duty of
such Personnel Counselor to work with the Civil Service Commission in setting
up standards and criteria for the measurement and rating of on the job
performance of each uniformed member of the Division of Police, together with a
psychological evaluation of the individual’s ability to perform the tasks
presently assigned to him or her.
   In addition, such Personnel Counselor shall personally interview each member
of the uniform ranks, at least once in every two (2) year period, to evaluate
the personal attitudes, difficulties and strengths of such personnel, so as to
offer advice and assistance to such personnel as relates to his or her on- the-
job performance and to make recommendations to the Director of Public Safety as
to the proper job assignment of such personnel, to maximize the proper
utilization of manpower in the Division of Police.
   The Personnel Counselor shall keep written records of his or her evaluations
and reports, which records shall be kept confidential and not open to public
inspection; provided however such information as is obtained by such Personnel
Counselor may be utilized in any authorized study or report, without using the
name of any individual member of the Division of Police.
   The Personnel Counselor may be a person assigned from the uniformed ranks or
outside of the uniform ranks, but shall possess at least an undergraduate
degree, from a recognized college or university, in the field of psychology or
personnel psychology. The status within the uniform ranks, if appointed from
the uniform ranks to the position of Personnel Counselor, and while serving
therein, shall remain unchanged and no vacancy shall accrue to the uniform
ranks thereby. Notwithstanding the compensation fixed by this section, the
Personnel Counselor shall not acquire any rights to promotion other than such
rights to promotion which apply to the rank held at the time of appointment as
Personnel Counselor.
   The annual compensation to be fixed by the Director of Public Safety shall
be within the schedule of compensation hereby established:
 
                    Minimum    Maximum
Personnel Counselor $18,000.00 $21,000.00
 
(Ord. No. 1126-75. Passed 7-25-77, eff. 8-1-77)
§ 135.40 Using Services of Local Colleges and Universities
   In carrying out and implementing the provisions of Section
135.37, the Director of Public Safety shall actively seek out, utilize and
establish a working plan and program with any local college or university in
establishing an in-service training program and also to further the education
of members of the uniform ranks in the Division of Police either by setting up
new or utilizing existing programs of education, leading to courses in or a
degree in a field of education relating directly or indirectly to police work.
For purposes of such continuing and further education, the Director of Public
Safety may rely on recommendations of the Personnel Counselor as to those
members of the Division of Police who would reasonably appear to benefit from a
program of continuing or further education at local colleges or universities,
beyond the level of in-service training programs. Provided, however, that no
member of the uniform ranks of the Division of Police shall be discriminated
against in selection as a candidate for continuing or further education, beyond
the in-service training program, at a local college or university on the basis
of race, religion, color, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity or
expression, national origin, age, disability, ethnic group or Vietnam-era or
disabled veteran status.
(Ord. No. 1445-13. Passed 11-17-14, eff. 11-19-14)
§ 135.41 Medical Assistance to Victims of Sexual Assault
   The Director of Public Safety shall cause to be paid by the City of
Cleveland any cost incurred by a hospital or other emergency medical facility
except a County facility, in conducting a medical examination of a victim of an
offense under RC 2907.02 to 2907.06 or 2907.12 for the purpose of gathering
physical evidence for a possible prosecution as provided in RC 2907.28.
   The Director of Public Safety shall promulgate such regulations, not
inconsistent with this section, as he or she may deem necessary to carry out
the provisions of this section.
(Ord. No. 1691-79. Passed 7-13-79, eff. 7-17-79)
§ 135.42 Contracts for Towing, Storage and Disposal of Impounded Motor Vehicles
   (a)   Contracts Authorized. The Director of Public Safety may enter into
contract for the following services:
      (1)   For the towing of vehicles and motor vehicles, including commercial
vehicles, authorized to be impounded by these Codified Ordinances;
      (2)   For the storage of impounded vehicles and motor vehicles;
      (3)   For the disposal and salvaging of impounded vehicles and motor
vehicles that are unclaimed or abandoned.
   (b)   Term. The term of any contract authorized by this section shall not
exceed two (2) years with one (1) two (2) year option to renew, exercisable by
the Director of Public Safety if authorized by additional legislative
authority.
   (c)   Salvage Vehicle Proceeds. Each contract for the towing of non-
commercial or commercial vehicles shall contain a provision that provides that
the division of monies received when vehicles are salvaged shall be as follows:
the towing firm that impounded the vehicle shall be paid thirty percent (30%)
of the salvage proceeds. The storage company shall be paid sixty percent (60%)
of the proceeds, not to exceed the amount authorized for its services in these
Codified Ordinances. The City of Cleveland shall be paid ten percent (10%) of
the proceeds, and shall also receive any monies that are not paid to the
storage firms because the percentage to which they would otherwise be entitled
exceeds the amount authorized for their services in these Codified Ordinances.
   (d)   Commercial Tow Rates. Each contract entered into under the authority
of division (a)(1) for the towing of commercial vehicles shall require that the
tower provide to the Director of Public Safety its schedule of commercial
towing rates, which shall not be higher than those charged to its most favored
customers. The Director of Public Safety shall have the right to audit the
records of each commercial tower to verify compliance with this requirement,
and may by contract impose sanctions on any vendor that fails to comply, up to
cancellation of the contract. No changes to a commercial tower's schedule of
rates shall take effect until thirty (30) days after written notice to the
Director of Public Safety of the revised schedule.
   (e)   Payment for Process Tows and Other Costs by the Division of Police
Authorized. Each contract for the towing of motor vehicles entered into under
the authority of this section:
      (1)   Shall provide that the Division of Police shall pay the costs of
towing any non-commercial or commercial vehicle in any case in which the
vehicle was impounded for processing by the Division of Police and the person
reclaiming the vehicle is the victim of a crime and is not liable for the
towing fees under these Codified Ordinances; and
      (2)   May provide that the Division of Police pay the costs of disposal
of solid wastes contained in impounded vehicles or incidental to the
impoundment, and the costs of disposal of non-salvageable watercraft, vehicles
or items, under such conditions as the Director of Public Safety may specify in
the contract.
   The costs authorized to be paid by the Division of Police under this
division shall be paid from the proper appropriation account as determined by
the Director of Finance.
   (f)   Disposal Firms' Qualifications. Any contract for the services
described in division (a)(3) of this section shall be performed by a motor
vehicle salvage dealer as defined in RC 4738.01 or a scrap metal processor as
defined in RC 4737.05.
(Ord. No. 1543-12. Passed 12-3-12, eff. 12-6-12)
§ 135.43 Employment of Licensed Medical Professionals
   The Director of Public Safety is authorized to contract for professional
services of licensed medical professionals as may be necessary for the
administration and operation of the Department of Public Safety and the several
divisions and activities comprising the Department of Public Safety. All
contracts shall require the medical professionals to indemnify the city and
provide insurance coverage acceptable to the Director of Public Safety and the
Director of Law.
(Ord. No. 1871-06, § 3. Passed 12-11-06, eff. 12-15-06)
§ 135.44 Safety Reports and Fees
   The Director of Public Safety or his or her designee is hereby authorized to
make and collect, upon application, a fee of six dollars ($6.00) for each
photostatic copy or part thereof, or search of any document, record or other
instrument furnished by the various Divisions within the Department of Public
Safety, except the Safety Medical Bureau.
(Ord. No. 1014-91. Passed 11-25-91, eff. 12-2-91)
§ 135.45 Motor Vehicle Lease Agreements
   (a)   Notwithstanding the requirements of Sections
181.08 and
181.09 of the Codified Ordinances of Cleveland, Ohio, 1976, the Director of
Public Safety is hereby authorized to enter into agreements for the lease of
motor vehicles to be used by the Division of Police.
   (b)   Any lease agreement entered into by the Director of Public Safety
pursuant to this section may provide that the City shall be responsible for and
protect the lessor against costs, damages, or liability arising out of the
City’s operation of the motor vehicle.
(Ord. No. 757-89. Passed 3-27-89, eff. 3-29-89)
§ 135.46 Veterinary Services Agreements
   The Director of Public Safety is authorized and directed to enter into
agreements necessary to provide veterinary services needed for the operation of
the City Dog Kennel and the Spay/Neuter Clinic in a total amount not to exceed
Forty Thousand Dollars ($40,000.00) per year.
(Ord. No. 1873-94. Passed 4-3-95, eff. 4-12-95)
§ 135.47 Emergency Medical Service Clinical Agreements
   The Director of Public Safety is hereby authorized to enter into clinical
agreements with Cuyahoga Community College, other governmental agencies, and
the various area hospitals to establish and maintain emergency medical
technology, EMT and paramedic continuing education, observation, and paramedic
and EMT training programs.
(Ord. No. 879-2019. Passed 8-21-19, eff. 8-26-19)
§ 135.471 College Credit for Police and Fire Personnel
   The Director of Public Safety is hereby authorized to enter into agreements
with Cuyahoga Community College and other area educational institutions to
coordinate and implement training programs and educational instruction for
police officers and cadets and fire officers, cadets and emergency medical
service personnel for college credit.
(Ord. No. 1672-91. Passed 8-21-91, eff. 8-27-91)
§ 135.48 Charge for County Prisoners Held in City Jail Facilities – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1115-18. Passed 10-15-18, eff. 10-17-18)
§ 135.49 Agreements with Cuyahoga County for Shared Use of Criminal Justice-
Oriented Information Systems
   The Director of Public Safety is hereby authorized to enter into successive
agreements, each for a term not exceeding two (2) years, with the Cuyahoga
County Executive, for use of and access to the County's Regional Enterprise
Data Sharing System (REDSS) and/or other police and criminal justice-oriented
information systems by and for all of the Division of Police, the Office of the
Chief Assistant Prosecutor of the Department of Law, the Office of the Clerk of
Courts of the Cleveland Municipal Court, the Cleveland Municipal Court, and at
the option of the Director of Public Safety, the Division of Correction. Each
unit participating in any one (1) agreement authorized hereby shall bear an
equal share of all costs incurred under such agreement.
(Ord. No. 238-13. Passed 3-25-13, eff. 3-28-13)
§ 135.50 Application and Acceptance of Annual Marine Patrol Grant
   The Director of Public Safety is hereby authorized to apply for and accept
annual grants from the Ohio Department of Natural Resources to conduct the
City’s marine patrol program, provided that the proceeds of each grant shall
not exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) and provided further that the
City will match this amount in salaries and/or equipment used by the marine
patrol program as a condition to receiving the grant. The Director is further
authorized to file all papers and execute all documents necessary to receive
the funds under said grants and, upon acceptance of said grants the grant funds
shall be appropriated for the purposes set forth in the grant agreement. The
Director shall notify the Clerk of Council of the making of any grant
application or the acceptance of any grant pursuant to this section.
(Ord. No. 1085-99. Passed 6-14-99, eff. 6-17-99)
§ 135.501 Application and Acceptance of Annual Drug Abuse Resistance Education
Grant
   The Director of Public Safety is hereby authorized to apply for and accept
annual grants from the Ohio Attorney General’s office to conduct the Drug Abuse
Resistance Education (“D.A.R.E.”) Grant program, provided that the City is not
obligated to provide in cash matching funds as a condition to receiving the
grant. The Director is further authorized to file all papers and execute all
documents necessary to receive the funds under said grants and, upon acceptance
of said grants the grant funds shall be appropriated for the purposes set forth
in the grant agreement. The Director shall notify the Clerk of Council of the
making of any grant application or the acceptance of any grant pursuant to this
section.
(Ord. No. 244-99. Passed 6-7-99, eff. 6-15-99)
§ 135.51 Collection of Fees for Training Classes Conducted by the Department of
Public Safety
   The Director of Public Safety is hereby authorized to fix and collect fees
from non-City employees who participate in any training class conducted by the
various divisions of the Department of Public Safety. The Director of Public
Safety is also hereby authorized to expend funds in order to provide food and
beverages, if desired, in connection with such training classes.
(Ord. No. 794-92. Passed 6-1-92, eff. 6-5-92)
§ 135.52 Rental of Site and Purchase of Refreshments and Mementos for Safety
Programs and Events
   (a)   The Director of Public Safety shall have the authority to expend funds
in order to provide refreshments, mementos and, if necessary, to rent a site
for the following:
      (1)   Training evaluation meetings held by members of the Department of
Public Safety to review Safety programs in progress and discuss new programs;
      (2)   Events honoring employees for volunteer and work-related
achievements, including but not limited to, an annual employees' service award
program;
      (3)   Events honoring citizens for volunteer and community service
achievements;
      (4)   Emergency operations for civil disturbance or special events
requiring Division wide call-up; and
      (5)   Community outreach events and education programs sponsored by the
Department of Public Safety.
   (b)   The total amount of funds expended for all of the above programs shall
not exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) per year.
(Ord. No. 122-18. Passed 3-5-18, eff. 3-7-18)
§ 135.53 Safety Department Call Histories
   (a)   The Director of Public Safety, Chief of Police, Fire Chief and
Commissioner of Emergency Medical Services are hereby authorized to make
available Safety Department call history information for any address within the
City of Cleveland, including the date, time and nature of calls for Safety
Department services.
   (b)   Requests for Safety Department call history information shall be made
in writing to the appropriate division. Such written requests shall include the
address for which the information is sought, and any other information required
by law.
   (c)   Any charge for providing Safety Department call histories and the time
period within which such histories are made available shall be in conformance
with the Public Records laws of the State of Ohio.
(Ord. No. 2129-94. Passed 6-19-95, eff. 6-28-95)
§ 135.531 Agreements to Share Crime and Safety Information with Residents and
Solicit Access and Store Home Camera Footage and Images
   (a)   The Director of Public Safety is authorized to enter into one (1) or
more agreements with various vendors for the Department of Public Safety to
share important crime and safety information with residents, to solicit access
to and store home camera footage and images related to criminal investigations
and service calls, and work with communities to help make neighborhoods safer.
   (b)   The agreements shall renew annually unless terminated by either party
upon sixty (60) days' prior written notice.
(Ord. No. 212-2022. Passed 4-4-22, eff. 4-6-22)
§ 135.54 Law Enforcement Automated Data System (LEADS)
   This Council finds that access to the Law Enforcement Automated Data System
(LEADS) cannot be secured from any source other than the State of Ohio.
Therefore, the Director of Public Safety is hereby authorized to enter into
agreements with the State of Ohio to obtain access to LEADS, for the Division
of Police.
(Ord. No. 1036-96. Passed 6-18-96, eff. 6-26-96)
§ 135.55 Jail Population Reduction Project – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1115-18. Passed 10-15-18, eff. 10-17-18)
§ 135.56 Third Grade Safety Belt Program
   (a)   The Director of Public Safety is authorized to enter into agreements
with the Ohio Department of Public Safety for the Division of Police to conduct
a program known as the “Third Grade Safety Belt Program” to educate youngsters
in the use of safety belts. The Chief of Police may co-sign such agreements and
is further authorized to sign such other documents as may be required by the
Ohio Department of Public Safety for the Division of Police to participate in
the program. Any such agreement shall provide that the City’s Department of
Public Safety receive reimbursement from the state of Ohio at the reimbursement
rate per student then prevailing.
(Ord. No. 398-97. Passed 5-12-97, eff. 5-21-97)
§ 135.57 Division of Correction; Duties of Commissioner – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1115-18. Passed 10-15-18, eff. 3-6-19) (BOC Res. No. 83-19. Adopted
3-6-19)
§ 135.58 Reimbursement for Confinement Costs – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1115-18. Passed 10-15-18, eff. 10-17-18)
§ 135.59 Inmate Labor – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1115-18. Passed 10-15-18, eff. 10-17-18)
§ 135.60 Contracts with Governments for Care of Persons at Institutions –
Repealed
(Ord. No. 1115-18. Passed 10-15-18, eff. 10-17-18)
§ 135.61 Home Detention Program; Contract Authority – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1115-18. Passed 10-15-18, eff. 10-17-18)
§ 135.62 Uniforms for Correctional Officers – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1115-18. Passed 10-15-18, eff. 10-17-18)
§ 135.63 Uniform Maintenance Allowances for the Division of Correction –
Repealed
(Ord. No. 1115-18. Passed 10-15-18, eff. 10-17-18)
§ 135.64 Treatment of Indigent Alcoholics, Drug Addicts – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1115-18. Passed 10-15-18, eff. 10-17-18)
§ 135.65 Correctional Officer Training – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1115-18. Passed 10-15-18, eff. 10-17-18)
§ 135.66 Purchase of Clothing, Bedding, and Shoes for Inmates – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1115-18. Passed 10-15-18, eff. 10-17-18)
§ 135.67 Purchase of Prescription and Non- prescription Drugs for Inmates –
Repealed
(Ord. No. 1115-18. Passed 10-15-18, eff. 10-17-18)
§ 135.68 Acceptance of Gifts and Services for the Division of Correction –
Repealed
(Ord. No. 1115-18. Passed 10-15-18, eff. 10-17-18)
§ 135.69 Establishment of Special Accounts for the Division of Correction –
Repealed
(Ord. No. 1115-18. Passed 10-15-18, eff. 10-17-18)
§ 135.70 Expenditure of Donated Funds for the Division of Correction – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1115-18. Passed 10-15-18, eff. 10-17-18)
§ 135.99 Penalty
   (a)   No uniform police officer below the rank of Lieutenant shall fail to
comply with any of the provisions of Section
135.06 with respect to displaying and wearing the required uniform, with his or
her permanently sewn or affixed identification or badge number thereon, at all
times while on duty. Whoever violates Section
135.06 shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than
fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first offense. For each subsequent offense, such
officer shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) or imprisoned not less than three (3) days nor more
than thirty (30) days, or both. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
each day during or on which an offense occurs or continues.
   (b)   Whoever violates Section
135.34 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and fined not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense.
   (c)   Whoever violates Section
135.19 is guilty of contempt and shall be fined not more than two hundred and
fifty dollars ($250.00) or imprisoned not more than thirty (30) days or both.
Each day upon which the violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Ord. No. 1256-99. Passed 7-14-99, eff. 7-14-99)
CHAPTER 137 – DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
137.01   Establishment
137.02   Duties of the Director of Community Development
137.021   Homesteading
137.022   Provision of Services for Fees
137.03   Office of Fair Housing and Consumer Affairs
137.04   Duties of the Manager of Fair Housing and Consumer Affairs
137.05   Reserved
137.06   Reserved
137.07   Division of Neighborhood Services – Repealed
137.08   Duties of Commissioner of Neighborhood Services – Repealed
137.09   Division of Neighborhood Development – Repealed
137.10   Duties of the Commissioner of Neighborhood Development – Repealed
137.11   Division of Administrative Services – Repealed
137.12   Duties of Commissioner of Administrative Services – Repealed
137.13   Housing Clinic
137.14   Function of the Housing Clinic
137.15   Housing Clinic Rules and Regulations
137.16   Demolition Bureau – Repealed
137.161   City Demolition Contracts – Repealed
137.17   Lease Agreements
137.18   Refreshments at Community Meetings and Workshops
   Note: Whenever any reference appears in the Codified Ordinances to the
“Division of Neighborhood Development” or the “Commissioner of Neighborhood
Development”, it is deemed to mean the “Division of Real Estate” and the
“Commissioner of Real Estate”. (Ord. No. 1117-06, § 4. Passed 1-28-08)
Cross-reference:
   Advertisement for bids for redevelopment, CO
321.13 et seq.
   Authority to amend neighborhood conservation plan, CO
323.15
   Commissioner of Relocation and Property Management to deduct delinquent rent
from relocation payments, CO
321.06
   Community Development Code, CO
Ch. 311 et seq.
   Community Relations Board, CO
Ch. 157
   Contents of community development plan, CO
313.03
   Contents of neighborhood conservation plan, CO
323.03
   Department designated local public agency for elimination of slums and
blight, CO
321.01
   Director to apply for financial assistance for community development plan,
CO
321.02
   Division of Relocation and Property Management to provide method for
relocation of families displaced by community development, CO
313.07
   Evaluation of relocation payments, CO
321.05
   Neighborhood conservation area designation, CO
323.02
   Purpose of Housing Code, CO
Ch. 361 et seq.
   Rehabilitation and relocation housing, CO
321.16
   Relocation of families displaced by neighborhood conservation plan, CO
323.07
   Zoning Code enforced by Division of Building and Housing, CO
Ch. 325 et seq.
Statutory reference:
   Fair housing, RC Ch. 4112
§ 137.01 Establishment
   Pursuant to the authority of the Charter there is hereby established, a
Department of Community Development, to be controlled and administered by a
Director of Community Development subject to the provisions of the Charter and
these Codified Ordinances, and to the direction of the Mayor.
(Ord. No. 1289-66. Passed 6-20-66, eff. 6-23-66) (BOC Res. No. 1025-66. Adopted
12-14-66)
§ 137.02 Duties of the Director of Community Development
   The Director of Community Development shall administer the Department of
Community Development and supervise the work of the several divisions
established in the Department; administer the laws and ordinances of the City
relating to Community Development; coordinate the functioning of the several
divisions of the Department with other departments, divisions and offices of
the City, with Federal, State and County offices and agencies; supervise the
carrying forward of the development, redevelopment, renewal, rehabilitation and
conservation of the City in conformity with the General Plan of the City;
manage and supervise all projects undertaken by the City for the redevelopment,
renewal, rehabilitation or conservation of slum, blighted, deteriorating or
deteriorated areas, including the relocation of occupants displaced by this or
other governmental action; make application to the appropriate agencies of the
Federal government and other public bodies on behalf of the City, the Local
Public Agency, for financial assistance if it is determined that financial
assistance is necessary; monitor and enforce the Cleveland Consumer Protection
Code and educate consumers and service providers as to their rights and
responsibilities under federal, state and local laws; and do and perform such
other duties as may from time to time be required of him or her by the Mayor,
or by ordinance of Council.
(Ord. No. 1329-10. Passed 12-6-10, eff. 12-6-10)
§ 137.021 Homesteading
   (a)   The Director of Community Development shall establish a Cleveland
Homestead Program within the City.
   (b)   For the purpose of such program, the Director of Community Development
is authorized to accept, as gifts, real property on which is situated a
structure which may be rehabilitated, or an undeveloped parcel of land which is
suitable for the construction of a residential structure.
   (c)   The Director of Community Development shall prepare qualifications for
prospective recipients of the Homestead Program and an outline of the
procedures to be followed in the program and forward the same to Council.
   (d)   Notwithstanding and as an exception to any conflicting ordinance of
the City, the Director of Community Development may convey real property
acquired under the Homestead Program to qualified recipients by way of a deed
with conditions subsequent, such conveyance being on the conditions that the
structure be rehabilitated to the Building and Housing Codes of the City and
that the recipient reside in the structure.
   (e)   The Director of Community Development is authorized to enter into all
necessary contracts for the purpose of securing professional real estate
appraisal, re-use appraisal, title services and such other professional
services he or she may deem necessary to receive services incidental to the
receipts, donation, sale or transfer of real property pursuant to the Urban
Homestead Program.
(Ord. No. 149-78. Passed 3-20-78, eff. 3-23-78)
§ 137.022 Provision of Services for Fees
   The Director of Community Development is authorized to enter into contracts
with governmental agencies to provide said agencies with appraisal, relocation
and cartography services, which contracts shall provide for the payment to the
City of the cost of the services rendered.
(Ord. No. 1254-87. Passed 6-15-87, eff. 6-19-87)
§ 137.03 Office of Fair Housing and Consumer Affairs
   There is established in the Department of Community Development an Office of
Fair Housing and Consumer Affairs to be administered and controlled by a
Manager of Fair Housing and Consumer Affairs. The Office of Fair Housing and
Consumer Affairs shall accept, investigate and process complaints regarding
unlawful discriminatory housing practices; accept, investigate and process
complaints from consumers regarding fraudulent, unfair, deceptive or
unconscionable business practices; work cooperatively with consumer agencies,
schools, media and community organizations to educate consumers and businesses
about consumer issues; make recommendations for legislative action to
strengthen consumer protection; and perform further duties as may from time to
time be required by ordinance or by the Director of Community Development.
(Ord. No. 1329-10. Passed 12-6-10, eff. 12-6-10)
§ 137.04 Duties of the Manager of Fair Housing and Consumer Affairs
   The Manager of Fair Housing and Consumer Affairs under the supervision and
direction of the Director of Community Development and subject to the Charter
and ordinances of the City, shall have the authority to:
   (a)   Delegate personnel in the Office of Fair Housing and Consumer Affairs
to aid and assist the Manager in the proper discharge of his or her duties and
powers;
   (b)   Supervise the execution and enforcement of all laws, rules and
regulations pertaining to fair housing and consumer affairs as provided in the
Fair Housing and Consumer Protection Codes;
   (c)   Receive moneys and issue vouchers for the disbursement of moneys in
accordance with the terms of any stipulated settlement agreement made pursuant
to division (a) of Section
643.13 of these Codified Ordinances;
   (d)   Accept, investigate and, if necessary, adjudicate, in conjunction with
the Law Department, complaints regarding violations of the Fair Housing and
Consumer Protection codes;
   (e)   Make studies, conduct tests and establish programs to educate and
inform consumers of practices and problems and represent the interest of
consumers before administrative and regulatory agencies;
   (f)   Work with governmental agencies and private consumer groups to insure
the protection of consumers and to coordinate activities for the common
municipal good;
   (g)   Make a written annual report to the Mayor enumerating the activities
and recommendations of the Office of Fair Housing and Consumer Affairs;
   (h)   Do any and all acts which may be necessary for the successful
prosecution of the purposes of the Fair Housing and Consumer Protection Code
and such other acts as may be specifically enumerated herein including, but not
limited to requiring that certain classes of merchants be licensed by the
Office of Consumer Affairs subject to approval by Council through the
Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses when the Director determines such
licensing to be in the public interest and necessary for the protection of
consumers.
(Ord. No. 1329-10. Passed 12-6-10, eff. 12-6-10)
§ 137.05 Reserved
§ 137.06 Reserved
§ 137.07 Division of Neighborhood Services – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1135-2023. Passed 12-4-23, eff. 12-7-23) (BOC Res. No. 33-24. Adopted
1-17-24)
§ 137.08 Duties of Commissioner of Neighborhood Services – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1135-2023. Passed 12-4-23, eff. 12-7-23) (BOC Res. No. 33-24. Adopted
1-17-24)
§ 137.09 Division of Neighborhood Development – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1135-2023. Passed 12-4-23, eff. 12-7-23) (BOC Res. No. 33-24. Adopted
1-17-24)
§ 137.10 Duties of the Commissioner of Neighborhood Development – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1135-2023. Passed 12-4-23, eff. 12-7-23) (BOC Res. No. 33-24. Adopted
1-17-24)
§ 137.11 Division of Administrative Services – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1135-2023. Passed 12-4-23, eff. 12-7-23) (BOC Res. No. 33-24. Adopted
1-17-24)
§ 137.12 Duties of Commissioner of Administrative Services – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1135-2023. Passed 12-4-23, eff. 12-7-23) (BOC Res. No. 33-24. Adopted
1-17-24)
§ 137.13 Housing Clinic
   There is hereby established within the Department of Community Development a
Housing Clinic to which members of the regularly employed staff of the several
Divisions of the Department may be assigned by the Director of Community
Development for the purpose set forth in Section
137.14, and to perform such functions as may be necessary to implement the
intent of the Housing Clinic.
(Ord. No. 1183-68. Passed 6-17-68, eff. 6-18-68)
§ 137.14 Function of the Housing Clinic
   The purpose of the Housing Clinic shall be to establish and administer
programs to implement and carry out the intent of these Codified Ordinances,
and to that end it shall deal with violators of the minimum standards set forth
in these Codified Ordinances necessary to make all housing, building and
structures safe, sanitary, free from fire and health hazards and fit for
habitation, and beneficial to the public welfare; aid and assist in the
coordination of the activities of the Municipal Court, upon referrals therefor,
and with volunteers, consultants and other organizations in the City concerned
with the problems of the enforcement of the minimum standards for housing and
building; assemble, analyze and work with individual violators, voluntarily or
upon referral, of the minimum Code requirements; enlist various social,
economic, financial and medico-legal methods to insure that violators of the
minimum Code requirements can comply and will be able to comply with the
aforesaid minimum standards; act as a source of accurate and reliable data on
the problems connected with housing and building; conduct such activities for
the improvement and education of the citizens of Cleveland in order that they
may better be able to comply with these Codified Ordinances; and provide such
technical assistance aid and help to those individuals, corporations, or other
entities referred to it, or voluntarily seeking its help.
(Ord. No. 1183-68. Passed 6-17-68, eff. 6-18-68)
§ 137.15 Housing Clinic Rules and Regulations
   In furtherance of the objectives of the Housing Clinic, the Director of
Community Development is hereby authorized to adopt such rules and regulations
as may be necessary for the conduct of the Housing Clinic.
(Ord. No. 1183-68. Passed 6-17-68, eff. 6-18-68)
§ 137.16 Demolition Bureau – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1266-02. Passed 1-27-03, eff. 1-28-03) (BOC Res. No. 77-03. Adopted
2-5-03) (Ord. No. 2370-04. Passed 1-24-05, effective 1-24-05) (BOC Res. No.
209-05. Adopted 4-27-05)
§ 137.161 City Demolition Contracts – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1266-02. Passed 1-27-03, eff. 1-28-03) (BOC Res. No. 77-03. Adopted
2-5-03) (Ord. No. 2370-04. Passed 1-24-05, effective 1-24-05) (BOC Res. No.
209-05. Adopted 4-27-05)
§ 137.17 Lease Agreements
   Notwithstanding and as an exception to Chapter
183 of the Codified Ordinances of Cleveland, Ohio, 1976, the Commissioner of
Redevelopment may, with the approval of the Board of Control, enter into month-
to-month written leases involving real property for community development lands
purchased by the Department of Community Development, or its named successor
departments, with Urban Renewal Bond Funds, Community Development Block Grant
Funds and/or Urban Renewal Funds. However, such real property shall be located
in neighborhood conservation areas, as defined in Chapter
323 of the Codified Ordinances of Cleveland, Ohio, 1976, or community
development plan areas as defined in Chapter
313 through 321 of the Codified Ordinances of Cleveland, Ohio, 1976, or urban
renewal project or plan areas.
(Ord. No. 258-A-83. Passed 12-19-83, eff. 12-22-83)
§ 137.18 Refreshments at Community Meetings and Workshops
   The Director of Community Development shall have the authority to expend
funds in order to provide refreshments, as necessary, at workshops, training
sessions and community meetings held by the Department of Community Development
in the course of administering the Community Development Block Grant Program.
(Ord. No. 2766-86. Passed 1-26-87, eff. 1-29-87)
CHAPTER 138 – DEPARTMENT OF BUILDING AND HOUSING
138.01   Establishment
138.02   Duties of Director of Building and Housing
138.03   Division of Construction Permitting
138.04   Duties of Commissioner of Construction Permitting
138.05   Division of Code Enforcement
138.06   Duties of the Commissioner of Code Enforcement
138.07   City Demolition Contracts
138.08   Property Rejuvenation Fund
138.09   Accepting Gifts and Grants to Abate Public Nuisance Properties
   Note: Ordinance No. 2154-05, passed December 5, 2005, authorizes the
continuation of the Department of Building and Housing. (BOC Res. No. 20-06.
Adopted 1-18-06)
§ 138.01 Establishment
   Pursuant to the authority of the Charter there is established, a Department
of Building and Housing, to be controlled and administered by a Director of
Building and Housing subject to the provisions of the Charter and these
Codified Ordinances, and to the direction of the Mayor.
   Wherever elsewhere in the Codified Ordinances of the City of Cleveland there
appears the phrase “Division of Building” or “Division of Housing” or “Division
of Building and Housing” it shall be deemed to mean Department of Building and
Housing for the purpose of construing such sections.
(Ord. No. 1767-06. Passed 10-23-06, eff. 10-24-06)
   Note: Ordinance No. 2154-05, passed December 5, 2005, authorizes the
continuation of the Department of Building and Housing. (BOC Res. No. 20-06.
Adopted 1-18-06)
§ 138.02 Duties of Director of Building and Housing
   The Director of Building and Housing shall administer the Department of
Building and Housing and supervise the work of the divisions established in the
Department; administer and enforce the laws and ordinances of the City relating
to buildings and the housing of its inhabitants; coordinate the functioning of
the divisions of the Department with other departments, divisions, and offices
of the City, with Federal. State and County offices and agencies; administer
and enforce the ordinances of the City relating to the use of land, the
construction and occupancy of buildings and structures; issue all building
permits and supervise the inspection of all work done pursuant to those
permits; issue all certificates of occupancy as authorized and required by the
Codified Ordinances dealing with structures; issue and have served upon the
owner or violator orders requiring the repair or removal of all buildings,
structures or conditions not in compliance with the codes pertaining to those
buildings, structures or conditions and all requirements of law or ordinances
relating to the maintenance, use or occupancy of dwellings in a safe, sanitary
and fit condition for human habitation; initiate and carry forth proceedings to
compel compliance with such codes and requirements; and do and perform such
other duties as may from time to time be required of the Director by the Mayor,
or by ordinance of Council.
   Wherever else in the Codified Ordinances of the City of Cleveland there
appears the phrase “Commissioner of Building” or “Commissioner of Housing” or
“Commissioner of Building and Housing” it shall be deemed to mean Director of
Building and Housing for the purposes of construing such sections.
(Ord. 1266-02. Passed 1-27-03, eff. 1-28-03) (BOC Res. No. 77-03. Adopted 2-5-
03)
   Note: Ordinance No. 2154-05, passed December 5, 2005, authorizes the
continuation of the Department of Building and Housing. (BOC Res. No. 20-06.
Adopted 1-18-06)
§ 138.03 Division of Construction Permitting
   There is established in the Department of Building and Housing a Division of
Construction Permitting to be administered and controlled by the Commissioner
of Construction Permitting, subject to the provisions of the Charter and
ordinances of the City and to the Director of Building and Housing.
(Ord. 1266-02. Passed 1-27-03, eff. 1-28-03) (BOC Res. No. 77-03. Adopted 2-5-
03)
   Note: Ordinance No. 2154-05, passed December 5, 2005, authorizes the
continuation of the Department of Building and Housing. (BOC Res. No. 20-06.
Adopted 1-18-06)
§ 138.04 Duties of Commissioner of Construction Permitting
   The Commissioner of Construction Permitting shall administer and enforce the
provisions of the ordinances of the City of Cleveland relating to construction,
reconstruction, and repair on all buildings, structures and dwellings and to
the use and occupancy of all buildings and structures as human habitation;
supervise the issuance of all building permits and the inspection of all work
done pursuant to those permits; supervise the issuance of certificates of
occupancy; maintain a register of all building permits and a record of all
compliance orders; assist the Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals
and the Board of Zoning Appeals in presenting facts and technical advice
concerning matters before such Boards; and perform such other duties as may
from time to time be required by ordinance or by the Director of Building and
Housing.
(Ord. 1266-02. Passed 1-27-03, eff. 1-28-03) (BOC Res. No. 77-03. Adopted 2-5-
03)
   Note: Ordinance No. 2154-05, passed December 5, 2005, authorizes the
continuation of the Department of Building and Housing. (BOC Res. No. 20-06.
Adopted 1-18-06)
§ 138.05 Division of Code Enforcement
   There is hereby established in the Department of Building and Housing a
Division of Code Enforcement to be administered and controlled by the
Commissioner of Code Enforcement, subject to the provisions of the Charter and
the ordinances of the City.
(Ord. 1266-02. Passed 1-27-03, eff. 1-28-03) (BOC Res. No. 77-03. Adopted 2-5-
03)
   Note: Ordinance No. 2154-05, passed December 5, 2005, authorizes the
continuation of the Department of Building and Housing. (BOC Res. No. 20-06.
Adopted 1-18-06)
§ 138.06 Duties of the Commissioner of Code Enforcement
   The Commissioner of Code Enforcement shall administer and enforce the
provisions of the ordinances of the City of Cleveland relating to construction,
reconstruction, and the repair on all buildings, structures and dwelling and to
the use, maintenance and occupancy of all buildings and structures as human
habitation; cause inspections to be made regularly in order to determine
compliance with the code of the City of Cleveland pertaining to such
structures; supervise the inspection of all work done pursuant to the issuance
of all building permits; supervise the issuance and service of orders requiring
the repair or removal of all buildings, structures or conditions not in
compliance with the codes pertaining to those buildings, structures or
conditions and all requirements of law or ordinances relating to the
maintenance, use or occupancy of dwellings in a safe, sanitary and fit
condition for human habitation; supervise the initiation and progress of
proceedings to compel compliance with such codes and requirements; assist the
Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals and the Board of Zoning
Appeals in presenting facts and technical advice concerning matter before such
Boards; and perform such other duties as may from time to time be required by
ordinance or by the Director of Building and Housing.
(Ord. 1266-02. Passed 1-27-03, eff. 1-28-03) (BOC Res. No. 77-03. Adopted 2-5-
03)
   Note: Ordinance No. 2154-05, passed December 5, 2005, authorizes the
continuation of the Department of Building and Housing. (BOC Res. No. 20-06.
Adopted 1-18-06)
§ 138.07 City Demolition Contracts
   Notwithstanding any provision of the Codified Ordinances to the contrary,
the Director of Building and Housing may enter into contracts for the boarding-
up and/or demolition of structures which are found to be unsafe structures and
declared public nuisances pursuant to the provisions of Section
3103.09 of the Codified Ordinances. Should the Director of Building and Housing
find that an unsafe structure constitutes an emergency situation, then the
Director of Building and Housing may enter into a contract for the boarding-up
and/or demolition of such an unsafe structure without advertising and without
competitive bidding.
(Ord. 1266-02. Passed 1-27-03, eff. 1-28-03) (BOC Res. No. 77-03. Adopted 2-5-
03)
   Note: Ordinance No. 2154-05, passed December 5, 2005, authorizes the
continuation of the Department of Building and Housing. (BOC Res. No. 20-06.
Adopted 1-18-06)
§ 138.08 Property Rejuvenation Fund
   When the fire insurance proceeds received under the authority of division
(g) of Section
3103.01 of the Codified Ordinances of Cleveland, Ohio, 1976, and RC 3929.86 are
unclaimed and the City has complied with all relevant procedures and laws
regarding unclaimed funds, those funds shall be placed in Fund 10-811, the
Property Rejuvenation Fund and disbursed to the appropriate fund, to be used
for demolition, property clean-up, maintenance, or rehabilitation under
programs administered by the Departments of Community Development and Building
and Housing. The funds may be granted or loaned to other persons or entities or
may be used directly by the City. The Property Rejuvenation Fund shall be
administered under rules and regulations written by the Directors of Community
Development and Building and Housing and submitted to Council for adoption. The
rules and regulations shall provide that, to the extent practicable, the funds
shall be used in the geographic area of the fire-damaged property that resulted
in the collection of the funds. The funds in the Property Rejuvenation Fund are
appropriated for the purposes stated in this ordinance and in the rules and
regulations referred to above.
(Ord. No. 951-04. Passed 10-11-04, eff. 10-13-04)
   Note: Ordinance No. 2154-05, passed December 5, 2005, authorizes the
continuation of the Department of Building and Housing. (BOC Res. No. 20-06.
Adopted 1-18-06)
§ 138.09 Accepting Gifts and Grants to Abate Public Nuisance Properties
   (a)   The Director of Building and Housing is authorized to apply for and
accept grants and gifts of funds, materials, equipment, supplies, and services
from public or private entities, to be used for abating properties found to be
unsafe and declared a public nuisance under the provisions of Sections
367.05 or
3103.09 of these Codified Ordinances. The Director shall report the acceptance
of each gift to the Clerk of the City Council.
   (b)   The Director may accept the gift if the donor has provided written
notification to the Director of the intent to make the gift, specifying the
type of gift, and stating the value thereof. If any gift or grant accepted
under this section causes administrative expenses to exceed fifteen percent
(15%) of the value of the gift or grant, additional legislative authority is
necessary before receiving the gift or grant.
   (c)   The Director is further authorized to pay cash matching funds if
required to receive grant funding. The matching funds shall be paid from funds
appropriated for the use of the Department of Building and Housing.
   (d)   The Director is further authorized to file all papers and execute all
documents necessary to receive the funds under the grants and gifts and, upon
acceptance of the grants or gifts under this section, the grant or gift funds
shall be appropriated for the purposes of this section.
   (e)   If the Director finds that a structure is found to be unsafe and
declared a public nuisance under the provisions of Sections
367.05 or
3103.09, the Director is authorized to enter into contract to abate the
nuisance under Section
138.07 of these Codified Ordinances using gifts or grants accepted under this
section.
(Ord. No. 682-14. Passed 6-2-14, eff. 6-4-14)
CHAPTER 139 – DEPARTMENT OF PORT CONTROL
139.01   Duties of Director of Port Control
139.02   Airport Property Damage and Earnings Insurance
139.03   Comprehensive General Airport Liability Insurance
139.04   Division of Airports
139.041   Duties of Commissioner of Cleveland Hopkins International Airport –
Repealed
139.05   Duties of the Commissioner of Airports
139.051   Duties of Commissioner of Burke Lakefront Airport – Repealed
139.06   Division of Harbor
139.07   Duties of Commissioner of Harbor
139.08   Refreshments for Promotional Activities
139.09   Crash-Fire-Rescue Ambulance Charges
139.10   Clothing Maintenance Allowance Payment
139.11   Airport Flight Guide; Advertising and Subscription Fees
139.12   Safety of Airfield Premises
139.13   Donating Employee Uniforms
139.14   Expenditures for Professional Memberships
139.15   Navigational Aids and Weather Equipment
139.16   Applying and Accepting Federal and State Grants and Other Funding
139.17   Customer Facility Charge for On-Airport Car Rental Customers
139.18   Loaned United States Government Property
139.19   Electronic Fingerprint-Based Background Checks for Employees,
Prospective Employees and Tenants Located at Cleveland Hopkins International
Airport
139.20   Department of Port Control Special Police Force
139.21   Acceptance of Art, Cash, Sponsorships, and Other Donations to Enhance
the Physical Appearance at the Cleveland Airport System
Charter reference:
   General provisions, Charter §
76-8
   Port and Harbor Commission, Charter §
76-7
Cross-reference:
   Aviation fuel and lubricant rates, CO
571.02
   City Airport, CO
Ch. 571
   Harbor, CO
Ch. 573
   Port and Harbor Commission, CO
Ch. 153
Statutory reference:
   Airports, RC Ch. 4563
§ 139.01 Duties of Director of Port Control
   (a)   The Director of Port Control shall supervise and control the
Department of Port Control as established by Charter Section
76-8, and the administration and control of the activities in and about the
harbor and airplane landing fields of the City.
   (b)   The Director shall initiate, promote and supervise such means of
publicity and promotional activities as will encourage the fullest use of the
Municipally owned and operated port facilities of the City for both air and
water-borne commerce, in order to place the operation of such facilities on a
self- sustaining basis.
   (c)   The Director shall have authority to solicit proposals and to
negotiate for the leasing of any piers or docks of the City with any and all
interested parties and, after approval by Council, to enter into leases
therefor with the parties deemed to be best able to advance the development of
the Port of Cleveland thereby.
(Ord. No. 2817-82. Passed 5-6-83, eff. 5-10-83)
§ 139.02 Airport Property Damage and Earnings Insurance
   In order to protect the City against financial loss, and to provide a
continuity of service at the airports operated by the City, the Director of
Finance is hereby authorized to take out property damage, including but not
limited to fire, windstorm, tornado and other casualty, and earnings insurance
hereinafter specified. The premiums on such policies shall be paid by the City
and the property damage insurance limits shall be controlled by current
practices, but in any event limited to the replacement value of the physical
facilities to be insured. The earnings insurance shall be limited to
anticipated annual gross income derived directly or indirectly from the airport
terminal facility insured.
(Ord. No. 781-57. Passed 6-17-57, eff. 6-19-57)
§ 139.03 Comprehensive General Airport Liability Insurance
   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized to take out comprehensive
general airport liability insurance covering the Cleveland Hopkins Airport and
the Cleveland Lakefront Airport. The premiums on such policies shall be paid by
the City.
(Ord. No. 1694-57. Passed 7-16-57, eff. 7-19-57)
§ 139.04 Division of Airports
   There is established in the Department of Port Control, a Division of
Airports to be administered and controlled by a Commissioner of Airports,
subject to provisions of the Charter and ordinances of the City, and to the
supervision and direction of the Director of Port Control.
(Ord. No. 846-17. Passed 10-9-17, eff. 10-11-17) (BOC Res. No. 559-17. Adopted
11-1-17)
§ 139.041 Duties of Commissioner of Cleveland Hopkins International Airport –
Repealed
(Ord. No. 846-17. Passed 10-9-17, eff. 10-11-17)
§ 139.05 Duties of the Commissioner of Airports
   The Commissioner of Airports shall have charge and general management of
Cleveland Hopkins International Airport and Burke Lakefront Airport and,
subject to the approval of the Board of Control, shall fix the charges for the
use of hangar space, landing and take-off fees. He or she shall perform such
other and further duties as the Director of Port Control may require.
(Ord. No. 846-17. Passed 10-9-17, eff. 10-11-17) (BOC Res. No. 559-17. Adopted
11-1-17)
§ 139.051 Duties of Commissioner of Burke Lakefront Airport – Repealed
(Ord. No. 846-17. Passed 10-9-17, eff. 10-11-17)
§ 139.06 Division of Harbor
   There is hereby established a Division of Harbor in the Department of Port
Control to be administered and controlled by a Commissioner of Harbor, subject
to the provisions of the Charter and ordinances of the City, and to the
supervision and direction of the Director of Port Control.
(Ord. No. 1484-54. Passed 6-21-54, eff. 6-29-54)
§ 139.07 Duties of Commissioner of Harbor
   (a)   The Commissioner of Harbor shall have charge of the administration and
control of the Harbor of the City and the docks, wharves, warehouse and
transportation facilities in connection therewith. He or she shall supervise
the enforcement by the Harbor Master of the regulations established by law or
ordinance governing the harbor and of the performance of other duties required
thereby of the Harbor Master.
   (b)   He or she shall have authority, subject to the approval of the Board
of Control, to fix the charges or fees duly imposed for the use of docks,
wharves, warehouse and transportation facilities in connection therewith, or
necessary and incidental to the licensing or regulating of marine craft and
transportation facilities, provided that no grant, license, permit or
concession shall be granted unless expressly authorized by Council.
(Ord. No. 962-78. Passed 5-15-78 over Mayor’s veto, eff. 5-15-78)
§ 139.08 Refreshments for Promotional Activities
   The Director of Port Control shall have the authority to expend funds in
order to provide food and beverages, as necessary, in order to promote the
fullest use of the Cleveland Hopkins International Airport or the Burke
Lakefront Airport.
(Ord. No. 1021-83. Passed 6-15-83, eff. 6-16-83)
§ 139.09 Crash-Fire-Rescue Ambulance Charges
   The Director of Port Control shall assess and collect from each user of the
Cleveland Hopkins International Airport Crash-Fire-Rescue ambulance
transportation service, other than City employees working at such Airport, a
fee in the same amount per use as the charge for emergency medical services
fixed pursuant to Section
135.332.
(Ord. No. 1097-91. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 6-26-91)
§ 139.10 Clothing Maintenance Allowance Payment
   The Director of Port Control is hereby authorized to cause payment of a
clothing maintenance allowance of one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) per
year to all employees in the classifications of Airport Maintenance Man, Heavy
Duty Mechanic, Auto Body Repairman, and Welder in the Division of Cleveland
Hopkins International Airport and the Division of Burke Lakefront Airport.
(Ord. No. 238-85. Passed 2-11-85, eff. 2-13-85)
§ 139.11 Airport Flight Guide; Advertising and Subscription Fees
   The Director of Port Control is hereby authorized to charge and collect a
fee for the inclusion of advertisements in the Airport Flight Guide and a
subscription fee for the guide. The advertising and subscription fees
authorized herein shall be fixed by the Director of Port Control in such
amounts as to recover the costs of preparing, printing, mailing and handling
the guide.
(Ord. No. 2741-89. Passed 1-22-90, eff. 1-30-90)
§ 139.12 Safety of Airfield Premises
   The Director of Port Control is hereby authorized to file applications and
other necessary documents to obtain permits and to enter into agreements which
are necessary to ensure the safety of airfield premises.
(Ord. No. 136-94. Passed 3-14-94, eff. 3-23-94)
§ 139.13 Donating Employee Uniforms
   That notwithstanding any provision of these Codified Ordinances to the
contrary, the Director of Port Control is hereby authorized to donate to
charitable organizations various pieces of uniforms of employees whose
employment with the City has been terminated.
(Ord. No. 239-94. Passed 3-14-94, eff. 3-23-94)
§ 139.14 Expenditures for Professional Memberships
   The Director of Port Control is authorized to expend funds for membership
and other related expenses for employee participation in professional and trade
organizations and associations deemed by the Director of Port Control to be
necessary to the operations of the various divisions of the Department of Port
Control, including but not limited to membership dues, program registration
fees, research, expenses related to participation in professional meetings and
events, and other related expenses.
(Ord. No. 1526-02. Passed 9-30-02, eff. 10-7-02)
§ 139.15 Navigational Aids and Weather Equipment
   Notwithstanding and as an exception to the provisions of Chapter
183 of the Codified Ordinances of Cleveland, Ohio, 1976, the Director of Port
Control is hereby authorized to enter into agreements with the United States of
America through the Federal Aviation Administration to provide necessary real
estate rights for the operation, installation, use and maintenance of
navigational aids (NAVAIDS) and weather equipment for the various divisions of
the Department of Port Control, subject to such terms and conditions as are
acceptable to the Director of Law. The agreements authorized by this section
are limited to providing necessary real estate rights and the Director of Port
Control is not authorized to enter into any other agreements of any value.
(Ord. No. 1817-99. Passed 2-7-00, eff. 2-16-00)
§ 139.16 Applying and Accepting Federal and State Grants and Other Funding
   The Director of Port Control is authorized to apply for and accept grants
and other funding from the United States of America and the State of Ohio, as
they become available, to fund projects related to the operations of the
various divisions of the Department of Port Control. The Director is further
authorized to file all papers and execute all documents necessary to apply for,
accept and receive grants and other funding; provided that the City shall
follow all applicable federal or state regulations; and that any funds are
appropriated for the purposes in the applications for the grants, applications
for other funding, or any amendments thereto. The Director of Port Control
shall notify this Council, through its Clerk, of any funds accepted under the
authority of this section, on receipt of each award.
   The Director of Port Control is further authorized to pay cash matching
funds for projects approved by the above-named grantors for grant funding and
other funding. The matching funds shall be paid from funds appropriated for the
use of the various divisions of the Department of Port Control and, when
permitted by law and indentures, from any existing or future revenue bond
funds, grant proceeds and PFC authorizations.
(Ord. No. 1005-08. Passed 7-2-08, eff. 7-2-08)
§ 139.17 Customer Facility Charge for On-Airport Car Rental Customers
   (a)   For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
      (1)   “Airport” shall mean Cleveland Hopkins International Airport.
      (2)   “Customer Facility Charge” or “CFC” shall mean the charge imposed
by the City upon a rental car customer arriving at the Airport and renting a
vehicle, which will be collected and remitted by the RACs.
      (3)   “Indenture” shall mean the Amended and Restated Trust Indenture
(Seventeenth Supplemental Trust Indenture dated as of November 1, 2011) by and
between the City and The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., as
trustee, as the same may be amended, modified or supplemented by any amendments
or modifications thereof and supplements thereto entered into in accordance
with the provisions thereof.
      (4)   “Rental Car Company” or “RAC” shall mean any rental car company or
business that enters into an agreement or is otherwise authorized to operate a
rental car concession at and from Cleveland Hopkins International Airport.
      (5)   “Rental Car Facility” or “Rental Car Facilities” shall mean the
consolidated rental car facility and all related equipment and facilities to be
located on Airport property from which all RACs would operate and all rental
car customers would pick up and return their cars.
      (6)   “Special Facility” or “Special Facilities” shall mean any hangar,
maintenance buildings, or any other facility, improvement, or structure to be
acquired or constructed on the Airport System, the cost of construction,
acquisition, maintenance and operation of which are financed by Special Revenue
Bonds and user charges.
      (7)   “Special Revenue Bond” or “Special Facility Bonds” shall mean
revenue bonds or other obligations of the City which may be authorized and
issued for the purpose of acquiring, constructing or improving a Special
Facility to be leased to, or contracted for operation by, any person or entity,
including the City, with the income therefrom to be used for the payment of
sums adequate to pay all principal, interest, redemption premiums, if any, and
reserves, if any, as required in the legislation authorizing such Special
Revenue Bonds and all operating expenses incurred in the operation of the
Special Facility. Special Revenue Bonds are not issued under or secured by the
Indenture.
      (8)   “Transaction Day” shall mean a 24-hour period or fraction thereof
for which a rental car customer is provided the use of a rental vehicle for
compensation or otherwise, and regardless of the duration or length of the
rental term.
   (b)   All persons entering into a rental car transaction with Rental Car
Company, which originates at Cleveland Hopkins International Airport, shall be
charged a Customer Facility Charge per each Transaction Day. The amount of the
CFC shall be set by the Board of Control of the City and may be amended from
time to time by the Board of Control. The Director of Port Control shall
provide not less than thirty (30) days’ notice to each Rental Car Company of
the adjusted changes to the CFC approved by the Board of Control for the costs
and expenses of financing, planning, designing, constructing, equipping,
operating and maintaining the Rental Car Facilities and related infrastructure;
provided, however, the CFC shall not, without further legislative action,
exceed the costs to finance, plan, design, construct, equip, operate and
maintain the Rental Car Facilities, related facilities, and purposes that the
Director deems appropriate to support and operate the Rental Car Facilities.
   (c)   Each Rental Car Company shall:
      (1)   Impose and collect the CFC authorized by the City;
      (2)   Hold such CFCs collected in trust for the benefit of the City, and
that the City, or a trustee on its behalf, shall have complete possessory and
ownership rights to such CFCs;
      (3)   Remit the CFCs collected to the City, without offset, in the manner
described in an agreement with the RAC, or as the City may otherwise direct;
and
      (4)   Comply with all City rules or requirements, as established by the
Director of Port Control from time to time or included within the agreement
with the Rental Car Company, regarding the collection and remittance of CFCs.
   (d)   In addition to all other remedies available to the City, any Rental
Car Company who fails to collect and/or timely remit the CFC may be barred from
using Cleveland Hopkins International Airport or its facilities for conduct of
any commercial activity whatsoever.
   (e)   Use. Proceeds of the Customer Facility Charge shall be deposited by
the Airport into a segregated account for the collection of the CFCs and
separate from Airport Revenues, to be used solely for:
      (1)   The planning, development, financing, construction and operation of
the Rental Car Facility, Rental Car Facility improvements and repairs, and
related infrastructure, which are or will be deemed as a Special Facility or
Special Facilities by the Airport.
      (2)   Rental Car Facility operations and maintenance expenses.
   (f)   Pledge. The Airport may pledge Customer Facility Charge revenues for
any of the following:
      (1)   To support the payment of Special Revenue Bonds or Special Facility
Bonds issued by the City to finance any use authorized under division (e) of
this section.
      (2)   The creation and maintenance of reasonable reserves and for the
payment of debt service associated with any Special Revenue Bonds or Special
Facility Bonds issued for any use authorized under division (e) of this
section.
   Capitalized terms used herein and not otherwise defined herein have the
meaning given to such terms as in the Indenture.
(Ord. No. 107-2023. Passed 4-3-23, eff. 4-5-23)
§ 139.18 Loaned United States Government Property
   The Director of Port Control is authorized to enter into agreements with the
United States of America to accept and maintain various property on loan from
the United States of America and located at Cleveland Hopkins International and
Burke Lakefront airports or adjacent to Harbor or Cuyahoga River property
managed by the Department of Port Control, subject to terms and conditions that
are acceptable to the Director of Law.
(Ord. No. 460-14. Passed 5-12-14, eff. 5-13-14)
§ 139.19 Electronic Fingerprint-Based Background Checks for Employees,
Prospective Employees and Tenants Located at Cleveland Hopkins International
Airport
   (a)   The Director of Port Control is authorized to enter into agreements
with the United States of America, an entity identified by the United States of
America as its vendor, or when allowable under federal regulations, an entity
selected by the Director of Port Control through the City’s process of
receiving professional services through competitive proposals to provide and
process electronic fingerprint-based background checks required under 49 C.F.R.
Part 1542.209 for employees and prospective employees at Cleveland Hopkins
International Airport, and for airport tenants located at Cleveland Hopkins
International Airport, subject to terms and conditions acceptable to the
Director of Law. When allowable under federal regulations, the Director of Port
Control is authorized to employ by contract or contracts one (1) or more
consultants or one (1) or more firms of consultants for the purpose of
supplementing the regularly employed staff of the several departments of the
City of Cleveland in order to provide professional services necessary to
provide electronic fingerprint- based background checks. The selection of the
consultants for the services shall be made by the Board of Control on the
nomination of the Director of Port Control from a list of qualified consultants
available for employment as may be determined after a full and complete canvass
by the Director of Port Control for the purpose of compiling a list. The
compensation to be paid for the services shall be fixed by the Board of
Control. The contract or contracts authorized shall be prepared by the Director
of Law, approved by the Director of Port Control, and certified by the Director
of Finance.
   (b)   The Director of Port Control is authorized to pay the costs of the
electronic fingerprint-based background checks from Fund No. 60 SF 001.
   (c)   The Director is further authorized to accept fees from airport tenants
located at Cleveland Hopkins International Airport, to reimburse the City for
the cost of fingerprinting and processing fingerprint-based background checks
of the included tenant employees, and their prospective employees. The fees
collected from the airport tenants shall be deposited into Fund No. 60 SF 001.
(Ord. No. 100-08. Passed 3-10-08, eff. 3-12-08)
§ 139.20 Department of Port Control Special Police Force
   Pursuant to the Charter of the City of Cleveland, the Director of Port
Control is authorized to utilize all special police officers commissioned for
the purpose of providing protection and security at Department of Port Control
facilities. The Director, in conjunction with the Director of Public Safety,
shall promulgate any rules and regulations necessary to implement a Special
Police Force for the Department of Port Control. The officers in the Special
Police Force authorized by this section shall be employees of the City of
Cleveland and subject to all Civil Service rules and regulations. The Chief of
Police shall determine the scope of their authority and maintain control over
the special police officers in accordance with the Charter. The minimum
qualifications for these positions and the schedule of compensation for these
officers shall be determined in accordance with the Charter.
(Ord. No. 169-08. Passed 6-9-08, eff. 6-16-08)
§ 139.21 Acceptance of Art, Cash, Sponsorships, and Other Donations to Enhance
the Physical Appearance at the Cleveland Airport System
   The Director of Port Control is authorized to accept gifts of art, cash,
sponsorships, and other donations to enhance the physical appearance at the
Cleveland Airport System, provided:
   (a)   The gift is used in the operation of the department;
   (b)   The donor has provided written notification to the Director of Port
Control of intent to make a gift, specifying the type of gift and the amount;
   (c)   The Director has accepted the gift in writing prior to the date of
donation; and
   (d)   The aggregate fair market value of all gifts made by the donor under
this section during the calendar year does not exceed one hundred thousand
dollars ($100,000.00).
   The Director shall notify the Clerk of Council of the acceptance of any gift
under this section.
(Ord. No. 1638-12. Passed 12-3-12, eff. 12-6-12)
CHAPTER 141 – DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH
141.01   Establishment; Employees
141.02   Powers and Duties of Director
141.03   Acceptance of Gifts
141.04   Establishment of Special Accounts
141.05   Expenditure of Donated Funds
141.06   Treatment of Indigent Alcoholics, Drug Addicts – Repealed
141.07   Division of Correction; Duties of Commissioner – Repealed
141.071   Reimbursement for Confinement Costs – Repealed
141.072   Inmate Labor – Repealed
141.08   Contracts with Governments for Care of Persons at Institutions –
Repealed
141.081   Home Detention Program; Contract Authority – Repealed
141.09   Uniforms for Institutional Guards and Matrons – Repealed
141.091   Uniform Maintenance Allowances – Repealed
141.10   Division of Health
141.11   Duties of Commissioner of Health
141.12   Subdivision of Communicable Diseases
141.13   Controller of Tuberculosis
141.14   Controller of Chronic Illness
141.15   Bureau of Public Health Education
141.16   Subdivision of Child Hygiene
141.17   Coordinator of Venereal Diseases
141.18   Bureau of Vital Statistics
141.19   Division of Environment
141.20   Bureau of Environmental Health
141.21   Voluntary Food Safety Training Courses
141.22   Division of Air Quality
141.23   Duties of the Commissioner of Air Quality
141.24   Division of Health Equity and Social Justice
141.25   Duties of the Commissioner of Health Equity and Social Justice
141.26   Charges for Services
141.27   Payment of Clothing Allowance – Repealed
141.28   Correctional Officer Training – Repealed
141.29 to 141.36   Reserved
141.37   Employment of Consultants
141.38   Contracts with the State of Ohio to Receive Reimbursement under the
Medicaid Administrative Claiming (MAC) Program for the Department of Public
Health
141.39   Employment of Licensed Medical Professionals
   Note: The legislative history of this chapter, except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 63410-A, passed
September 22, 1924.
Charter reference:
   General provisions for public health, Charter §
114
Cross-reference:
   Contents, purpose and implementation of neighborhood conservation plan, CO
Ch. 323
   Housing Clinic’s function, CO
137.13 et seq.
Statutory reference:
   Air pollution, RC Ch. 3704
   Inspection of food, RC 3707.38 et seq.
   Quarantine and communicable diseases, RC 3707.04 et seq.
§ 141.01 Establishment; Employees
   There is hereby established a Department of Public Health to be controlled
and administered by a Director of Public Health subject to the provisions of
the Charter and ordinances of the City, and to the direction of the Mayor. The
Director may appoint and employ a secretary who may be in the unclassified
service and such other officers and employees as may be necessary for the
operation of his or her office and the several divisions and activities
comprising the Department, except officers and employees appointed by the
commissioners of the several divisions in accordance with the provisions of
Charter Section
40.
(Ord. No. 2421-90. Passed 1-28-91, eff. 2-5-91)
   Note: Pursuant to Section 2 of Ord. No. 2421-90, any references in the
Codified Ordinances to the Department of Public Health and Welfare, Director of
Public Health and Welfare, Director of Public Welfare or Director of Welfare
shall be amended to read Department of Public Health and Director of Public
Health, respectively.
§ 141.02 Powers and Duties of Director
   The Director of Public Health shall have charge of and general supervision
and control over divisions and bureaus established in the Department of Public
Health. The Director shall have the power to authorize, approve and accept the
rendition of voluntary services to the benefit of and without cost to the City
and its citizens by medical and paramedical and other volunteer personnel. He
or she shall have additional duties as may be required by ordinance.
(Ord. No. 1871-06, § 3. Passed 12-11-06, eff. 12-15-06) (BOC Res. No. 184-07.
Adopted 4-18-07)
§ 141.03 Acceptance of Gifts
   The Director of Public Health is authorized to accept gifts of money,
property, or services, with or without limitations imposed by the donor, that
may be donated for the use and benefit of the Department of Public Health.
(Ord. No. 640-07. Passed 6-11-07, eff. 6-15-07)
§ 141.04 Establishment of Special Accounts
   (a)   Funds so accepted shall be placed to the credit of the particular
institution in Fund 126 in an account to be designated, if the fund is limited
in purpose by the conditions of the gift, as “_______________ limited purpose
account”; otherwise in an account to be designated “_______________
unconditioned expenditure account”.
   (b)   The funds deposited to the credit of the foregoing accounts are hereby
determined not to constitute public funds subject to the provisions of law
relating to the budget, but funds to be expended for the benefit of the named
institution at the discretion of the Director of Public Health and Welfare, or
in the manner and for the specific purpose named in the gift.
(Ord. No. 2640-55. Passed 12-12-55, eff. 12-15-55)
§ 141.05 Expenditure of Donated Funds
   Expenditures from accounts shall be made on vouchers signed by the
appropriate commissioner and the Director of Public Health when the amount is
less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00); otherwise the expenditure shall
first be authorized by ordinance of Council in the manner provided in Charter
Section
108. No part of any funds so credited to the accounts shall be paid to or for
the benefit of any officer of employee, either as additional compensation or as
reimbursement for expenses incurred, or paid for purposes other than those
directly benefitting the divisions or in any manner other than that applicable
to the expenditure of other public funds, unless the payment is specifically
provided for in the terms of the gift or authorized by resolution or ordinance
of Council.
(Ord. No. 1871-06, § 3. Passed 12-11-06, eff. 12-15-06)
§ 141.06 Treatment of Indigent Alcoholics, Drug Addicts – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1871-06, § 2. Passed 12-11-06, eff. 12-15-06)
§ 141.07 Division of Correction; Duties of Commissioner – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1871-06, § 2. Passed 12-11-06, eff. 12-15-06)
§ 141.071 Reimbursement for Confinement Costs – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1871-06, § 2. Passed 12-11-06, eff. 12-15-06)
§ 141.072 Inmate Labor – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1871-06, § 2. Passed 12-11-06, eff. 12-15-06)
§ 141.08 Contracts with Governments for Care of Persons at Institutions –
Repealed
(Ord. No. 1871-06, § 2. Passed 12-11-06, eff. 12-15-06)
§ 141.081 Home Detention Program; Contract Authority – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1871-06, § 2. Passed 12-11-06, eff. 12-15-06)
§ 141.09 Uniforms for Institutional Guards and Matrons – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1871-06, § 2. Passed 12-11-06, eff. 12-15-06)
§ 141.091 Uniform Maintenance Allowances – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1871-06, § 2. Passed 12-11-06, eff. 12-15-06)
§ 141.10 Division of Health
   There is hereby established in the Department of Public Health and Welfare a
Division of Health to be controlled and administered by a Commissioner of
Health, subject to the provisions of the Charter and ordinances of the City,
and to the supervision and direction of the Director of Public Health and
Welfare.
§ 141.11 Duties of Commissioner of Health
   The Commissioner of Health shall administer the Health Code and see that all
ordinances and rules of the City and all applicable State laws affecting the
public health are properly enforced. He or she shall supervise the work of the
several bureaus established in the Division of Health. He or she shall apply to
physicians in the City, who are licensed by the Ohio State Medical Board to
practice medicine and surgery in all its branches, outfits for the collection
of material from cases suspected to be diphtheria, typhoid fever, tuberculosis,
rabies and such other communicable diseases as he or she may decide, and shall
have such material examined and report the result of such examination to the
physician submitting such material. He or she shall maintain and supervise a
laboratory to assist in the diagnosis of communicable diseases and in fixing
the period of quarantine, determine the quality of the food, milk and water
supplies of the City and perform such other chemical and bacteriological
analyses as are related to the public welfare.
(Ord. No. 921-42. Passed 6-15-42)
§ 141.12 Subdivision of Communicable Diseases
   There is hereby established in the Division of Health a Subdivision of
Communicable Diseases to be administered and controlled by a Chief, subject to
the direction and supervision of the Commissioner of Health. The function of
the Subdivision shall be to prevent the transmission of communicable diseases,
perform disinfection, establish and maintain quarantine and perform such other
duties as shall be deemed necessary for the prevention and control of
epidemics.
§ 141.13 Controller of Tuberculosis
   There is hereby established the office of Controller of Tuberculosis in the
Division of Health. The Controller, who may be the person designated as
Controller of Tuberculosis by the County of Cuyahoga, and a majority of the
health districts therein, shall be appointed by the Commissioner of Health of
the City, shall serve without compensation from the City and shall have and
exercise all the powers and duties of the Commissioner relating to the control
of tuberculosis under the supervision and direction of the Commissioner which
it would be competent for a deputy commissioner of health to have and exercise.
(Ord. No. 309-43. Passed 4-12-43)
§ 141.14 Controller of Chronic Illness
   There is hereby established the office of Controller of Chronic Illness in
the Division of Health. The Controller, who may be the person designated as
Controller of Chronic Illness by the County of Cuyahoga, and a majority of the
health districts therein, shall be appointed by the Commissioner of Health of
the City, shall serve without compensation from the City and shall have and
exercise all powers and duties of the Commissioner relating to the control of
chronic illness under the supervision and direction of the Commission, which it
would be competent for a deputy commissioner of health to have and exercise.
(Ord. No. 454-60. Passed 5-16-60, eff. 5-18-60)
§ 141.15 Bureau of Public Health Education
   There is hereby established in the Division of Health the Bureau of Public
Health Education in the charge of a Chief of Public Health Education, subject
to the supervision and direction of the Commissioner of Health.
(Ord. No. 309-43. Passed 4-12-43)
§ 141.16 Subdivision of Child Hygiene
   There is hereby established in the Division of Health a Subdivision of Child
Hygiene, to be administered and controlled by a Chief, subject to the
supervision and direction of the Commissioner of Health. The function of the
Subdivision shall be to foster the health and physical well being of children,
and to that end it may provide such infant welfare stations, prenatal clinics,
medical supervision of school children and such other means for the protection
of children as the Commissioner of Health may deem necessary.
§ 141.17 Coordinator of Venereal Diseases
   There is hereby created, in the Division of Health, Subdivision of
Communicable Diseases, the position of Coordinator of Venereal Diseases, the
incumbent of which shall be a person trained in public health procedure and in
the control of venereal disease.
(Ord. No. 589-40. Passed 4-15-40)
§ 141.18 Bureau of Vital Statistics
   There is hereby established in the Division of Health a Bureau of Vital
Statistics, to be administered and controlled by a Chief, subject to the
supervision and direction of the Commissioner of Health. The function of the
Bureau shall be to administer the ordinances of the City and the laws of the
State on the registration of births and deaths within the City.
§ 141.19 Division of Environment
   (a)   There is hereby established in the Department of Public Health a
Division of Environment, to be administered and controlled by a Commissioner of
Environment, subject to the provisions of the Charter and ordinances of the
City, and to the supervision and direction of the Director of Public Health.
(Ord. No. 2996-90. Passed 4-8-91, eff. 4-15-91)
   Note: Section
141.19 became effective July 31, 1991, upon adoption of Board of Control Res.
No. 633-91. Pursuant to Section
4 of Ord. No. 2996-90, any references in the Codified Ordinances to the
Division of Environmental Health or Division of Air Pollution Control,
Commissioner of Environmental Health or Commissioner of Air Pollution Control,
shall be amended to read Division of Environment and Commissioner of
Environment, respectively.
§ 141.20 Bureau of Environmental Health
   (a)   There is hereby established in the Division of Environment a Bureau of
Environmental Health, to be administered and controlled by a Chief, subject to
the provisions of the Charter and ordinances of the City, and to the
supervision and direction of the Commissioner of Environment.
   (b)   Notwithstanding the provisions of Sections
141.11 and
201.01 of the Codified Ordinances of Cleveland, Ohio, 1976, the Chief shall
administer and enforce provisions of state and local law, ordinances and
regulations relating to environmental health, including but not limited to the
sanitation of neighborhoods, places of business, schools and places of
recreation, such as those sections of the Health Code which relate to the
inspection of food and milk, insect and rodent control, lead poisoning and
exposure control, swimming pool inspection, the approval of various license
applications as imposed by the Code, and the investigation of environmental
health nuisances and complaints. The Chief shall keep such records as may be
necessary or useful to the efficient management of the Bureau.
(Ord. No. 2996-90. Passed 4-8-91, eff. 4-15-91)
   Note: Section
141.20 became effective July 31, 1991, upon adoption of Board of Control Res.
No. 633-91.
§ 141.21 Voluntary Food Safety Training Courses
   (a)   The Director of Public Health is authorized to conduct voluntary food
safety training courses in order to certify participants as being adequately
trained in food safety throughout the year and to fix and collect fees from
participants for such purposes.
   (b)   The Director of Public Health is authorized to make purchases and
enter into one (1) or more agreements under the Charter and relevant Codified
Ordinances for course materials, supplies, and refreshments, and if necessary,
rental of sites for the courses.
   (c)   The Director of Public Health shall deposit fees collected from
participants in the courses into the Food Fund. The fees collected and placed
in the Food Fund are appropriated for the purposes stated in this section. All
expenditures made under this section shall be paid from the Food Fund and from
other funds appropriated for use of the Department of Public Health.
(Ord. No. 498-03. Passed 4-14-03, eff. 4-16-03)
§ 141.22 Division of Air Quality
   There is hereby established in the Department of Public Health, a Division
of Air Quality to be administered and controlled by the Commissioner of Air
Quality, subject to the provisions of the Charter and the ordinances of the
City, and to the direction of the Director of Public Health.
(Ord. No. 1531-02. Passed 10-14-02, eff. 10-17-02) (BOC Res. No. 68-03. Adopted
2-5-03)
§ 141.23 Duties of the Commissioner of Air Quality
   The Commissioner of Air Quality shall administer and enforce the ordinances
of the City of Cleveland relating to air quality; confer, as appropriate, with
State of Ohio and federal agencies in regard to environmental matters; plan,
manage and implement divisional air program and policies; develop environmental
policy recommendations; supervise the preparation of air pollution permits,
including enforcement and compliance monitoring; oversee all relevant
environmental issues; supervise enforcement, monitoring, permitting and
information control; and perform such other duties as may from time to time be
required by ordinance or the Director of Public Health.
(Ord. No. 1531-02. Passed 10-14-02, eff. 10-17-02) (BOC Res. No. 68-03. Adopted
2-5-03)
   Note: Section 4 of Ordinance No. 1531-02, passed October 14, 2002, effective
October 17, 2002, reads as follows: “That any references contained in the
Codified Ordinances of Cleveland, Ohio, 1976, to the Division or Bureau of Air
Pollution Control shall be amended to read “Division of Air Quality”. Also, any
references contained in the Codified Ordinances of Cleveland, Ohio, 1976, to
the Commissioner of Air Pollution Control shall be amended to read
“Commissioner of Air Quality” consistent with this ordinance.”
   Section 5 of Ordinance No. 1531-02, passed October 14, 2002, effective
October 17, 2002, reads as follows: “That the Clerk of Council is authorized,
when publishing the Codified Ordinances of Cleveland, Ohio, 1976, and
amendments thereto, to change all references to the Division or Bureau of Air
Pollution Control to read “Division of Air Quality” and to change all
references to the Commissioner of Air Pollution Control to read “Commissioner
of Air Quality”.
§ 141.24 Division of Health Equity and Social Justice
   There is established in the Department of Public Health a Division of Health
Equity and Social Justice to be controlled and administered by a Commissioner
of the Health Equity and Social Justice, subject to the provisions of the
Charter and ordinances of the City, and to the supervision and direction of the
Director of Public Health.
(Ord. No. 843-2020. Passed 11-18-20, eff. 11-19-20)
§ 141.25 Duties of the Commissioner of Health Equity and Social Justice
   The Commissioner of Health Equity and Social Justice shall administer the
Health Code and see that all ordinances and rules of the City and all
applicable State laws affecting the public health are properly enforced. He or
she shall supervise the work of the several bureaus as may be established in
the Division of Health Equity and Social Justice. He or she shall examine and
address health inequities across the City and shall review differing
opportunities for healthcare by demographic sub-populations and geographic
areas. He or she shall analyze social well-being and social determinants of
health, including but not limited to, aspects of the social environment, such
as racism, discrimination, income, education level, and marital status; the
physical environment, such as place of residence, crowding conditions, and
built environment (buildings, spaces, transportation systems, and products that
are created or modified by people); and health services, such as access to and
quality of care and insurance status. He or she will conduct assessments of
health equity in communities and systems to identify the behavioral, cultural,
social, environmental and organizational determinants that promote or
compromise health in disadvantaged groups. He or she shall identify evidence-
based strategies and measurable goals and objectives to promote health equity
and social justice; and shall implement effective, efficient and culturally
sensitive strategies to improve health equity and social justice. He or she
shall perform all other appropriate duties that are critical to advancing the
mission, duties and responsibilities of the Division of Health Equity and
Social Justice.
(Ord. No. 843-2020. Passed 11-18-20, eff. 11-19-20)
§ 141.26 Charges for Services
   (a)   The Director of Public Health shall charge each patient for service
rendered at clinics and other health facilities operated by the City of
Cleveland in accordance with a sliding scale schedule of fees approved by the
Board of Control.
   (b)   The Director of Public Health is authorized to enter into agreements
with Medicaid, Medicaid HMOs, Medicare, and other insurance carriers for third-
party billings.
   (c)   The Director of Public Health shall also charge for the analysis of
blood samples for lead performed at the lead laboratory operated by the City of
Cleveland, in accordance with a sliding scale schedule of fees approved by the
Director of Public Health. The schedule of fees charged for the analysis of
blood samples for lead performed at the lead laboratory operated by the City
shall not exceed the cost of the analysis.
   (d)   Charges and fees received from patients under this section shall be
placed into a revolving fund which will be used to provide additional services
under this section.
   (e)   All fee schedules, including the sliding scale formula, shall become
effective upon their publication in the City Record.
(Ord. No. 1646-11. Passed 11-28-11, eff. 12-2-11)
§ 141.27 Payment of Clothing Allowance – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1871-06, § 2. Passed 12-11-06, eff. 12-15-06)
§ 141.28 Correctional Officer Training – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1871-06, § 2. Passed 12-11-06, eff. 12-15-06)
§§ 141.29 to 134.36 Reserved
§ 141.37 Employment of Consultants
   The Director of Public Health is hereby authorized to employ by contract,
for the purpose of supplementing the regularly employed personnel of the
Department of Public Health, such expert medical consultants as may be
necessary for the administration of special projects and programs by the
Department of Public Health. Contracts may be made without competitive bidding,
but shall be entered into only with the person or firm determined by the Board
of Control, after inquiry and investigation, to be the best qualified to render
such services to the City; and shall be for amounts not to exceed Twenty
Thousand Dollars ($20,000.00).
(Ord. No. 2416-91. Passed 3-2-92, eff. 3-6-92)
§ 141.38 Contracts with the State of Ohio to Receive Reimbursement under the
Medicaid Administrative Claiming (MAC) Program for the Department of Public
Health
   (a)   The Director of Public Health is authorized to enter into contracts
with the State of Ohio to receive reimbursement of costs for services related
to activities that support efforts to identify and enroll eligible clients into
Medicaid under the Medicaid Administrative Claiming (MAC) Program.
   (b)   The Director of Finance is authorized to accept reimbursements from
the State of Ohio under the MAC Program and deposit those funds into the
general fund to be used to finance the operation of the Department of Public
Health.
(Ord. No. 164-13. Passed 3-4-13, eff. 3-5-13)
§ 141.39 Employment of Licensed Medical Professionals
   The Director of Public Health is authorized to contract for professional
services of licensed medical professionals as may be necessary for the
administration and operation of the Department of Public Health, the clinics
and other facilities under the jurisdiction of the Department of Public Health.
All such contracts shall require the medical professionals to indemnify the
City and provide insurance coverage acceptable to the Director of Public Health
and Director of Law.
(Ord. No. 2241-02. Passed 11-25-02, eff. 12-3-02; Reprinted 12-25-02 CR)
CHAPTER 143 – DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN RESOURCES
143.01   Establishment
143.02   Duties of the Director of Human Resources
143.03   Duties of the Assistant Director of Human Resources
143.04   Acceptance of Gifts and Grants, and Authority to Purchase and Provide
Incentives, for the City-Wide Well-Being Program
143.05   Agreements for Student Intern and Extern Programs
143.06   Applications for and Acceptance of Fellowship, Apprenticeship and
Intern Grants and Other Funding and Services from Any Public or Private Entity
   Note: Former Sections 143.04 through 143.08 were repealed by Ordinance No.
1655-80, passed July 31, 1980, and Ordinance No. 2904-83, passed December 5,
1983.
Cross-reference:
   Community Relations Board, CO
Ch. 157
   Housing clinic, CO
137.13 et seq.
§ 143.01 Establishment
   There is established a Department of Human Resources to be controlled and
administered by a Director of Human Resources subject to the provisions of the
Charter and ordinances of the City, and to the direction of the Mayor.
(Ord. No. 92-11. Passed 4-25-11, eff. 4-29-11)
§ 143.02 Duties of the Director of Human Resources
   (a)   The Director of Human Resources shall establish standards of
efficiency and conduct for the officers and employees in the classified
service; adopt and administer a plan for the equitable and periodic measurement
of such conduct and efficiency; maintain complete records of such measurements
for use in determining eligibility for increases in rate of compensation, the
order of layoff and in disciplinary action, the eligibility for promotion and
for the betterment of the public service; initiate, administer and coordinate
the employee safety program of the City; direct the administration of claims
for compensation under the provisions of law relating thereto; do and perform
such other and additional duties with reference to the personnel administration
of the City as may be required by the Mayor or the Council.
   (b)   With respect to internal equal employment programs for the City’s
personnel, it shall be the duty of the Director of Human Resources:
      (1)   To establish, monitor, administer, and coordinate for all City
departments, divisions, offices, boards, and commissions equal employment
opportunity and affirmative action policy, practices, standards, and programs
required by Federal, State and City laws, ordinances, rules and regulations;
      (2)   To review and monitor personnel procedures, policies and practices
of the Civil Service Commission and other departments of City government,
including without limitation, appointment, wage and salary administration,
testing, recruitment, and disciplinary procedures;
      (3)   To recommend and design programs to increase recruitment and
employment by the City of minorities, women, handicapped and aged;
      (4)   Subject to approval of the Board of Control, the Director of Human
Resources shall establish, implement and administer an internal equal
employment opportunity grievance procedure for City employees, under which the
Director of Human Resources shall have discretion to accept for review or
reject any grievance properly filed; provided, however, that in determining
whether to accept or reject such grievance the Director of Human Resources
shall consider, among other things, the availability of other grievance
procedures under civil service rules or applicable labor agreements;
      (5)   At the request of the Director of Law, to investigate charges of
discrimination and grievances;
      (6)   To advise appropriate City officers and employees of current equal
employment opportunity requirements pertinent to performance of their duties;
      (7)   To provide for education and training of appointing authorities,
supervisory and other City employees, as appropriate, with respect to pertinent
equal employment opportunity requirements and procedures; and
      (8)   To provide for overall supervision, coordination and evaluation of
the affirmative action plan and program of the City in order to insure its
effective implementation.
   (c)   It shall also be the duty of the Director of Human Resources:
      (1)   To develop and maintain contacts with community groups concerned
with the rights of minorities, women, handicapped, aged and Vietnam-era or
disabled veterans;
      (2)   To coordinate and monitor the accessibility of City-owned
facilities to the handicapped;
      (3)   To formulate a plan of education or promote fair employment
practices by employers, labor unions, employees, employment agencies and the
general public to eliminate employment discrimination based on race, religion,
color, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, national origin,
age, disability, ethnic group or Vietnam-era or disabled veteran status;
      (4)   To confer and cooperate with and furnish technical assistance to
employers, labor unions, employment agencies and other public and private
agencies in formulating educational programs for the elimination of employment
discrimination based on race, religion, color, sex, sexual orientation, gender
identity or expression, national origin, age, disability, ethnic group or
Vietnam-era or disabled veteran status, and in connection herewith, the
Director of Human Resources may stimulate the establishment of committees in
industry, labor and other areas; and
      (5)   To perform such other equal employment opportunity and affirmative
action related duties as the Mayor may require.
   (d)   By February 15, the Mayor shall file the following written reports
with the Clerk of Council:
      (1)   A report setting forth all new appointments and promotions made by
the City during the preceding calendar year, together with the classification
and level of compensation of the persons so appointed and promoted, and
demonstrating the impact of such appointments and promotions on the City’s
affirmative action program and goals.
      The Mayor shall also indicate as to each person appointed or promoted
whether or not the person is one of those in a protected class as set forth in
division (d)(1) of this section. All such information required by this division
shall be separately prepared and presented by department and division. The
Mayor shall notify each member of Council of the filing of the report.
      (2)   A report setting forth the total number of employees in each
division, bureau or office and the number of employees in such divisions,
bureaus or offices who are minorities or women.
   (e)   The Director of Human Resources shall plan, develop and implement
employment opportunities and manpower development programs, welfare and social
services programs, community action and anti-poverty programs; relate the
activities of Federal and State agencies to the needs of the community for
human resources; and coordinate all such activities and cooperate with all
private and public agencies in achieving these objectives.
   (f)   The Director of Human Resources shall appoint, under the civil service
provisions of the Charter such assistants and clerical, stenographic and other
employees as may be required for the performance of the duties of the
Director’s office, and shall be responsible for their supervision.
(Ord. No. 92-11. Passed 4-25-11, eff. 4-29-11)
§ 143.03 Duties of the Assistant Director of Human Resources
   There shall be an Assistant Director of Human Resources, who shall perform
such duties as are determined by the Director of Human Resources.
(Ord. No. 92-11. Passed 4-25-11, eff. 4-29-11)
§ 143.04 Acceptance of Gifts and Grants, and Authority to Purchase and Provide
Incentives, for the City-Wide Well-Being Program
   (a)   Acceptance of Gifts and Grants. The Director of Human Resources is
authorized to accept gifts and grants from public or private entities, as they
become available, to conduct the Well-Being Program ("Program") and to provide
incentives describe in division (b) below. The Director of Human Resources is
further authorized to file all papers, execute all documents, and enter into
agreements necessary to apply for, accept, and receive the gifts and grants
and, upon acceptance of gifts or grants under this section, the grant or gifts
shall be appropriated for the purposes of this section.
   (b)   Purchase and Provide Incentives.
      (1)   The Director of Human Resources is authorized to expend funds
received for the Program to provide incentives to City employees who
participate in the Program. These incentives may include, but are not limited
to, gift cards, savings matches, goods, such as software, exercise equipment
and books, and professional services, such as counseling, coaching, advising
and planning on personal and financial matters.
      (2)   The Director of Human Resources shall promulgate procedures and
regulations for the operation, maintenance, and duration of the incentives
under the Program.
   (c)   The Director of Human Resources is authorized to enter into one (1) or
more standard purchase and requirement contracts duly let to the lowest and
best bidder after competitive bidding for the purchase of materials, equipment,
supplies, and services necessary to conduct the Program and to purchase
incentives; and to enter into one (1) or more professional services contracts
to provide Program-related services to employees as incentives, deemed by the
Director of Human Resources to be necessary to conduct the Program.
   Any purchase made by standard purchase or requirement contract under this
section shall be made by the Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies. The
selection of a professional consultant or consultants made under this section
shall be made by the Board of Control upon the nomination of said Director of
Human Resources from a list of qualified consultants available for such
employment as may be determined after a full and complete canvass by the
Director of Human Resources for the purpose of compiling such a list. The
compensation to be paid for such services shall be fixed by the Board of
Control. Professional services contracts herein authorized shall be prepared by
the Director of Law, approved by the Director of Human Resources, and certified
by the Director of Finance.
   (d)   That under Section
108(b) of the Charter, the purchases authorized by this section may be made
through cooperative arrangements with other governmental agencies. The Director
may sign all documents that are necessary to make the purchases, and may enter
into one or more contracts with the vendors selected through that cooperative
process.
   (e)   The costs of contracts for the purchase of incentives authorized by
this section shall not exceed one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00)
annually, and the costs of all contracts authorized by this section shall be
paid from any available grant monies appropriated for this purpose, any grant
monies or other monies received under this section, annual appropriations made
for such purpose, and other funds approved by the Director of Finance.
(Ord. No. 404-2021. Passed 6-7-21, eff. 6-9-21)
§ 143.05 Agreements for Student Intern and Extern Programs
   The Director of Human Resources, or other appropriate Director, is
authorized to enter into one (1) or more agreements with educational
institutions and their students for the City to participate in student intern
and extern programs, including, but not limited to, programs where the City
receives reimbursements of wages or stipends paid to such students, programs
where such students receive funds directly from their educational institution
or another source, programs where the City provides a portion of the wages or
stipends paid to such students, and programs where such students receive
academic credit for interning at the City.
(Ord. No. 468-2023. Passed 5-8-23, eff. 5-9-23)
§ 143.06 Applications for and Acceptance of Fellowship, Apprenticeship and
Intern Grants and Other Funding and Services from Any Public or Private Entity
   (a)   The Director of Human Resources, or other appropriate Director, is
authorized to apply for and accept grants and other funding and services from
any public or private entity for programs to provide funding for current
employees or to place fellows, apprentices, and interns in various City
departments under a City apprenticeship or intern program established for
purposes of recruitment. The appropriate Director is authorized to file all
papers, execute all documents, and enter into any agreements necessary to apply
for, accept, and/or receive the funds or services. Any funds received shall be
appropriated for the purposes described in this section. The appropriate
Director will notify the Council in writing where and when the fellows and
interns are placed.
   (b)   The appropriate Director is further authorized to pay cash matching
funds up to fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) if required to receive grant
funding. The matching funding shall be paid from funds appropriated for the use
of the applicable City department. Any grant that requires a cash match over
fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) shall require additional legislative
authority.
(Ord. No. 323-2025. Passed 3-31-25, eff. 4-1-25)
CHAPTER 144 – DEPARTMENT OF DEVELOPMENT
144.01   Establishment
144.02   Duties of Director
144.021   Office of Land Strategy and Asset Redevelopment
144.03   Financial Assistance Fees
§ 144.01 Establishment
   There is hereby established a Department of Development to be controlled and
administered by a Director of Development subject to the provisions of the
Charter and ordinances of the City, and to the direction of the Mayor.
(Ord. No. 1226-2025. Passed 12-1-25, eff. 1-1-26)
§ 144.02 Duties of Director
   The Director of Development shall administer the Department and supervise
the work of such divisions, offices and bureaus as may be established in the
Department. The Director may appoint and employ such other officers and
employees appointed by commissioners of divisions in accordance with the
provisions of Section
79 of the Charter. The Director shall develop and implement policies, programs,
and strategies for the retention, expansion and relocation of existing business
and industry and for the attraction of new industry; coordinate, monitor and
evaluate all municipal programs and procedures relating to economic
development; prepare grant proposals for private, State and federal assistance
programs in the area of economic development; to manage the Land Reutilization
Programs; provide technical assistance to business, industry and neighborhood
organizations regarding the availability of sites for development, public and
private financing for development, and municipal procedures and programs
regarding land use and land assembly for economic development; and do and
perform such other duties as may from time to time be required of him or her by
the Mayor, or by ordinance of Council.
(Ord. No. 1226-2025. Passed 12-1-25, eff. 1-1-26)
§ 144.021 Office of Land Strategy and Asset Redevelopment
   There is established in the Department of Development, an Office of Land
Strategy and Asset Redevelopment to be administered and controlled by the
Director of Development, or his or her designee, subject to the provisions of
the Charter and the Codified Ordinances of Cleveland, Ohio 1976, and to the
supervision of the Director of Development. The Director of Development, or his
or her designee, shall oversee, monitor and regulate land strategy and asset
redevelopment for development projects in the City of Cleveland.
(Ord. No. 1226-2025. Passed 12-1-25, eff. 1-1-26)
§ 144.03 Financial Assistance Fees
   (a)   The Director of Development hereby is authorized to establish a
schedule of and collect fees from loan and other financial assistance
applicants to cover the cost of servicing loans and applications therefor under
the various loan and financial assistance programs administered by the
Department of Development. Such fees may be refunded to applicant at the
direction of the Director of Development.
   (b)   The Director of Development is hereby authorized to employ by
contracts such professional services as may be required to prepare grant
applications and to service loans made under the various loan and financial
assistance programs administered by the Department of Development, including,
but not limited to, appraisal services, title insurance, survey costs,
construction management, project identification materials and legal
advertising. The costs of the contracts authorized herein shall be paid from
the fees collected pursuant to this section.
   (c)   The Director of Development is hereby authorized to pay a fee not to
exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) to area local development corporations
that he or she determines have provided substantial assistance to applicants
submitting proposals for financial assistance to the Department. The fee
authorized herein shall be paid from the fees collected pursuant to this
section.
(Ord. No. 1226-2025. Passed 12-1-25, eff. 1-1-26)
CHAPTER 145 – DEPARTMENT ON AGING
145.01   Establishment; Director
145.02   Powers and Duties of Director
145.03   Employees, Equipment and Activities Transferred
145.04   Acceptance of Gifts
145.05   Purchase of Food, Beverages, and Mementos for Activities or Events
Sponsored by the Department of Aging
145.06   Reserving Space at Department of Aging Events; Fee
§ 145.01 Establishment; Director
   With the concurrence of the Board of Control, as required by Charter Section
77, there is hereby established a Department on Aging subject to the Charter
and ordinances of the City and to the direction of the Mayor. The Director may
appoint and employ a secretary who may be in the unclassified service and such
other officers and employees as may be necessary for the operation of his or
her office and the several divisions and activities comprising the Department,
except officers and employees appointed by the Commissioners of the several
divisions in accordance with the provisions of Charter Section
79.
   The Department on Aging shall be responsible for and shall administer, or
wherever possible, assist in administering all City programs relating to older
adults sixty (60) years of age or older, except where the legal requirements
for the use of any funds for the elderly specify a lesser age.
(Ord. No. 1423-A-82. Passed 11-22-82, eff. 11-26-82)
§ 145.02 Powers and Duties of Director
   The Director of Aging shall:
   (a)   Determine that services and facilities provided, operated, contracted
for or supported by the Department for older adults are being operated
effectively;
   (b)   Provide consultants to agencies, associations or individuals providing
services supported by the Department;
   (c)   Study current living conditions and needs of older adults with special
emphasis on persons with low income, physical and mental impairments, advanced
age or isolated living conditions, and proposed and deliver the most effective
service or assistance to such older adults;
   (d)   Study existing methods and alternatives of providing services,
programs and opportunities for older adults;
   (e)   Identify these factors of particular detriment or benefit to the
welfare of older adults; and assist in alleviating detrimental conditions and
maximizing beneficial factors;
   (f)   Develop and implement new approaches and alternatives for living
arrangements, social services, institutional care, health services, legal
representation and the coordination of community services for older adults;
   (g)   Develop and implement a general long range plan to cope with the
City’s aging problems;
   (h)   Make recommendations for legislative action;
   (i)   Administer all grants and funds received by the City from federal,
State or other public or private sources for the use and benefit of older
adults, and to seek, wherever possible new funding sources.
(Ord. No. 1423-A-82. Passed 11-22-82, eff. 11-23-82)
§ 145.03 Employees, Equipment and Activities Transferred
   Employees, equipment and activities presently working for or in use by the
Mayor’s Commission on Aging are hereby transferred and assigned to the
Department on Aging. Accumulated sick leave, vacation and other benefits are
hereby transferred with the employees to the Department on Aging.
(Ord. No. 184-80. Passed 7-30-80, eff. 8-4-80)
§ 145.04 Acceptance of Gifts
   The Director of the Department on Aging is authorized to accept gifts of
money, material or services, provided that the value of the gift shall not
exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00).
(Ord. No. 2423-90. Passed 12-17-90, eff. 12-21-90)
§ 145.05 Purchase of Food, Beverages, and Mementos for Activities or Events
Sponsored by the Department of Aging
   The Director of Aging shall have the authority to purchase food, beverages,
and mementos for activities or events sponsored by the Department of Aging in
pursuance of its senior programs.
(Ord. No. 381-03. Passed 5-12-03, eff. 5-16-03)
§ 145.06 Reserving Space at Department of Aging Events; Fee
   The Director of Aging may charge a fee, as established from time to time by
the Board of Control, to agencies to reserve space to provide information and
resources to benefit older adults at appropriate Department of Aging events.
The Board of Control may establish a fee scale that takes into consideration an
agency’s non-profit or for-profit status. Fees collected under this section are
for the purpose of defraying costs incurred by the Department of Aging during
these events, and are appropriated for this purpose. The Director of Aging,
with the approval of the Board of Control, shall establish a protocol for the
allocation of space at Department of Aging events.
(Ord. No. 1184-08. Passed 10-6-08, eff. 10-9-08)
CHAPTER 147 – DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS
147.01   Establishment – Repealed
147.02   Duties of Director – Repealed
§ 147.01 Establishment – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1329-10. Passed 12-6-10, eff. 12-6-10) (BOC Res. No. 560-10. Adopted
12-29-10)
§ 147.02 Duties of Director – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1329-10. Passed 12-6-10, eff. 12-6-10) (BOC Res. No. 560-10. Adopted
12-29-10)
CHAPTER 148 – DEPARTMENT OF INNOVATION AND TECHNOLOGY
148.01   Establishment of the Department of Innovation and Technology
148.02   Duties of the Director of Innovation and Technology
148.03   Standard and Requirement Contracts for Various Telecommunications
Purposes and Payment of Recurring Fees
§ 148.01 Establishment of the Department of Innovation and Technology
   There is established a Department of Innovation and Technology to be
controlled and administered by a Director of Innovation and Technology subject
to the provisions of the Charter and ordinances of the City, and to the
direction of the Mayor.
(Ord. No. 1081-2024. Passed 11-25-24, eff. 1-1-25) (BOC Res. No. 638-24.
Adopted 12-18-24)
§ 148.02 Duties of the Director of Innovation and Technology
   The Director of Innovation and Technology shall:
   (a)   Evaluate the City’s information technology needs;
   (b)   Implement information systems, plans, policies, and standards for use
by departments of City government as requested by the Mayor or the Directors of
the departments;
   (c)   Oversee an annual information systems budget;
   (d)   Manage the City’s telecommunications and network environment,
equipment, and customer services (including the telephone exchange);
   (e)   Operate a centralized, non-emergency hotline and website for
residents, visitors, and businesses to report non-emergency issues in a
streamlined way and to access City services and information;
   (f)   Monitor and assess program and service delivery to the residents and
businesses by tracking and improving performance of departments of City
government through the incorporation of efficient, effective, and economically
sound process improvement methods to ensure high levels of accountability,
compliance, and quality control;
   (g)   Conduct audit and compliance programs to ensure customer and quality
service and efficiency through technology, conduct quality control programs to
inspect service requests received from the public, and conduct performance
improvement programs to recommend and facilitate process improvement models;
and
   (h)   Perform all other duties pertaining to the Department which may be
required of him or her by ordinance or by the Mayor.
(Ord. No. 1081-2024. Passed 11-25-24, eff. 1-1-25) (BOC Res. No. 638-24.
Adopted 12-18-24)
§ 148.03 Standard and Requirement Contracts for Various Telecommunications
Purposes and Payment of Recurring Fees
   (a)   The Director of Innovation and Technology is authorized to enter into
one or more standard purchase or requirement contracts for purchase, rental
agreements, or leases with or without an option to purchase when the Director
determines there is a financial advantage, duly let to the lowest and best
bidder for various telecommunication commodities, goods, utilities, equipment,
or services, including but not limited to, telephone lines, circuits, and
services necessary to update and improve telecommunications and network
infrastructure including materials, supplies, parts, repair, services, labor,
support, maintenance, installation, design, circuit repair, demarcation site
relocation, and other related services.
   (b)   The Director is authorized to pay ongoing recurring telecommunication-
related subscription and service fees.
   (c)   That under Section
108(b) of the Charter, the purchases authorized by this section may be made
through cooperative arrangements with other governmental agencies. The Director
of Innovation and Technology may sign all documents that are necessary to make
the purchases, and may enter into one (1) or more contracts with the vendors
selected through that cooperative process.
   (d)   Any purchase or payment made under this section shall be made by the
Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies and paid from the annual appropriations
made for that purpose.
(Ord. No. 1081-2024. Passed 11-25-24, eff. 1-1-25) (BOC Res. No. 638-24.
Adopted 12-18-24)
TITLE VII: JUDICIAL
   Chapter
149   Municipal Court
CHAPTER 149 – MUNICIPAL COURT
149.01   Psychiatric Clinic; Clerical Assistants
149.02   Duties of Director of Law
149.03   Refusal to Serve as Juror
149.04   Complainant’s Bond; Payment of Costs
149.05   Report on Fines Collected from Prisoners
149.06   Docket Entries and Journal Proceedings
149.07   Report and Payment of Fees Due Jurors and Witnesses
149.08   Guilty Person to Pay Costs
149.09   Credit on Fines
149.10   Purchase of Beverages for Jurors
149.11   Contracts for Collection Services on Behalf of the Clerk of the
Cleveland Municipal Court
   Note: The legislative history of this chapter, except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 63410-A, passed
September 22, 1924.
Charter reference:
   Director of Law as Prosecuting Attorney, Charter §
84
Cross-reference:
   Bailiff’s bond, CO
171.17
   Mileage allowance for Deputy Bailiffs and probation officers, CO
171.43 et seq.
Statutory reference:
   General provisions, RC Ch. 1901
   Release of Court Clerk’s liability for loss of funds, RC 131.18 et seq.
§ 149.01 Psychiatric Clinic; Clerical Assistants
   In accordance with RC 1901.33 and 1901.36, and for the purpose of providing
for the personnel of the Psychiatric Clinic of the Cleveland Municipal Court,
the judges of the Court may appoint one (1) or more psychiatrists,
psychologists, clinic referral consultants, psychiatric social workers and an
administrative assistant, all of whom shall serve at the pleasure of the judges
and shall receive such compensation as is provided in Section
173.11. In addition, the judges are hereby authorized to appoint such clerical
assistants as may be necessary, which clerical assistants shall be in the
classified service of the City.
(Ord. No. 1612-54. Passed 6-21-54, eff. 7-1-54)
§ 149.02 Duties of Director of Law
   (a)   The Director of Law shall be furnished an office convenient to the
criminal branch of the Municipal Court. He or she shall have power to recommend
a nolle prosequi in any case commenced in such Court for the violation of a
City ordinance, and shall, from time to time, recommend the passage of such
ordinances as may be necessary to prevent crime and maintain the police
regulations of the City.
   (b)   He or she shall prosecute to collection all fines and penalties
imposed by the criminal branch of the Municipal Court, and shall take care that
all fees, penalties or fines collected by any officer are promptly paid into
the City Treasury. He or she shall attend to every process in error or habeas
corpus issued from courts superior to such Court in all City cases.
§ 149.03 Refusal to Serve as Juror
   Any person summoned as juror who refuses to serve without reasonable or
lawful cause, to be judged of by the Court, may be fined not more than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) for contempt of court.
§ 149.04 Complainant’s Bond; Payment of Costs
   Before issuing a warrant, the judge so issuing, or the Clerk, may, if either
of them deems it necessary, require the complainant to enter into bond with
sufficient surety to the City, conditioned for the appearance of the
complainant at the trial, to give evidence against the person complained of by
him or her, and if upon the trial the defendant shall be discharged, that the
complainant shall pay the costs of prosecution, if so ordered by the Court. In
all cases, whether a bond is taken or not, when the defendant is acquitted, the
informant or complainant may be adjudged to pay the costs, if it appears to the
Court that the prosecution was instituted vexatiously, maliciously or without
probable cause.
§ 149.05 Report on Fines Collected from Prisoners
   (a)   The Director of Public Health and Welfare shall provide the Clerk of
the criminal branch of the Municipal Court with a statement, on the first day
of every month, showing in detail the collection for the previous month of all
cash fines imposed on prisoners sentenced to the House of Correction by the
Court. In any case where money is not collected, but the money fine imposed, or
any portion of it, is worked out by the prisoner or is by proper authority
remitted, he or she shall so report the same in the statement rendered.
   (b)   The Clerk of the criminal branch of the Municipal Court shall enter
upon the dockets of the judges of such Court, in the proper respective places,
the collections and dispositions of money, fined according to the statement
rendered by the Director of Public Health and Welfare.
§ 149.06 Docket Entries and Journal Proceedings
   The Clerk of the criminal branch of the Municipal Court shall produce each
day, at the opening of Court, a docket in which shall be inscribed all cases
set for trial on that day, and for the violation of ordinances for which
prosecutions have been commenced. The judges shall note upon the docket the
judgment or other action in each case as soon as the same is had. The Clerk
shall also faithfully keep a record or journal of the proceedings of Court.
§ 149.07 Report and Payment of Fees Due Jurors and Witnesses
   The Clerk of the criminal branch of the Municipal Court shall certify to the
Director of Finance, under the seal of such Court, the amount of fees due
jurors and witnesses in City cases, and the Director shall thereupon draw his
or her warrant in favor of such jurors or witnesses for the amounts due on the
City Treasurer, and said City Treasurer or said Clerk, shall pay the same on
presentation. The Director shall report monthly the amount so paid to Council.
(Ord. No. 2212-96. Passed 1-13-97, eff. 1-21-97)
§ 149.08 Guilty Person to Pay Costs
   In all cases when any person is found guilty of violating any ordinance of
the City and fined, he or she shall be adjudged to pay all the costs imposed in
the case.
§ 149.09 Credit on Fines
   (a)   A person confined in the workhouse under a sentence imposing a fine
which he or she is unable or unwilling to pay shall receive credit upon such
fine in the amount of ten dollars ($10.00) per day of confinement until such
fine is paid.
   (b)   This section shall be applied to persons confined in the workhouse for
payment of fines on April 20, 1970, and the credit of ten dollars ($10.00) per
day shall be calculated from the day upon which confinement began. Any person
whose credit toward the payment of a fine is found to exceed that fine shall be
immediately released. However, no person whose credit towards payment of a fine
is calculated retroactively under the provisions of this section shall have a
claim against the City for any excess credit heretofore earned.
(Ord. No. 286-70. Passed 4-20-70, eff. 4-22-70)
§ 149.10 Purchase of Beverages for Jurors
   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized to expend funds in order to
provide beverages for persons summoned to the Cleveland Municipal Court for
jury duty.
(Ord. No. 2840-89. Passed 12-18-89, eff. 12-22-89)
§ 149.11 Contracts for Collection Services on Behalf of the Clerk of the
Cleveland Municipal Court
   (a)   The Director of Finance, on behalf of the Clerk of the Cleveland
Municipal Court, is authorized to enter into a contract or contracts for
professional services necessary to collect any or all of all of the following:
      (1)   Financial sanctions imposed upon misdemeanor offenders under RC
Section 2929.28, civil judgments, criminal judgments converted to civil
judgments, fees, costs, and other receivables of the Cleveland Municipal Court;
      (2)   Unpaid notices of liability for photo- enforced red light and
speeding offenses issued under Section
413.031;
      (3)   Unpaid parking infraction judgments and default judgments;
      (4)   Restitution payments in cases in which payment is a receivable of
the Court.
   (b)   Any collection contract entered into under the authority of this
section may include in its scope the collection of any or all receivables of
the Cleveland Municipal Court whether or not expressly listed in division (a).
The types of receivables listed in division (a) are illustrative only and shall
not limit the scope of collection work that may be included in the contract.
   (c)   In any case in which it is not already provided that the debtor is
liable for the costs of collection under any provision of the Codified
Ordinances or state law, or any rule of court or judgment entry, the debtor may
be assessed a fee under this division in an amount equal to the costs paid by
the City to any vendor for the costs of collection of the debt.
   (d)   The cost of each contract authorized by this section shall be paid
from any proper appropriation accounts including any fund to which are credited
the following fees, which are appropriated for this purpose:
      (1)   The fee established under division (c) of this section;
      (2)   The fee established by Section
413.032 assessing to persons liable for unpaid tickets for photo- enforced red
light camera or speeding offenses the costs paid by the City to any vendor for
the costs of collection of the debt;
      (3)   The fee established under Section
459.03 assessing to judgment debtors on unpaid parking infraction judgments or
default judgments the costs paid by the City to any vendor for the costs of
collection of the debt;
      (4)   Any other fee established by the Codified Ordinances or state law,
or rule of court or judgment entry that imposes upon a debtor the cost of
colleting a receivable of the Court.
(Ord. No. 1029-07. Passed 8-8-07, eff. 8-16-07)
TITLE IX: BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
   Chapter
151   Boards and Commissions Generally
   Chapter
153   Port and Harbor Commission
   Chapter
154   City Audit Committee
   Chapter
155   Moral Claims Commission
   Chapter
157   Community Relations Board
   Chapter
159   Consumers Council Advisory Board
   Chapter
160   Housing Advisory Board
   Chapter
161   Landmarks Commission
   Chapter
162   Cleveland Commission on Black Women and Girls
   Chapter
163   Urban Forestry Commission
   Chapter
165   Boxing and Wrestling Commission
   Chapter
167   City Records Commission
   Chapter
169   Civil Service Commission
   Chapter
170   Tax Abatement Commission
CHAPTER 151 – BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS GENERALLY
   Note: There are no sections in Chapter
151. This chapter has been established to provide a place for future
legislation and for cross references.
Charter reference:
   Board of Control, Charter §
80
   Board of Revision of Assessments, Charter §
148
   Board of Zoning Appeals; Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals,
Charter §
76-6
   Charter Review Commission, Charter §
200-1
   City Planning Commission, Charter §
76 et seq.
   Civil Service Commission, Charter §
124 et seq.
   General provisions for advisory boards, Charter §
81
   Sinking Fund Commission, Charter §
110
Cross-reference:
   Board of Right-of-Way Appeals, CO
Ch. 502

   Board of Zoning Appeals; Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals,
CO
Ch. 329
   City Planning Commission, CO
Ch. 301
   Income Tax Board of Review, CO
191.2501 et seq.
   Off-Street Parking Committee, CO
349.12
   Sinking Fund Commission, CO
Ch. 179
CHAPTER 153 – PORT AND HARBOR COMMISSION
153.01   Establishment and Members
153.02   Organization and Rules
153.03   Employment of Commission Members for Special Work
153.04   Powers and Duties
Charter reference:
   Alienation of waterfront lands, Charter §
45
   General provisions, Charter §
76-7
Cross-reference:
   City Airport, CO
Ch. 571
   Department of Port Control, CO
Ch. 139
   Harbor, CO
Ch. 573
§ 153.01 Establishment and Members
   Pursuant to Charter Section
76-7, there is hereby established a Port and Harbor Commission to consist of
nine (9) members to be Appointed by the Mayor in accordance with Charter
Section
70, to serve without compensation and at the pleasure of the Mayor. The Mayor
shall designate one (1) of the members to serve as Chairman and shall appoint a
secretary for the Commission, who may be selected from the members of the
Commission or who may be an officer or employee of the City, who shall serve in
that capacity without additional compensation.
(Ord. No. 103737. Passed 2-24-36)
§ 153.02 Organization and Rules
   The Port and Harbor Commission shall make its own rules and regulations and
shall keep a journal of its proceedings. The Commission is authorized to call
upon the various officers and employees of the several departments of the City
for such information and assistance which it may need in the carrying forward
of its work. The Commission, with the approval of the Mayor, shall have power
to employ other experts and assistants, provided Council has first appropriated
funds for that purpose.
(Ord. No. 103737. Passed 2-24-36)
§ 153.03 Employment of Commission Members for Special Work
   (a)   The Port and Harbor Commission may employ one (1) or more of its
members who, by reason of scientific or professional knowledge, may be
especially qualified for the purpose, to do such engineering, landscaping,
architectural and other professional work as may be authorized by such
Commission, and when any member of the Commission has been so designated, the
Board of Control shall then fix the compensation of such member of the
Commission performing such special work.
   (b)   Whenever the City requires special engineering, legal, landscaping,
architectural or other professional service, which the regular officers and
employees of the City for any reason are not able to render, and a member of
the Commission is particularly qualified to render such service, the Mayor,
with the approval of the Board, may contract therefore with such member, and
the latter may receive such compensation from the City as is provided in such
contract. Such compensation shall be payable from the appropriation of the
departments requiring such special services or from bonds issued for the
improvement in connection with which such services are required.
(Ord. No. 107655. Passed 3-14-38)
§ 153.04 Powers and Duties
   The Port and Harbor Commission shall make a comprehensive study of the plan
and program for the development of the waterfront of the City and vicinity, and
include in such study all the waterfront extending from and including Rocky
River on the west, to and including Chagrin River on the east. The Commission
shall reduce its finding and recommendations to writing and submit the same to
the Mayor and shall accompany the same with an estimated budget of expenses
necessary to be incurred in the development of such port and in the further
work of the Commission. The Commission, with a view to exercising and
conserving the rights conferred upon the City under RC 721.04, shall also have
the power and duty to adopt rules and regulations, consistent with the
provisions of RC 721.04, governing the erecting and placing of any building or
structure of any kind or nature proposed to be erected or placed within the
City between E. 9th and E. 72nd Street upon any land situated northerly of a
line three hundred (300) feet distant southerly from the southerly curb line of
the street commonly known as the Lakefront Road. The Commission shall also have
the duty and power to examine and approve or disapprove any application and
plans for the erection of any structure within the area aforesaid. The
Commission shall make a written monthly report to the Mayor of the progress of
the work done under this section.
(Ord. No. 1203-38. Passed 8-10-38)
CHAPTER 154 – CITY AUDIT COMMITTEE
154.01   Establishment and Members
154.02   Declaration of Purpose
154.03   Duties of Committee
154.04   Meetings and Attendance
§ 154.01 Establishment and Members
   There is hereby established a City Audit Committee composed of seven (7)
members consisting of the Mayor, or his or her designee; the President of
Council, or his or her designee; the Director of Law; one (1) member appointed
by the Mayor; and two (2) members appointed by the President of Council. The
final member, who shall serve as Chair of the City Audit Committee, shall be
chosen jointly by the Mayor and Council President, shall have at least ten (10)
years' experience in auditing or financial accounting, including some
experience in governmental finance or auditing, and shall have no financial or
contractual interest with the City of Cleveland in accordance with the ethics
provisions of the Ohio Revised Code. In addition, the Chair shall not have had
any duties pertaining to the audit of the City of Cleveland for at least five
(5) years prior to his or her appointment. In the event that the President of
Council and Mayor fail to jointly select a Chair within thirty (30) days of the
vacancy of the seat, then the President of Council shall appoint a Chair. The
appointed members’ terms shall be two (2) years and the term of the Chair shall
be three (3) years. The Clerk of Council shall publish the name of each member
and the Chair in the City Record. The Director of Law shall designate one (1)
of his or her assistants to serve as Secretary of the City Audit Committee.
Members of the City Audit Committee shall serve without compensation.
(Ord. No. 1010-2022. Passed 10-17-22, eff. 10-20-22)
§ 154.02 Declaration of Purpose
   The City Audit Committee is to serve as the focal point for communication
between the legislative and executive branches of the City of Cleveland, the
independent auditor retained by the City, the Department of Finance, and the
Division of Internal Auditing as their duties relate to financial accounting,
reporting, internal controls, and compliance with applicable laws and
regulations. The City Audit Committee is to assist the staff and employees of
the City in fulfilling its responsibilities as to accounting policies and
reporting practices of the City of Cleveland and sufficiency of auditing
relative thereto. The City Audit Committee shall be the principal agent in
ensuring the independence of independent auditors, the integrity of management
and the adequacy of disclosures to the public. The City Audit Committee shall
make recommendations to the Director of Finance relative to his or her
selection of an independent auditor for the City pursuant to Section
127.41 of the Codified Ordinances of Cleveland, Ohio, 1976.
(Ord. No. 1957-2000. Passed 11-13-00, eff. 11-22-00, without the signature of
the Mayor)
§ 154.03 Duties of Committee
   (a)   The City Audit Committee shall:
      (1)   Review with the Director of the Department of Finance, the
independent auditor, and the Commissioner of Internal Audit, the City’s
policies and procedures to reasonably assure the adequacy of internal control’s
over accounting, administration, compliance with laws and regulations and
financial reporting;
      (2)   Have familiarity, through the individual efforts of its members,
with the accounting and reporting principles and practices applied by the City
in preparing its financial statements. Further, the City Audit Committee is to
make, or cause to be made, all necessary inquiries of the City and the
independent auditor concerning established standards of conduct and performance
and deviations therefrom;
      (3)   Review, prior to the start of the annual audit, the scope and
general extent of the independent auditor’s planned examination, including its
engagement letter. The auditor’s fees shall be summarized by the Director of
Finance for review by the City Audit Committee. The Committee’s review should
entail an understanding from the independent auditor of the factors considered
by the auditor in determining the audit scope, including:
         A.   Risk characteristics of the City of Cleveland; and
         B.   External reporting requirements; and
         C.   Quality of internal accounting, administrative and compliance
controls; and
         D.   Extent of internal auditor’s involvement with the audit
examination; and
         E.   Other areas to be covered during the audit engagement.
      (4)   Review the extent of non-audit services planned to be provided by
the independent auditor in relation to the objectivity and independence needed
in the audit;
      (5)   Review with the City staff and the independent auditor, upon
completion of its audit, financial results and findings prior to their
finalization and dissemination to the public.
   (b)   The City Audit Committee is to review the City’s comprehensive annual
financial report, including the financial statements and footnote disclosures
and supplemental disclosures required by generally accepted accounting
principles, with respect to the following:
      (1)   Significant transactions not a normal part of the City’s
operations; and
      (2)   Selection of and changes, if any, during the year in the City’s
accounting principles or their application; and
      (3)   Significant adjustments proposed by the independent auditor; and
      (4)   The process used in formulating accounting estimates and the
independent auditor’s conclusions regarding the reasonableness of those
estimates; and
      (5)   Any disagreements between the independent auditor and management
about matters that could be significant the City’s financial statements or the
auditor’s report; and
      (6)   Difficulties encountered in the performance of the audit.
   (c)   The City Audit Committee shall also:
      (1)   Evaluate the cooperation received by the independent auditor during
its audit, including its access to all requested records, data, and information
and inquire of the independent auditor whether there have been any
disagreements with City management that, if not satisfactorily resolved, would
have caused the independent auditor to issue a nonstandard report on the City’s
financial statements;
      (2)   Discuss with the independent auditor the quality of the City’s
financial and accounting process and any recommendations that the independent
auditor may have, including improvements to internal financial controls,
controls over compliance with laws and regulations, the selection of accounting
principles and management reporting systems;
      (3)   Review written responses to “letter of comments and
recommendations” from the independent auditor and discuss with the City the
status of implementation of prior period recommendations and corrective action
plans;
      (4)   Recommend any extensions or changes in the duties of the City Audit
Committee
      (5)   Issue an annual report on the discharge of the duties of the City
Audit Committee.
(Ord. No. 1957-2000. Passed 11-13-00, eff. 11-22-00, without the signature of
the Mayor)
§ 154.04 Meetings and Attendance
   The City Audit Committee shall meet at least three (3) times during each
calendar year and as many additional times as the majority of members deems
necessary in the offices of the Department of Finance at such time as it shall
decide. All meetings of the City Audit Committee shall be public and the dates
and attendance of the meetings shall be published by the Clerk of Council in
the City Record. The Chair, however, may hold executive sessions in accordance
with the provisions of the Ohio Revised Code. A simple majority of the members
shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. Any member who is
absent from three (3) consecutive duly-called meetings shall be removed by the
Chair from the City Audit Committee. In the event that a vacancy occurs during
the term of any member, the appropriate appointing authority shall name a
successor to serve the unexpired term. The members of the City Audit Committee
may request that members of the other departments of the City be present at the
meetings, as well as representatives of the independent auditor. The City Audit
Committee shall keep minutes of its meetings, a copy of which shall be kept on
file and available for public inspection in the Mayor’s office and with the
Clerk of Council.
(Ord. No. 1302-11. Passed 9-19-11, eff. 9-21-11)
CHAPTER 155 – MORAL CLAIMS COMMISSION
155.01   Establishment and Members
155.02   Duties of Commission
155.03   Claims for Damages Incurred in Crime Prevention or Criminal
Apprehension
155.04   Award Determined by Commission
155.05   Assignment of Reimbursement to City
§ 155.01 Establishment and Members
   There is hereby established a Moral Claims Commission consisting of the
Director of Law, who shall be Chairman, President of Council and two (2)
members of Council designated by him or her and the Director of Finance, all of
whom shall serve as such without additional compensation. The Director of Law
shall assign one (1) of his or her assistants to serve as secretary of the
Commission.
(Ord. No. 2036-52. Passed 3-2-53, eff. 3-9-53)
§ 155.02 Duties of Commission
   All claims arising from injury or damage from alleged acts of the City in
its governmental capacity, or which arise from circumstances wherein but for
the interposition of some defense peculiar to municipal corporations the City
would otherwise be liable at law, or which arise from facts under which the
City has the right and obligation in good conscience to pay for such injury or
damage, shall be referred to the Moral Claims Commission, filed and properly
designated either by number or short title or both. All such claims shall be
carefully investigated by the Commission. The Chairman of the Commission shall,
for the purposes of this chapter, have the power to administer oaths, compel
attendance of witnesses and production of books and papers under the penalty
provided in Section
111.08 of these Codified Ordinances. After such investigation, the Commission
shall either approve, with conditions or limitations, or disapprove such a
claim. Original papers relating to claims shall be filed in the office of the
Director of Law and shall be preserved for not less than four (4) years. The
Director shall cause to be prepared and introduced into Council ordinances
setting forth moral claims allowed by the Commission. Each such ordinance shall
set forth the number of each claim, the general subject of the claim and the
fund from which payment is to be made. The Director of Finance shall certify
that funds are available for the payments contemplated by each such ordinance.
After the approval of the ordinance by the Finance Committee and subsequent to
at least one (1) public hearing thereon, Council shall proceed to pass such
ordinance introduced, or as it may be amended, after such public hearing.
(Ord. No. 389-81. Passed 2-23-81, eff. 2-24-81)
§ 155.03 Claims for Damages Incurred in Crime Prevention or Criminal
Apprehension
   In addition to the claims set forth in Section
155.02, any claim based solely on current and future out-of-pocket expenses
arising from injury, death or property damage incurred by a person, other than
a peace officer, while attempting to apprehend a person suspected of committing
a crime, or while attempting to prevent the commission of a crime, to preserve
the public peace or to prevent public disturbance may be presented to the Moral
Claims Commission. The claim must be filed within six (6) months after the
happening of the occurrence which resulted in injury or damage and its validity
shall be determined by the Commission in the same manner as set forth in
Section
155.02.
(Ord. No. 197-67. Passed 2-27-67, eff. 3-1-67)
§ 155.04 Award Determined by Commission
   (a)   The Moral Claims Commission may fix an award for the payment of a
claim. Such award shall be fixed in the discretion of the Commission as a
matter of grace and not as a matter of right and shall in the case of personal
injuries be based upon the medical expenses and loss of earnings incurred by
such person.
   (b)   In the case of death of a person, the award shall be made to the
widow, child or legal representative of the decedent.
   (c)   Payment of any award fixed by the Commission shall be made in the
manner set forth in Section
155.02.
(Ord. No. 197-67. Passed 2-27-67, eff. 3-1-67)
§ 155.05 Assignment of Reimbursement to City
   Before any payment is made, the claimant shall execute and deliver an
assignment to the City in such form as approved by the Director of Law agreeing
to reimburse the amount of the payment to the City any sum of money obtained by
the claimant arising out of the occurrence entitling the claimant to the
payment, whether by judgment, settlement or otherwise against anyone legally
responsible for the damage.
(Ord. No. 197-67. Passed 2-27-67, eff. 3-1-67)
CHAPTER 157 – COMMUNITY RELATIONS BOARD
157.01   Establishment and Terms
157.02   Duties of the Board
157.03   Executive Director
157.04   Duties of Executive Director
Cross-reference:
   Administration of provisions to eliminate employment discrimination, CO
663.05
   Department of Community Development, CO
Ch. 137
§ 157.01 Establishment and Terms
   There is hereby established in the office of the Mayor a board known as the
Community Relations Board, consisting of the Mayor, as chairman ex-officio, one
(1) member of Council chosen by Council for a term of two (2) years, one (1)
person chosen by the President of Council for a term of two (2) years, and
fourteen (14) persons broadly representative of the social, economic and
cultural interests of the community, appointed by the Mayor, with the approval
of Council, for four (4) year terms. However, of the original appointment three
(3) shall be appointed for one (1) year terms, three (3) shall be appointed for
two (2) year terms, three (3) shall be appointed for three (3) year terms and
five (5) shall be appointed for four (4) years terms; provided further that not
less than five (5) shall represent organized industry, not less than three (3)
shall represent organized labor and not less than five (5) shall be public
members. A member of the Board may be removed for cause by the Mayor but only
after opportunity has been afforded for a public hearing before the Mayor
within ten (10) days after written charges have been given such member by the
Mayor and a copy filed with the Clerk of Council. Such member shall be heard in
person or by counsel. Action of the Mayor shall be final unless not later than
the second meeting of Council after the Mayor's action, Council disapproves the
removal by the affirmative vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the members elected to
Council.
(Ord. No. 1641-13. Passed 12-2-13, eff. 12-3-13)
§ 157.02 Duties of the Board
   (a)   The Community Relations Board shall promote amicable relations among
the racial and cultural and other groups within the community; take appropriate
steps to deal with conditions which strain relationships; aid in the
coordination of the activities of private organizations concerned with these
relationships; assemble, analyze and disseminate authentic and factual data
relating to interracial and other intergroup relationships. It shall have power
to publish and distribute at public expense such factual material as it shall
deem necessary or desirable.
   (b)   The Board shall investigate on its own initiative any complaint,
situation or occurrence which may strain relationships.
   (c)   The Board shall coordinate its efforts to achieve its duties with
those efforts of the Office of Equal Opportunity to carry out the duties set
forth in Section
123.08 of these Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 77-94. Passed 3-14-94, eff. 3-23-94)
§ 157.03 Executive Director
   The Community Relations Board shall nominate and the Mayor shall appoint an
Executive Director who shall serve until removed by the Mayor with the
concurrence of a majority of the Board. Upon nomination of the Executive
Director, the Board shall appoint as its staff such technical and office
personnel and assistants as it may deem necessary within the appropriation made
available for such purpose. All such appointments, except one (1) assistant and
one (1) secretary to the Executive Director, shall be made in conformity with
the civil service provisions of the Charter.
(Ord. No. 240-45. Passed 3-5-45)
§ 157.04 Duties of Executive Director
   Under the direction of the Community Relations Board the Executive Director
shall supervise and control the staff. He or she shall:
   (a)   Serve as Secretary of the Board and of any advisory committee or
subcommittee which may be created;
   (b)   Maintain contacts with all groups throughout the community which are
concerned with interracial and other intergroup understanding, report to the
Board regarding the activities of these groups, be a source of accurate and
reliable data on the acute problems in the field of interracial and other
intergroup understanding and join one (1) or more of these groups as a member
if he or she so chooses, with the approval of the Board; any expense of
membership is to be charged against the Board budget;
   (c)   Implement the decisions of the Board and on the advice of the Board
shall work in cooperation with the directors of all departments of the
Municipal government in the improvement of services to eliminate whatever
sources of interracial friction may exist; work to remove inequalities which
may be related to minority group or other status on such important problems as
housing, recreation, education, law enforcement, vocational guidance and
related matters; conduct such educational activities, institutes, meetings and
prepare such reading materials as will lead to better public relations;
   (d)   Cooperate with the Director of the Office of Equal Opportunity in
those instances when their duties are concurrent.
(Ord. No. 77-94. Passed 3-14-94, eff. 3-23-94)
CHAPTER 159 – CONSUMERS COUNCIL ADVISORY BOARD
159.01   Establishment; Terms; Meetings
Charter reference:
   General provisions for advisory boards, Charter §
81
§ 159.01 Establishment; Terms; Meetings
   There is hereby created in the Office of Fair Housing and Consumer Affairs
an advisory board on consumer affairs which shall be known as the Consumers
Council, consisting of the Director, ex- officio and seven (7) members. Four
(4) shall be appointed by the Mayor and three (3) by the President of Council.
The Consumers Council shall represent business and consumer interests, but
consumer members shall never be less than a majority. One (1) of these members
shall be elected Chairman annually by the members of the Advisory Board. Of the
seven (7) members first appointed, three (3) shall be appointed for a term of
three (3) years, two (2) for a term of two (2) years and two (2) for a term of
one (1) year; thereafter all appointments shall be for a term of three (3)
years. Members of the Consumers Council shall serve without compensation but
shall be reimbursed for expenses necessarily incurred in the performance of
their duties. The Consumers Council must meet with the Director at least
quarterly in each calendar year and shall advise the Director on general goals
for the development of programs; undertake studies and reports and make written
recommendations to the Director and foster cooperation among City, State and
Federal agencies and private consumer groups. The Consumers Council shall hold
additional meetings with the Director when called by the Chairman or when
requested by the Director or by at least three (3) members of the Consumers
Council.
(Ord. No. 1329-10. Passed 12-6-10, eff. 12-6-10)
CHAPTER 160 – HOUSING ADVISORY BOARD
160.01   Housing Board Establishment; Composition; and Terms
160.02   Purposes of the Housing Advisory Board
§ 160.01 Housing Board Establishment; Composition; and Terms
   (a)   There is hereby established a Housing Advisory Board for the purposes
set forth in RC Chapter 176 in connection with the issuance of general
obligation bonds or the expenditure of moneys raised by taxation to provide, or
assist in providing, housing pursuant to Section
16 of Article VIII of the Ohio Constitution.
   (b)   The Housing Advisory Board shall consist of no less than eleven (11)
members, to be appointed by the Mayor and subject to the confirmation of
Council, with terms of two (2) years each. Such appointments shall include a
balanced representation of each of the following groups located within the City
of Cleveland:
      (1)   Institutions that lend money for housing;
      (2)   Nonprofit builders and developers of housing;
      (3)   For-profit builders and developers of housing;
      (4)   For-profit builders and developers of rental housing;
      (5)   Real estate brokers licensed under RC Chapter 4735;
      (6)   Other persons with professional knowledge regarding local housing
needs and fair housing issues within the City of Cleveland;
      (7)   Residents of the City of Cleveland;
      (8)   Representatives of CMHA;
      (9)   Elected officials of the City of Cleveland; and
      (10)   Such other groups or individuals that the Mayor determines are
necessary to provide balanced advice on housing plans and programs.
   (c)   Six (6) of the initial appointments shall be for terms ending three
(3) years after the date the initial appointments were approved. The remaining
initial appointments shall be for a term ending two (2) years after the date
the appointments were approved. Thereafter, terms of appointment shall be for
two (2) years, with each term ending on the same date of the same month as did
the term that it succeeds.
   (d)   Membership on the Housing Advisory Board does not constitute the
holding of a public office or employment by the City of Cleveland. The members
shall serve without compensation.
(Ord. No. 252-95. Passed 6-12-95, eff. 6-21-95)
§ 160.02 Purposes of the Housing Advisory Board
   The Housing Advisory Board shall:
   (a)   Receive and review comprehensive plans for the development and
maintenance of affordable housing submitted to it pursuant to RC 176.04(A)(2),
political subdivision it serves;
   (b)   Receive and review written descriptions submitted to it pursuant to RC
176.04(A)(2);
   (c)   Advise the City of Cleveland regarding the plans and descriptions it
receives pursuant to paragraphs (a) and (b) herein; and
   (d)   Perform such other advisory functions for the City of Cleveland
related to the City’s programs to provide, or assist in providing, housing the
Mayor may request it to perform.
(Ord. No. 252-95. Passed 6-12-95, eff. 6-21-95)
CHAPTER 161 – LANDMARKS COMMISSION
161.01   Declaration of Public Policy and Purpose
161.02   Definitions
161.03   Landmarks Commission, Composition and Terms
161.04   Designation of Landmarks and Landmarks Districts
161.05   Regulation of Environmental Changes; Certificate of Appropriateness
161.051   Certificate of Appropriateness Review Fee
161.06   Powers and Duties of Commission
161.07   Certain Changes Not Prohibited
161.08   Plaques Identifying Cleveland Landmarks and Landmark Districts
161.09   Minimum Maintenance Requirements
161.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Regulations for erecting memorials, CO
105.11
§ 161.01 Declaration of Public Policy and Purpose
   Council hereby declares as a matter of public policy that the preservation,
protection, perpetuation and use of areas, places, buildings, structures, works
of art and other objects having a special historical, community or aesthetic
interest or value is a public necessity and is required in the interest of the
health, prosperity, safety and welfare of the people. The purpose of this
chapter is to:
   (a)   Safeguard the heritage of the City by preserving sites and structures
which reflect elements of the City’s cultural, social, economic, political or
architectural history;
   (b)   Stabilize and improve property values;
   (c)   Strengthen the economy of the City;
   (d)   Protect and enhance the City’s attractions to residents, tourists and
visitors, and serve as a support and stimulus to business and industry;
   (e)   Enhance the visual and aesthetic character, diversity and interest of
the City;
   (f)   Foster civic pride in the beauty and notable accomplishments of the
past;
   (g)   Promote the use and preservation of historic sites and structures for
the education and general welfare of the people of the City; and
   (h)   Take whatever steps are necessary to safeguard the property rights of
the owners whose property is declared to be a landmark or is located in an area
designated as a landmark district.
(Ord. No. 505-72. Passed 6-19-72, eff. 6-23-72)
§ 161.02 Definitions
   As used in this chapter, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
   (a)   “Alteration” means any material change in the external architectural
features of any improvement which has been designated a landmark or which is
situated in a landmark district, less than demolition, removal or construction
of any such improvement.
   (b)   “Applicant” means any person, persons, association, partnership or
corporation who applies for a certificate of appropriateness in order to
undertake any environmental change as property subject to this chapter.
   (c)   “City Council” means Council of the City of Cleveland.
   (d)   “Commission” means the Cleveland Landmarks Commission established
under the provisions of this chapter.
   (e)   “Environmental change” means any alteration, demolition, removal or
construction of any property subject to the provisions of this chapter.
   (f)   “Improvement” means any place, building, structure, work of art or
similar object constituting a physical betterment of real property, or any part
of such betterment.
   (g)   “Improvement parcel” means the unit of property which includes a
physical betterment constituting an improvement and the land embracing the site
thereof, which is treated as a single entity for the purpose of levying real
estate taxes. However, any vacant parcel of land is excluded.
   (h)   “Landmark” means any improvement which has special character or
special historical or aesthetic value as part of the development, heritage or
cultural characteristics of the City, State, or the United States and which has
been designated as a landmark pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
However, “landmark” may also include the improvement parcel, or part thereof,
on which a landmark is situated.
   (i)   “Landmark district” means any area designated by the Commission as an
area containing any physical features or improvements or both which are of
historical, social, cultural, architectural or aesthetic significance to the
City of Cleveland, State of Ohio, or the United States, and cause such area to
constitute a distinctive section of the City of Cleveland.
   (j)   “Member” means any member of the Commission.
   (k)   “Owner” means the owner of record and includes the plural as well as
the singular.
(Ord. No. 2458-79. Passed 12-17-79, eff. 12-19-79)
§ 161.03 Landmarks Commission, Composition and Terms
   There is hereby created the Cleveland Landmarks Commission. The Commission
shall consist of eleven (11) members, seven (7) of whom shall be appointed by
the Mayor, subject to the confirmation of Council. The remaining members shall
be the Commissioner of Architecture, or his or her designee, the Director of
the City Planning Commission, or his or her designee, who shall act as
Secretary of the Landmarks Commission and two (2) members appointed by the
Council President to serve during the term of such Council. Members to be
appointed by the Mayor shall be chosen from nominations made by the Western
Reserve Historical Society, the Cleveland Chapter of the American Institute of
Architects and the Early Settlers Association. At least one (1) member shall be
an owner of commercial or industrial real property; at least one (1) member
shall be a registered architect; at least one (1) member shall be a historian
qualified in the field of historic preservation; at least one (1) member shall
be a licensed real estate broker; at least one (1) member shall be an attorney;
and all members shall have, to the highest extent practicable, a known interest
in landmarks preservation.
   The terms of members appointed by the Mayor next after the expiration of the
two (2) year terms of the members of the Commission existing on the effective
date of this section shall be: two (2) members, two (2) year terms; and five
(5) members, four (4) year terms. Thereafter, the terms of all members
appointed by the Mayor shall be four (4) years. The terms of members appointed
by the President of the Council shall be four (4) years. Members may be
reappointed. Members appointed by the Council President shall be appointed for
terms of four (4) years.
   The members shall select a Chairman and a Vice- Chairman to serve for two
(2) year terms. The members shall serve without compensation.
(Ord. No. 3143-83. Passed 6-18-84, eff. 6-22-84)
§ 161.04 Designation of Landmarks and Landmarks Districts
   (a)   In considering the designation of any area, place, building,
structure, work of art of similar object in the City as a landmark or landmark
district, the Commission shall apply the following criteria with respect to
such property:
      (1)   Its character, interest or value as part of the development,
heritage or cultural characteristics of the City, State or the United States;
      (2)   Its location as a site of a significant historic event;
      (3)   Its identification with a person who significantly contributed to
the culture and development of the City;
      (4)   Its exemplification of the cultural, economic, social or historic
heritage of the City;
      (5)   Its portrayal of the environment of a group of people in an era of
history characterized by a distinctive architectural style;
      (6)   Its embodiment of distinguishing characteristics of an
architectural type or specimen;
      (7)   Its identification as the work of an architect or master builder
whose individual work has influenced the development of the City;
      (8)   Its embodiment of elements of architectural design, detail,
materials or craftsmanship which represent a significant architectural
innovation;
      (9)   Its relationship to other distinctive areas which are eligible for
preservation according to a plan based on an historic, cultural or
architectural motif;
      (10)   Its unique location or singular physical characteristic
representing an established and familiar visual feature of a neighborhood,
community or the City.
   (b)   If the Commission finds that any area, place, building, structure,
work of art or similar object in the City meets the criteria in (a)(1) above,
it shall propose its designation as a landmark or landmark district, and take
the following actions:
      (1)   For designation of an area, place, building, structure, work of art
or similar object as a landmark, the Landmarks Commission shall cause written
notice of the proposed designation to be given by regular mail to the owner of
record. Whenever possible, the Commission shall secure the owner’s written
consent to submit the proposed designation, together with its recommendation
and findings of fact, to Council. In the event that the owner refuses or
declines to give written consent to the proposed designation, the Commission
shall schedule a public hearing on the question of the proposed designation,
and shall cause written notice to be given by regular mail to the owner of
record. The Commission also shall cause a legal notice to be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the City setting forth the nature of the
hearing, the property involved and the date, time and place of the scheduled
public hearing.
      (2)   For designation of an area as a Landmark District, the Landmarks
Commission shall schedule a public hearing on the question of the proposed
designation, and shall cause written notice of the hearing and the proposed
designation to be given by regular mail to the owners of record of the property
in the proposed district. The Commission also shall cause a legal notice to be
published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City setting forth the
nature of the hearing, the property involved and the date, time and place of
the scheduled public hearing.
      (3)   The Commission shall conduct the public hearings described in
divisions (b)(1) and (b)(2) of this section and provide a reasonable
opportunity for all interested parties to express their opinions under such
rules as the Commission may adopt for the purpose of governing the proceedings
of the hearings. Each speaker shall be fully identified as to name, address and
the interests which he or she represents.
      (4)   The Commission shall make a determination with respect to the
proposed designation in writing at its next meeting after the initial hearing
date. The Commission shall set forth in its recommendation the findings of fact
that constitute the basis for its decision and shall transmit the
recommendation to Council.
      (5)   The Council may designate by ordinance the areas, places,
buildings, structures, works of art and other similar objects as a landmark or
landmark district. Council may, in its discretion, hold public hearings on any
proposed designation, whether designation is proposed only with the consent of
the owner, or after public hearings before the Commission. Before passage, the
ordinance designating an area, place, building, structure, work of art or
similar object in the City as a landmark or landmark district shall be
submitted to the Planning Commission for report and recommendation.
      (6)   As soon as is reasonably possible after passage of an ordinance
designating an area, place, building, structure, work of art or similar object
in the City as a landmark or landmark district, the Commission shall notify the
Department of Building and Housing of the official designation.
      (7)   For designation of an area, place, building, structure, work of art
of similar object in the City as a landmark, the Commission shall file with the
County Recorder a affidavit briefly stating the fact of designation and the
number and passage date of the ordinance making the designation. The
Commission, further, shall send by certified mail a copy of the ordinance and a
copy of the affidavit filed with the County Recorder to the owner of record.
      (8)   For areas designated as a landmark district, the designation shall
be made upon the Building Zone Maps of the City of Cleveland on file in the
office of the Clerk of Council and on file in the office of the City Planning
Commission by the appropriate person designated for this purpose by the City
Planning Commission.
      (9)   Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, Council may rescind
the designation of any area, place, building, structure, work of art or similar
object as a landmark or landmark district by ordinance. Passage of such an
ordinance shall relieve the owner of such area, place, building, structure,
work of art or similar object from any duties or penalties contained in this
chapter.
(Ord. No. 1281-06. Passed 12-11-06, eff. 12-15-06)
§ 161.05 Regulation of Environmental Changes; Certificate of Appropriateness
   No person owning, renting or occupying property which has been designated a
landmark or which is situated in a designated landmark district shall make any
environmental change in such property unless a certificate of appropriateness
has been previously issued by the Commission with respect to such environmental
change. The following procedures shall apply to all alterations, demolitions,
removals or constructions of such property in the City:
   (a)   Any application to the Department of Building and Housing for a
building permit for an environmental change shall also be deemed an application
for a certificate of appropriateness, and shall be forwarded to the Commission,
together with copies of all detailed plans, designs, elevations, specifications
and documents relating thereto, and, for any environmental change on one (1) or
more acres of land, and for any environmental change to an apartment, townhome
or condominium of four (4) or more units situated on any size parcel of land, a
copy of a Tree Preservation Plan meeting the requirements set forth in Section
341.051, within seven (7) days after receipt of the application. An application
for a certificate of appropriateness may be filed by the applicant directly
with the Commission at the same time that an application for a building permit
is filed or in lieu of filing for a building permit, if no building permit is
required for the proposed environmental change. The Commissioner of Urban
Forestry or a designee shall review any Tree Preservation Plan and shall notify
the Director of Building and Housing of approval or disapproval as set forth in
Section
341.051. The general requirements of tree preservation in Section
341.052 shall apply to any person seeking to make an environmental change on
one (1) or more acres of land, and to any person seeking to make an
environmental change to an apartment, townhome or condominium of four (4) or
more units situated on any size parcel of land.
   (b)   The Commission shall evaluate applications to determine whether or not
the environmental change proposed by the applicant will adversely affect any
significant historical or aesthetic feature of the property and to determine
whether or not the environmental change proposed by the applicant is consistent
with the spirit and purposes of this chapter.
      (1)   In evaluating applications for alterations or construction of
property, the Commission shall consider the following standards created by the
U.S. Department of the Interior:
         A.   A property shall be used for its historic purpose or be placed in
a new use that requires minimal change to the defining characteristics of the
building and its site and environment;
         B.   The historic character of a property shall be retained and
preserved. The removal of historic materials or alternation of features and
spaces that characterize a property shall be avoided;
         C.   Each property shall be recognized as a physical record of its
time, place, and use. Changes that create a false sense of historical
development, such as adding conjectural features or architectural elements from
other buildings, shall not be undertaken;
         D.   Most properties change over time; those changes that have
acquired historic significance in their own right shall be retained and
preserved;
         E.   Distinctive features, finishes, and construction techniques or
examples of craftsmanship that characterize a property shall be preserved;
         F.   Deteriorated historic features shall be repaired rather than
replaced. Where the severity of deterioration requires replacement of a
distinctive feature, the new feature shall match the old in design, color,
texture, and other visual qualities and, where possible, materials. Replacement
of missing features shall be substantiated by documentary, physical, or
pictorial evidence;
         G.   Chemical or physical treatments, such as sandblasting, that cause
damage to historic materials shall not be used. The surface cleaning of
structures, if appropriate, shall be undertaken using the gentlest means
possible;
         H.   Significant archaeological resources affected by a project shall
be protected and preserved. If such resources must be disturbed, mitigation
measures shall be undertaken;
         I.   New additions, exterior, alterations, or related new construction
shall not destroy historic materials that characterize the property. The new
work shall be differentiated from the old and shall be compatible with the
massing, size, scale, and architectural features to protect the historic
integrity of the property and its environment; and
         J.   New additions and adjacent or related new construction shall be
undertaken in such a manner that if removed in the future, the essential form
and integrity of the historic property and its environment would be unimpaired.
      (2)   In evaluating applications for demolition or removal of property,
the Commission shall consider the following standards:
         A.   The architectural and historic significance of the subject
building or structure;
         B.   The significance of the building or structure in contributing to
the architectural or historic character of its environs;
         C.   In the case of a request to move a building or other structure,
the relationship between the location of the subject building or structure and
its overall significance;
         D.   The present and potential economic viability of the subject
building or structure, given its physical condition and marketability;
         E.   If the demolition will remedy conditions imminently dangerous to
life, health, or property, as determined in writing by the Department of
Building and Housing, the Division of Fire or the Department of Public Health;
and
         F.   The appropriateness of the proposed new structure or use and its
impact on the surrounding community.
   (c)   If the Commission finds that the environmental change proposed by the
applicant will not adversely affect any significant historical or aesthetic
feature of the property and is appropriate and consistent with the spirit and
purposes of this chapter, or will remedy conditions imminently dangerous to
life, health or property, as determined in writing by the Department of
Building and Housing or the Division of Fire or the Department of Public
Health, then the Commission shall issue a certificate of appropriateness.
   (d)   If the Commission finds that the environmental change proposed by the
applicant will adversely affect any significant historical or aesthetic feature
of the property or is inappropriate or inconsistent with the spirit and
purposes of this chapter, the Commission may either deny the application or
delay action on the application. Any decision to delay action on the
application shall be by mutual agreement of the Commission and the applicant
and shall be for a period not to exceed six (6) months. During the delay
period, the Commission shall conduct further investigation with regard to the
proposed environmental change, conduct negotiations with the applicant and any
other party in an effort to find a means of preserving the property, or explore
alternatives to the proposed environmental change. The Commission may also
investigate the feasibility of all available ways and means of preserving the
improvement, including without limitation, inducing by contract or other
consideration the creation of covenants restricting the use of property,
leasing and subleasing the property for the purposes of preservation and
acquiring by eminent domain or contract or conveyance all or any part of or
interest in the property.
   (e)   At the end of the delay period, the Commission shall either approve or
deny the application, or delay action. A decision to delay action, at the end
of one (1) delay period, shall be by mutual agreement of the Commission and the
applicant and shall be for a period not to exceed six (6) months. The
Commission shall only agree to a second and final delay period if the
Commission determines that this additional time period may be useful in
securing an alternative to the proposed environmental change. At the end of the
second and final delay period, the Commission shall either approve or deny the
application for a certificate of appropriateness.
   (f)   Upon the issuance, denial or a delay in the issuance of a certificate
of appropriateness, the Commission shall give written notices of the issuance,
denial or delay in the issuance to the applicant and the Department of Building
and Housing. The Commission shall provide written notice of the issuance,
denial or delay in the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness to the
applicant and the Department of Building and Housing within forty-five (45)
days of the receipt by the Commission of an application from either the
applicant or the Department of Building and Housing.
   (g)   If no action has been taken by the Commission on an application for a
certificate of appropriateness to approve, deny or delay action within forty-
five (45) days after such application has been received by the Commission, the
certificate of appropriateness shall be deemed issued.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 161.051 Certificate of Appropriateness Review Fee
   (a)   A review fee shall be paid to the Landmarks Commission when the
Landmarks Commission’s approval is required by the Codified Ordinances for
issuance of a Building Permit, in accordance with the following schedule to
cover the cost of review by the Landmarks Commission payable subsequent to the
Landmarks Commission approval, upon issuance of a Certificate of
Appropriateness.
   (b)   The review fee shall be determined on the basis of the following
schedule which “improvement cost” is that portion of a project’s total
improvement cost attributable to exterior improvements requiring review and
approval by the Landmarks Commission:
 
Applicable Improvement Cost Fee Rate
Less than $5,000            1.5% of the amount over $0
$5,001 - $10,000            $75.00 + 1.0% of the amount over $5,000
$10,001 - $100,000          $125.00 + 0.5% of the amount over $10,000
$100,001 - $500,000         $575.00 + 0.2% of the amount over $100,000
$500,001 - $5,000,000       $1,375.00 + 0.05% of the amount over $500,000
More than $5,000,000        $3,625.00 + 0.02% of the amount over $5,000,000
 
   (c)   Exemptions. No fee payments shall be required for the renovation or
alteration of existing single-family, two (2) family and three (3) family
residences or for construction or alteration of accessory structures on the
property of such existing residence.
   (d)   All fees generated pursuant to this section shall be deposited into
the fund or funds which are designated for use by the Landmarks Commission, and
shall be used for Landmark Commission purposes.
(Ord. No. 329-99. Passed 6-7-99, eff. 6-16-99)
§ 161.06 Powers and Duties of Commission
   The Commission shall have the following powers and duties in addition to
those otherwise specified in this chapter:
   (a)   The Commission shall conduct a continuing survey of all areas, places,
buildings, structures, works of art or similar objects in the City which the
Commission, on the basis of information available or presented to it, has
reason to believe are or will be eligible for designation as landmarks or
landmark districts;
   (b)   The Commission shall work for the continuing education of the citizens
of the City with respect to the historic and architectural heritage of the City
and the landmarks and landmark districts designated under the provisions of
this chapter. It shall keep current and publish a register of landmarks and
landmark districts;
   (c)   The Commission shall have authority to establish, within the spirit
and purposes of this chapter, criteria, rules and regulations for evaluating
applications for certificates of appropriateness submitted to it and the manner
in which they shall be processed;
   (d)   The Commission may accept the services on a permanent or part-time
basis of technical experts and such other persons as may be required to perform
its duties.
(Ord. No. 339-73. Passed 3-12-73, eff. 3-20-73)
§ 161.07 Certain Changes Not Prohibited
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the ordinary
maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural feature of any property
which has been designated a landmark or which is situated in a designated
landmark district that does not involve a change in design, material color or
outer appearance thereof, nor to prevent any environmental change that the
Division of Building, Division of Fire or Department of Public Health and
Welfare shall certify in writing is required by the public safety because of an
unsafe or dangerous condition.
(Ord. No. 84-71. Passed 6-21-71, eff. 6-23-71)
§ 161.08 Plaques Identifying Cleveland Landmarks and Landmark Districts
   The Secretary to the Landmarks Commission is hereby authorized to enter into
contract for the making of plaques which identify Cleveland landmarks and
landmark districts and to sell such plaques to be used to mark individual
landmarks and properties within landmark districts at a fee of two hundred
dollars ($200.00) per plaque.
(Ord. No. 1881-93. Passed 9-13-93, eff. 9-16-93)
§ 161.09 Minimum Maintenance Requirements
   (a)   Every Owner, operator, or agent of any property which has been
designated a Landmark or is situated in a designated Landmark district shall
keep in good repair all of the exterior portions of each Improvement and
Improvement parcel and all interior portions thereof which, if not so
maintained, may cause or tend to cause the exterior portion of such Improvement
or Improvement parcel to deteriorate, decay or become damaged or otherwise fall
into a state of disrepair. Every Owner, operator or agent of any property which
has been designated a Landmark or is situated in a designated Landmark district
shall further keep in good repair all portions of each Improvement and
Improvement parcel which, if not so maintained, may cause or tend to cause such
portions to deteriorate, decay, or become damaged or otherwise fall into a
state of disrepair.
   (b)   The repair and maintenance required by this section includes, without
limitation:
      (1)   Developing and implementing a maintenance and monitoring plan for
protecting each Improvement and Improvement parcel;
      (2)   Structurally stabilizing each Improvement and Improvement parcel by
taking all steps necessary to ensure:
         A.   The roof is watertight;
         B.   Gutters are properly pitched and cleared of debris;
         C.   Downspout joints are intact;
         D.   Drains are unobstructed;
         E.   Windows and door frames and wood siding are in good condition;
         F.   Masonry walls are properly tuck- pointed to keep out moisture;
         G.   The Improvement parcel is graded for proper water run-off;
         H.   Vegetation is cleared from around each Improvement; and
         I.   Trash, debris and hazardous materials such as inflammable
liquids, poisons and paints are removed from the interior of each Improvement
and from the Improvement parcel on a continuous basis.
      (3)   Exterminating or controlling pests, including termites and rodents;
      (4)   Protecting each Improvement from moisture penetration;
      (5)   Securing each vacant Improvement and Improvement parcel from
vandalism and break-ins including, without limitation:
         A.   First floor windows and doors must be secured as provided in
Section
3103.09 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Cleveland, Ohio, 1976;
         B.   Plywood must be painted black or if the structure is composed of
brick, a color compatible with the color of the brick;
         C.   The method used to install the plywood may not result in the
destruction of the opening covered and all sashes, doors and frames must be
protected or stored for future use;
         D.   Battery-operated intrusion alarms must be installed on the first
floor of each Improvement;
         E.   Battery-operated smoke alarms must be installed on all floors of
each Improvement;
         F.   Adequate security lighting must be installed on each improvement
and adequate security lighting or fencing or both must also be installed on
each Improvement parcel where deemed necessary by the Commissioner of Buildings
and Housing.
      (6)   Providing adequate ventilation to the interior of each vacant
Improvement;
      (7)   Securing or modifying utilities and mechanical systems for each
vacant Improvement;
      (8)   Taking such other steps deemed necessary by the Commissioner of
Building and Housing.
   (c)   Every Owner of any property which has been designated a Landmark or is
situated in a designated Landmark district shall, when the Commissioner of
Building and Housing deems it necessary to preserve the public peace, property,
health or safety, furnish and file with such Commissioner a bond in the penal
sum of fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) to be approved as to form by the
Director of Law, guaranteeing full and faithful compliance by the Owner with
the requirements of this section, binding the surety thereon to correct or
abate any violation of this section whenever the Owner refuses, neglects or
fails to correct or abate such violation within a reasonable time limit set by
such Commissioner.
   (d)   Every Owner of any property which has been designated a Landmark or is
situated in a designated Landmark district shall designate in writing the name,
current address and telephone number of a natural person residing within
Cuyahoga County who is authorized by the Owner to act for the Owner and receive
any notices under this section. Such natural person must be of sound mind and
at least eighteen (18) years of age. Every Owner shall notify the Commissioner
of Building and Housing in writing of any change in the name, address and/or
telephone number of the natural person designated in this section.
   (e)   The provisions of this chapter shall be in addition to all other
applicable provisions of the Building Code of the City of Cleveland. Where
provisions conflict, the provision imposing the stricter requirement shall
control.
   (f)   It shall be the duty of the Division of Building and Housing to
enforce this section. The Cleveland Landmarks Commission, on its own
initiative, may notify the Division of Building and Housing and request that
the Commissioner of Building and Housing proceed to take action against any
Owner, operator or agent who, in the opinion of such Commissioner, is in
violation of his or her section.
(Ord. No. 1146-95. Passed 12-18-95, eff. 12-26-95)
§ 161.99 Penalty
   (a)   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter by failing to
perform any act required by this chapter or performing any act which is
prohibited by this chapter shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00)
nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which an offense occurs
or continues.
   (b)   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) hereof, in the event
any environmental change is made in any property which has been designated a
landmark or which is situated in a landmark district, in violation of the
provisions of this chapter, the City may institute appropriate proceedings to
prevent such unlawful environmental change.
(Ord. No. 84-71. Passed 6-21-71, eff. 6-23-71)
CHAPTER 162 – CLEVELAND COMMISSION ON BLACK WOMEN AND GIRLS
162.01   Cleveland Commission on Black Women and Girls, Composition and Terms
162.02   Organization and Procedures
162.03   Duties of the Commission
§ 162.01 Cleveland Commission on Black Women and Girls, Composition and Terms
   (a)   There is hereby created the Cleveland Commission on Black Women and
Girls, consisting of the Mayor, or his or her designee, one (1) member of
Council appointed by Council, or the Council’s designee; one (1) city employee
from any office or department, appointed by the Mayor; and twelve (12) persons,
who shall include the following:
      (1)   a representative from the faith community;
      (2)   a representative from the business community;
      (3)   a representative from a pre-school, primary, and/or secondary
school;
      (4)   a representative from a college or university;
      (5)   a representative from a grass-roots organization located in the
City;
      (6)   a representative who is a member of a union;
      (7)   a representative from a local hospital who is a doctor of medicine;
      (8)   a representative from a social service agency or who is employed as
a social worker;
      (9)   two (2) college students who attend either community college,
technical school or one (1) of the four (4) year Cleveland based universities
and live in Cleveland; and
      (10)   two (2) Cleveland Metropolitan School District (“CMSD”) students
between eleven (11) and seventeen (17) years old who live in Cleveland, and
have permission from their parent or legal guardian, who shall be appointed for
a term of one (1) year.
   (b)   The appointing authority for those described in division (a) above
shall be as follows: the Mayor shall appoint those described in subdivisions
(1) through (4); the Council shall appoint those described in subdivisions (5)
through (8); and the Mayor and the Council shall each appoint one student
described in subdivisions (9) and (10).
   (c)   Other than the Mayor, or his or her designee, the member of Council or
Council’s designee, and the CMSD students, the term of the members shall be
three (3) years. However, the terms of the original appointments shall be as
follows: the members under subdivisions (a)(1), (a)(3), (a)(5), and (a)(7)
shall serve three (3) years, the members under subdivisions (a)(2), (a)(4), (a)
(6), and (a)(8) shall serve two (2) years; and the members under subdivision
(a)(9) shall serve one (1) year. In the event that a vacancy occurs during the
term of any member, the Commission, with Mayoral and Council approval, shall
appoint a successor to serve the unexpired portion of that term.
(Ord. No. 1006-2023. Passed 10-23-23, eff. 10-25-23)
§ 162.02 Organization and Procedures
   (a)   The Mayor shall appoint a chairperson. At the first meeting of the
Commission, the chairperson shall appoint from the Commission's membership a
vice chairperson and secretary.
   (b)   The Commission shall meet at least once a month at such time and place
as it shall decide. Special meetings may be called by the chairperson at the
chairperson's discretion. A simple majority of the members shall constitute a
quorum for the transaction of business. Any member who is absent from three (3)
consecutive duly-called meetings shall be removed from the Commission unless
said member files a written appeal with the Commission and a majority thereof
votes to retain said member.
   (c)   The Commission shall adopt such rules and regulations governing its
own conduct as are not in conflict with the Charter or these Codified
Ordinances.
   (d)   The Commission may establish one (1) or more advisory subcommittees to
help achieve the goals set forth in this Chapter.
   (e)   The Commission shall keep minutes of its meetings, a copy of which
shall be kept on file in the Mayor's Office. All findings, reports and
recommendations of the Commission shall be in writing and shall designate
thereon the names of the members concurring therein. A member who does not
concur in any such plan, finding, report or recommendation may note thereof the
reasons for said member's failure to concur.
(Ord. No. 373-2022. Passed 6-6-22, eff. 6-13-22)
§ 162.03 Duties of the Commission
   The Commission shall:
   (a)   Serve in an advisory capacity to the Mayor on matters pertaining to
the quality of life for black women and girls;
   (b)   Conduct research and public hearings, and issue reports, including
quarterly reports to all members of City Council, on the status of black women
and girls in education, economic development, healthcare, justice, and civil
rights;
   (c)   Develop, maintain, and share information and referral service to
respond to the needs of black women and girls;
   (d)   Recommend policies, programs, or legislation to ensure equality rights
and opportunities for all women;
   (e)   Solicit grants or contributions on behalf of the City in furtherance
and purposes of the Commission; and
   (f)   Any other responsibility requested by the Mayor.
(Ord. No. 373-2022. Passed 6-6-22, eff. 6-13-22)
CHAPTER 163 – URBAN FORESTRY COMMISSION
163.01   Declaration of Public Policy and Purpose
163.02   Urban Forestry Commission, Composition, Terms and Compensation
163.03   Organization and Procedures
163.04   Duties of Commission
§ 163.01 Declaration of Public Policy and Purpose
   Trees contribute to the quality of life of urban dwellers and are a valuable
and beautiful asset throughout the City. Trees stabilize the soil, help control
water pollution, preserve and foster air quality by removing carbon dioxide and
airborne pollutants, abate visual and noise pollution, reduce energy costs by
providing shade, and provide a natural habitat for wildlife. Not only do trees
provide welcome shade to people, they also provide a psychological boost to
urban dwellers, and add color and vitality to the urban landscape.
   The Urban Forestry Commission will serve in an advisory capacity to assist
the Mayor, Cleveland City Council, Urban Forestry Section of the Division of
Park Maintenance, and the City Planning Commission in ensuring the many
benefits trees provide to citizens of the City by making recommendations
related to:
   (a)   Maintaining the health of trees in our parks, rights-of-way and other
public spaces and reducing the risk associated with trees;
   (b)   Increasing public education and support for urban forestry;
   (c)   Providing for the planting of new and replacement trees to preserve
and expand the tree canopy;
   (d)   Maintaining the tree canopy and protecting trees during construction
and development; and
   (e)   Establishing policy and regulations governing the protection,
management, and conservation of trees and vegetation in the City; and
   (f)   Generating funds from the foundation community, corporate community,
the citizens of the City, the private sector, and government grants to support
urban forestry.
(Ord. No. 702-2020. Passed 6-6-22, eff. 6-13-22)
   Note: Pursuant to Sections 9 and 10 of Ord. No. 521-2024, any references to
the Division of Park Maintenance and Properties and Commissioner of Park
Maintenance and Properties shall be amended to read Division of Park
Maintenance and Commissioner of Park Maintenance.
§ 163.02 Urban Forestry Commission, Composition, Terms and Compensation
   (a)   There is hereby established the Cleveland Urban Forestry Commission,
which shall consist of fifteen (15) members, eight (8) of whom shall be
appointed by, the Mayor, and seven (7) of whom shall be appointed by City
Council.
   (b)   The members of the Commission shall include the following:
      (1)   a representative from the Urban Forestry Section of the Division of
Park Maintenance, Department of Parks and Recreation;
      (2)   a representative from the Department of City Planning;
      (3)   the Chief of the Office of Sustainability, or his or her designee;
      (4)   a representative from the Division of Engineering and Construction,
Mayor's Office of Capital Projects;
      (5)   a representative from the Department of Public Utilities;
      (6)   Council Member or representative appointed by the Council
President;
      (7)   a certified arborist;
      (8)   a representative from an electric company;
      (9)   a developer who has completed projects in the City;
      (10)   three (3) resident representatives, one (1) being a youth between
the ages of eleven (11) and seventeen (17) who has permission from his or her
parent or legal guardian;
      (11)   a representative from an environmental justice organization; and
      (12)   two (2) representatives from a non-profit or non-governmental
organization whose mission is to advocate for preservation or enhancement of
urban forests, wildlife habitat, or similar natural systems.
   (c)   The Mayor shall appoint those members from the City Departments, the
youth resident representative, the representative from an electric company, and
the representative from an environmental justice organization. The Council
shall appoint all other members.
   (d)   Other than the representatives of City Departments, the term of the
members shall be three (3) years; provided that of the initial appointments,
four (4) members shall serve three (3) years and four (4) members shall serve
two (2) years. If a vacancy occurs during the term of any member, the Mayor or
Council President, depending on who appointed the outgoing member, shall
appoint a successor to serve the unexpired portion of that term.
   (e)   The members of the Commission shall serve without compensation.
(Ord. No. 702-2020. Passed 6-6-22, eff. 6-13-22)
   Note: Pursuant to Sections 9 and 10 of Ord. No. 521-2024, any references to
the Division of Park Maintenance and Properties and Commissioner of Park
Maintenance and Properties shall be amended to read Division of Park
Maintenance and Commissioner of Park Maintenance.
§ 163.03 Organization and Procedures
   (a)   The Commission members shall select a chairperson at the first meeting
of the Commission. The chairperson shall appoint a vice chairperson and
secretary from the Commission's membership.
   (b)   The Commission shall meet at least quarterly at such time and place as
it shall decide. Special meetings may be called by the chairperson at the
chairperson's discretion. A simple majority of the members shall constitute a
quorum for the transaction of business. Any member who is absent from three (3)
consecutive duly-called meetings shall be removed from the Commission unless
said member files a written appeal with the Commission and a majority thereof
votes to retain said member.
   (c)   The Commission may create any committee or subcommittee it deems
necessary to carry out the work of the Commission.
   (d)   The Commission shall adopt such rules and regulations governing its
own conduct as are not in conflict with the Charter or these Codified
Ordinances.
   (e)   The Commission shall keep minutes of its meetings, a copy of which
shall be kept on file in the Division of Park Maintenance. All plans, findings,
reports and recommendations of the Commission shall be in writing and shall
designate thereon the names of the members concurring therein. A member who
does not concur in any such plan, finding, report or recommendation may note
thereof the reasons for said member’s failure to concur.
(Ord. No. 702-2020. Passed 6-6-22, eff. 6-13-22)
   Note: Pursuant to Sections 9 and 10 of Ord. No. 521-2024, any references to
the Division of Park Maintenance and Properties and Commissioner of Park
Maintenance and Properties shall be amended to read Division of Park
Maintenance and Commissioner of Park Maintenance.
§ 163.04 Duties of Commission
   The Commission shall:
   (a)   Assist with the adoption of an urban forest management plan and assist
with updating a comprehensive inventory of trees and tree benefits analysis at
regular intervals for the City;
   (b)   Provide recommendations on policy, plans, programs, or legislation
concerning urban forestry management, sustainability and protection of
associated trees on public or private property;
   (c)   Review and comment on any program or work undertaken by any City
Department, technical or advisory bodies related to the protection or
enhancement of the urban forest when so requested by the Mayor or Council;
   (d)   Work with the necessary departments to implement recommendations to
reduce tree loss and damage;
   (e)   Monitor implementation of City plans and policies related to the urban
forest and provide review and comment to the Mayor and Council;
   (f)   Assist the Director of Parks and Recreation, or his or her designee,
in preparing educational programming for residents, businesses, and
organizations in the community to encourage proper maintenance of trees within
the City;
   (g)   Solicit grants or contributions to the Tree Preservation Fund set
forth in Section
509.21 of the codified ordinances, for the purpose of supporting the
preservation, protection, maintenance, purchase and planting and establishment
of trees in the City, and educating the public with respect thereto;
   (h)   Review and report on whether the penalties collected for unauthorized
damage or removal of trees are being paid to the Tree Preservation Fund as set
forth in Section
509.99 of the codified ordinances and make recommendations regarding the
disbursement of funds from the Tree Preservation Fund;
   (i)   Assist the Director of Parks and Recreation, or his or her designee,
in preparing an annual report to Council, the Mayor, and the public regarding
the activities of the Commission; and
   (j)   Any other duty requested by the Mayor or Council.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
CHAPTER 165 – BOXING AND WRESTLING COMMISSION
165.01   Establishment and Members
165.02   Permit Application, Examination and Issuance
165.03   Rules of Commission; Enforcement
165.04   Adoption of State Boxing Commission Rules
165.041   Fee and/or Tax on Gross Proceeds
165.05   Special Commission Account
165.06   Expenditures
165.07 to 165.09   Reserved
Statutory reference:
   Boxing; Discharging Firearms; Dueling, RC Ch. 3773
§ 165.01 Establishment and Members
   There is hereby established a Boxing and Wrestling Commission to consist of
three (3) members to be appointed by the Mayor in accordance with Charter
Section
70, and to serve at the pleasure of the Mayor. The Mayor shall also appoint a
secretary to the Commission.
(Ord. No. 1020-41. Passed 6-16-41)
§ 165.02 Permit Application, Examination and Issuance
   Consistent with the provisions of RC 3773.31 to 3773.58 and the
administrative rules of the State Boxing Commission now or hereafter adopted,
as incorporated by reference in this chapter, with respect to boxing
exhibitions, and consistent with the provisions of this chapter and the rules
of the Cleveland Boxing and Wrestling Commission, with respect to wrestling
exhibitions:
   (a)   Application for boxing and wrestling exhibitions shall be made to the
Boxing and Wrestling Commission. The Commission shall make or cause to be made
thorough investigations of all such applications to determine the financial
responsibility and the general character of the applicants, the fitness of the
prospective participants in the boxing or wrestling exhibitions proposed and
such other matters as may be pertinent to the granting of the application. Each
application for a wrestling exhibition shall be accompanied by a cash bond,
certified check, bank draft or surety bond of not less than five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00).
   (b)   The Commission shall report the results of its examinations to the
Mayor with a recommendation as to whether each such application should be
granted or not.
   (c)   The Mayor may grant such permits in accordance with State law and the
rules and regulations of the Commission. No boxing or wrestling exhibition
shall be held within the City unless authorized by such a permit, excepting
only that this requirement shall not apply in the case of wrestling exhibitions
given in theaters as a regular part of the theater program.
(Ord. No. 430-82. Passed 12-13-82, eff. 12-16-82)
§ 165.03 Rules of Commission; Enforcement
   Consistent with RC 3773.31 to 3773.58 and the administrative rules of the
State Boxing Commission adopted by Section
165.04, the Boxing and Wrestling Commission shall make, and may amend, alter or
repeal, such additional rules no less stringent than those of such RC sections,
and administrative rules as it may deem necessary in the public interest to
regulate and control the conditions and conduct of boxing and wrestling
exhibitions. The Commission may suspend and/or fine a promoter, manager, boxer
or wrestler pursuant to its rules. The Commission shall enforce and see to the
enforcement of its rules.
(Ord. No. 2568-81. Passed 11-9-81, eff. 11-13-81)
§ 165.04 Adoption of State Boxing Commission Rules
   RC 3773.31 to 3773.58 and such administrative rules as the State Boxing
Commission may now or hereafter adopt, amend or rescind are hereby incorporated
by reference in this chapter. The Boxing and Wrestling Commission is hereby
authorized to exercise those powers, duties and functions granted to the State
Boxing Commission by such RC sections and rules, and to levy and collect for
payment into the General Fund account established for the Boxing and Wrestling
Commission to the benefit of the Commission and the City, those fees, charges
and taxes imposed or allowed by this chapter or other fees, charges and taxes
which may be imposed or allowed by the City.
(Ord. No. 2568-81. Passed 11-9-81, eff. 11-13-81)
§ 165.041 Fee and/or Tax on Gross Proceeds
   (a)   Consistent with RC 3773.54, a person issued a permit to conduct a
boxing match or exhibition shall pay to the City treasurer a tax of five
percent (5%) of the gross proceeds from the sale of tickets to the match or
exhibition.
   (b)   A grantee of a permit for a professional wrestling exhibition shall
pay to the Treasurer a fee equal to five percent (5%) of the gross receipts of
the wrestling exhibition held under such permit, excluding any tax which may be
imposed under Federal or State law. However, no fee shall be required in the
case of a wrestling exhibition given by a charitable organization or church.
(Ord. No. 430-82. Passed 12-13-82, eff. 12-16-82)
§ 165.05 Special Commission Account
   There is hereby established within the General Fund a special account to be
known as “126-Boxing and Wrestling Commission.”
(Ord. No. 881-57. Passed 4-8-57, eff. 4-11-57)
§ 165.06 Expenditures
   No expenditure shall be made for the purposes of the Boxing and Wrestling
Commission in excess of the revenues received in any year from the fee imposed
upon the holding of boxing and wrestling exhibitions in the City, pursuant to
Section
165.04, except by the transfer of an appropriation pursuant to Charter Section
41.
(Ord. No. 881-57. Passed 4-8-57, eff. 4-11-57)
§§ 165.07 to 165.09 Reserved
CHAPTER 167 – CITY RECORDS COMMISSION
167.01   Creation and Composition; Records Disposal and Retention Procedure
Statutory reference:
   State law provisions, RC 149.39
§ 167.01 Creation and Composition; Records Disposal and Retention Procedure
   (a)   There is hereby created a City Records Commission composed of the
Mayor or his or her delegate, as Chairman; the Director of Law or his or her
delegate, the Director of Finance or his or her delegate; the Clerk of Council
or his or her delegate; and a citizen appointed by the Mayor. The Commission
shall appoint a Secretary, who may or may not be a member of the Commission and
who shall serve at the pleasure of the Commission. Such Commission shall adopt
its own rules and order of business and keep a journal of its proceedings. The
Commission shall meet at least once every six (6) months, and upon call by the
Chairman.
   (b)   Such Commission shall review records disposal lists submitted by
Municipal offices. The disposal lists shall contain those records which have
been microfilmed or no longer have administrative legal or fiscal value to the
City or to its citizens. Such records may be disposed of by the Commission
pursuant to procedure hereinafter outlined.
   When Municipal records have been approved for disposal, a copy of such
records list shall be sent to the Bureau of Inspection and Supervision of
Public Offices of the Auditor of State. If such Bureau disapproves of the
action by the Commission, in whole or in part, it shall so inform the
Commission within a period of sixty (60) days, and these records shall not be
destroyed. Before records are otherwise disposed of, the Ohio Historical
Society shall be informed and given the opportunity for a period of sixty (60)
days to select for its custody or disposal such public records as it considers
to be of continuing historical value.
   (c)   Such Commission may cause the preparation of records retention and
destruction, schedules for the guidance of the various offices, departments,
divisions, boards, and commissions of the City.
(Ord. No. 1502-93. Passed 11-29-93, eff. 12-7-93)
CHAPTER 169 – CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION
169.01   Notarization Services
169.02   Employment of Health Care Professionals – Repealed
169.03   Employment of Referees
169.04   Civil Service Examination Fees
Charter reference:
   Civil Service Commission, Charter §
124 et seq.
Statutory reference:
   State law provisions, RC Ch. 124
§ 169.01 Notarization Services
   The Civil Service Commission is hereby authorized to provide notarization
services to any person required by law or the rules of the Civil Service
Commission to file a notarized document with said Commission. The Civil Service
Commission shall charge a fee in accordance with law for each document
notarized pursuant to this section. The Secretary of the Civil Service
Commission shall cause all fees collected hereunder to be deposited into the
General Fund.
(Ord. No. 633-94. Passed 5-2-94, eff. 5-12-94)
§ 169.02 Employment of Health Care Professionals – Repealed
(Ord. No. 746-06. Passed 6-5-06, eff. 6-9-06)
§ 169.03 Employment of Referees
   The Civil Service Commission, through its Secretary, is hereby authorized to
employ by written contract attorneys to act as referees to conduct Civil
Service hearings as may be required by law or by the rules of the Civil Service
Commission.
(Ord. No. 343-90. Passed 3-26-90, eff. 4-2-90)
§ 169.04 Civil Service Examination Fees
   (a)   The Civil Service Commission is hereby authorized to charge applicants
in all civil service examinations for positions in the classified service of
the City of Cleveland an examination application fee, which fee shall be
established by the Board of Control based upon recommendation by the Civil
Service Commission. The fee established for any given examination shall not
exceed twenty-five dollars ($25.00) unless authorized by the Council. Any fee
established pursuant to this section may be waived by the Civil Service
Commission if the applicant is determined by the Commission to be indigent.
   (b)   Such examination application fee shall be paid to the Treasurer of the
City at the time of filing an examination application. No application shall be
finally accepted by the Civil Service Commission until said application bears a
notation by the Treasurer that the requisite fee has been paid. The Treasurer
shall give a receipt to the applicant or person paying such fee. No fee, once
paid, shall be refunded for reason of the applicant’s failure to appear for the
test or otherwise; provided, however, that when an applicant is disqualified
from taking an examination on the basis of age; education or failure to meet
other minimum entrance requirements, the fee paid by such applicant shall be
refunded to such applicant upon the applicant’s request in writing made within
ten (10) days after the date of examination. The Civil Service Commission shall
give notice of the fee to be charged and paid for each examination and said
notice shall be included in and made a part of its official announcement of the
examination.
(Ord. No. 1888-95. Passed 12-18-95, eff. 12-23-95)
CHAPTER 170 – TAX ABATEMENT COMMISSION
170.01   Establishment and Terms
170.02   Duties of Commission
170.03   Tax Abatement Application for a Community Urban Redevelopment
Corporation
170.04   Tax Abatement Application Fee
170.05   Employment of Consultants to Review Tax Abatement Applications
§ 170.01 Establishment and Terms
   There is hereby established a Tax Abatement Commission consisting of seven
(7) members to be appointed by the Mayor, and approved by the Council. Three
(3) of the initial appointments shall be for terms ending one (1) year after
the date the appointments were approved. The remaining initial appointments
shall be for a term ending two (2) years after the date of the appointments
were approved. Thereafter, terms of office shall be for two (2) years, with
each term ending on the same date of the same month as did the term that it
succeeds.
(Ord. No. 2010-88. Passed 10-10-88, eff. 10-13-88)
§ 170.02 Duties of Commission
   The Tax Abatement Commission shall evaluate, develop and recommend a
commercial tax abatement policy to the Mayor and review proposed commercial tax
abatement projects of significance. The commercial tax abatement policy report
from the Commission must be submitted to the Mayor within forty-five (45) days
after appointment of the seven (7) members to the Commission. All specific
proposal review shall be submitted to the Mayor within forty-five (45) days of
receipt by the Commission of the proposal.
(Ord. No. 2010-88. Passed 10-10-88, eff. 10-13-88)
§ 170.03 Tax Abatement Application for a Community Urban Redevelopment
Corporation
   An application for tax abatement of real property taxes for a community
urban redevelopment corporation qualifying under RC Chapter 1728 shall be
addressed and submitted to the Mayor on a form certifying such facts and data
as are prescribed by the Director of Development.
(Ord. No. 821-89. Passed 4-10-89, eff. 4-14-89)
   Note: Pursuant to Section 11 of Ord. No. 1226-2025, any references to the
Department of Economic Development (and, by extension, the Director of Economic
Development) shall be amended to read the Department of Development (and, by
extension, the Director of Development).
§ 170.04 Tax Abatement Application Fee
   Each application for tax abatement submitted pursuant to Section
170.03 and RC Chapter 1728 shall be accompanied by an application fee. The
application fee shall be in an amount equal to one percent (1%) of the value of
the total project cost as set forth in the application or fifty thousand
dollars ($50,000.00), whichever amount is less. The Director of Development is
authorized to assess an additional application fee in the event that the actual
costs incurred by the City for its review of the application, including the
costs of employing professional consultants pursuant to Section
170.05, exceed the amount of the initial application fee. The amount of the
additional application fee shall equal the amount of the actual costs incurred
by the City in excess of the amount of the initial application fee. All
application fees shall be non-refundable.
(Ord. No. 821-89. Passed 4-10-89, eff. 4-14-89)
   Note: Pursuant to Section 11 of Ord. No. 1226-2025, any references to the
Department of Economic Development (and, by extension, the Director of Economic
Development) shall be amended to read the Department of Development (and, by
extension, the Director of Development).
§ 170.05 Employment of Consultants to Review Tax Abatement Applications
   The Director of Development is authorized to employ by contract such
professional consultants as are necessary to supplement the regularly employed
staff of the several departments of the City to review an application for tax
abatement submitted pursuant to Section
170.03 and RC Chapter 1728. The compensation to be paid for such services shall
be fixed by the Director of Development. The total cost for all professional
services employed for the purpose of reviewing an application for tax abatement
shall not exceed the sum of the initial application fee and any additional
application fee charged pursuant to Section
170.04
(Ord. No. 821-89. Passed 4-10-89, eff. 4-14-89)
   Note: Pursuant to Section 11 of Ord. No. 1226-2025, any references to the
Department of Economic Development (and, by extension, the Director of Economic
Development) shall be amended to read the Department of Development (and, by
extension, the Director of Development).
TITLE XI: EMPLOYMENT AND COMPENSATION
   Chapter
171   Employment Provisions
   Chapter
173   Compensation
CHAPTER 171 – EMPLOYMENT PROVISIONS
171.01   Oath of Office
171.02   Hours of Employment
171.03   Employment of Health Care Professionals for Employee Examinations
171.04   Special Hazard Employment
171.05   Overtime Work; Compensatory Time Off
171.06   Pay for Shift Differential
171.07   Longevity Pay
171.071   Longevity Pay for Division of Police and Division of Fire
171.08   Absence of Officials; Acting Officials
171.09   Extra Compensation for Serving in Higher Capacity
171.10   Acceptance of Outside Employment
171.11   Insurance Required
171.12   Type and Amount of Insurance Coverage Required
171.13   Purchase of Insurance
171.14   Bond Approval and Premium Payment
171.15   Bond of Mayor
171.16   Bonds of Directors, President of Council, Commissioner of Accounts and
City Treasurer
171.17   Bond of the Bailiff of Municipal Court
171.18   Filing Bonds and Insurance; Record
171.19   Lists of Bonded Employees
171.20   Appointing Officer Responsible for Bonding
171.21   Appointments Not Effective until Bonding
171.22   Hospitalization Deduction
171.23   Voluntary Deductions for Public Employees Retirement System
171.24   Voluntary Deductions for Employees Credit Unions
171.241   Voluntary Deductions for the Ohio Tuition Trust Authority’s College
Advantage Savings Plan
171.242   Voluntary Deductions for the RTA Commuter Advantage Program
171.25   Voluntary Deductions for Payment of Group Life Insurance Premiums
171.26   Voluntary Deductions for Payment of Fire and Casualty Insurance
Premiums
171.27   Purchase of Savings Bonds
171.28   Vacation Leave
171.29   Unused Vacation Leave and Overtime Pay of Deceased Employee
171.30   Holidays
171.31   Sick Leave
171.311   Establishing a Sick Time Contribution Program for Employees of City
Council
171.32   Group Term Life Insurance
171.33   Hospitalization for Certain Employees
171.34   Hospitalization for Sworn Members of Police and Fire Divisions
171.35   Hospitalization for Mayor and All Elected Councilmen
171.36   Prescription Drug Program
171.37   Reimbursement of Tuition for Employee Education
171.371   Payment of Costs of Attracting Certain Personnel
171.372   Agreements for Information Technology Training
171.38   Ethical Conduct and Conflict of Interest
171.39   Special Death Benefit for Employees of the City of Cleveland
171.391   Health Care Benefits for Surviving Spouse and Dependents of Employees
Killed in the Line of Duty
171.40   Use of City Credit Cards
171.41   Travel Expenses
171.42   Calculation of and Deduction for Maintenance
171.421   Charge for Use of City-Owned Cars for Commuting
171.43   Vehicle Mileage Allowance
171.44   Deputy Bailiff’s Vehicle Mileage Allowance
171.45   Probation Officer’s Vehicle Mileage Allowance
171.46   Polygraph Testing
171.47   Reserved
171.48   Reserved
171.49   Officers’ and Employees’ Right to Free Expression
171.50   Right of Officers and Employees to Meet and Discuss
171.51   Effect of Existing Regulations
171.52   Existing Eligible List Prohibits Promotion, Appointment, Assignment or
Transfer
171.53   Employees’ Right to Counsel in Disciplinary Hearings
171.54   Deferred Compensation Plan
171.55   Temperatures and Weather Conditions
171.56   Compensation for School Crossing Guards
171.57   Military Service Leave of Absence; Benefits During Service
171.58   Compensation While on Jury Duty
171.59   Payment for Tool Insurance
171.60   Dental Care Insurance
171.601   Dental Care Insurance Exception
171.61   City Employees Entitled to Benefits of Federally Administered Loan and
Grant Programs for Home Loans and Grants
171.62   Benefits for Executive Assistants – Council Members
171.621   Benefits for Council Employees
171.63   Incentive Pay for Airport Emergency Medical Technicians
171.64   Rehabilitation Contracts
171.65   Domestic Partner Benefits – Repealed
171.66   Residency Requirements
171.67   Paid Safe Leave
171.68   Paid Parental Leave
171.99   Penalty
   Note: The legislative history of this chapter, except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 63410-A, passed
September 22, 1924.
Charter reference:
   Civil Service, Charter §
124 et seq.
   Compensation of officers and employees, Charter §
191
   Contract interest, Charter §
195
   Hours of labor, Charter §
196
   Officers required to take oath of office, Charter §
194
Cross-reference:
   Compensation of officers and employees, CO
Ch. 173
   Contract interest, CO
615.10
   Deductions for municipal income tax, CO
191.1302
   Workers’ compensation actuarial services, CO
127.10
Statutory reference:
   Bond, RC 733.69 et seq.
   Civil Service, O Const, Art XV § 10
   Conduct and delinquent charges, RC 733.34 et seq.
   Deductions for municipal income tax, RC 9.42
   Expenses for attendance at conference or convention, RC 733.79
   Officers required to take oath of office, O Const, Art XV § 7
   Public Employees Retirement System, RC Ch. 145
   Sick leave, RC 124.38
   Validity of bond, RC 3.34, 733.71, 3929.14 et seq.
   Workers’ compensation, O Const, Art II § 35; RC Ch. 4123
§ 171.01 Oath of Office
   The members and the Clerk of Council, the Mayor, the directors of all
departments, the commissioners or chiefs of all divisions, the City Treasurer
and all cashiers in the City Treasury, the chiefs or heads of all bureaus or
offices of record, the deputies of any of them, the members of all boards and
commissions and clerks or other employees whose duties involve the handling of
money belonging to the City, or the purchase or sale of anything in behalf of
the City or the negotiation or making of contracts in behalf of the City, shall
before entering upon the duties of such office or employment, take and
subscribe to an oath or affirmation to be filed and recorded in the office of
the Clerk of Council in substantially the following form:
“I, _______________ do solemnly swear that I will support the constitution of
the United States and the Constitution of the State of Ohio, and that I will
faithfully, honestly, and impartially discharge the duties of the office of
_______________ of the City of Cleveland, State of Ohio, during my continuance
in said office.
Sworn to before me and subscribed in my presence this _______ day of _______,
A.D. _______
   /sig/
   Notary Public.”
   The oath herein prescribed may be administered by the Mayor or the Clerk of
Council, the director of any department, the commissioner or chief of any
division or office or by any notary public authorized to administer oaths in
the State.
§ 171.02 Hours of Employment
   In all departmental divisions having plants or functions that are required
to be continuously operated twenty-four (24) hours a day, the directors of the
departments concerned may provide, within the limit of the number fixed by the
Board of Control, for as many shifts and crews to man them as in their judgment
shall best conduce to the successful and efficient operation of such plants or
functions. Such director may also prescribe a schedule fixing the hours during
which each shift shall work and the days each crew, and the employees in each
crew, shall work. However, such schedule shall be so arranged that each
employee in each crew shall be employed not less than one hundred sixty-five
(165) hours out of every eight hundred forty (840) hours of such continuous
operation.
(Ord. No. 104274. Passed 5-25-36)
§ 171.03 Employment of Health Care Professionals for Employee Examinations
   The Director of Human Resources or the Civil Service Commission, through its
Secretary, are authorized to employ by one (1) or more written contracts health
service professionals, including hospitals, clinics, medical providers,
physicians, psychiatrists, and psychologists to conduct, on an as- needed
basis, medical examinations or testing of City of Cleveland employees and
applicants. The cost of the contract or contracts shall be payable from funds
appropriated for this purpose.
(Ord. No. 92-11. Passed 4-25-11, eff. 4-29-11)
§ 171.04 Special Hazard Employment
   Whenever it shall be necessary, as determined by the department head
concerned, to assign one (1) or more employees of the City to inspection duties
in any tunnel or tunnelling operation being conducted by or for the City, and
such assignment involves an unusual hazard to the lives or limbs of such
employees by reason of the nature thereof, it shall be lawful for the Board of
Control, by appropriate resolution duly adopted, to provide for extra
compensation for such employees over and above the rates otherwise provided in
the Salary and Compensation Schedule while they are so assigned and so engaged
in such hazardous work. Such extra compensation so provided and authorized may
be paid as consideration for the specially hazardous nature of such assignment
and work.
(Ord. No. 748-54. Passed 3-15-54, eff. 3-17-54)
§ 171.05 Overtime Work; Compensatory Time Off
   (a)   Employees of the City may be entitled to compensation in money at a
rate not to exceed one and one-half (1.5) times the regular rate established
for the work performed by such employee for all hours worked on a holiday and
for each hour worked in excess of eight (8) hours per day, or in excess of
forty (40) hours during any work week. In lieu of the monetary compensation as
herein provided, employees may be granted compensatory time off from the
performance of duty during regular hours or work at a rate not to exceed one
and one-half (1.5) hour for each hour of overtime work.
   (b)   The inclusion or exclusion of employees to the benefits of this
section shall be determined by resolution of the Board of Control.
(Ord. No. 1003-86. Passed 5-12-86, eff. 5-14-86)
§ 171.06 Pay for Shift Differential
   All regular full-time employees of the City may be paid a shift differential
as follows:
   (a)   Twenty-five cents ($0.25) per hour to all those employees regularly
assigned to, and working the majority of their hours on the afternoon shift
between 2:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight;
   (b)   Twenty-five cents ($0.25) per hour to all those employees regularly
assigned to, and working the majority of their hours on the night shift between
12:00 midnight and 8:00 a.m.; and
   (c)   Twenty-five cents ($0.25) per hour to all those employees regularly
assigned to rotating shifts.
   (d)   The shift differential authorized in this section may be paid
notwithstanding maximum compensation schedules established by other ordinances
relating to compensation.
   The inclusion or exclusion of a group of employees to the benefits of this
section shall be determined by the Board of Control upon the recommendation of
the director of a department, the commissioner of a division or the Mayor for a
board, commission or miscellaneous employee.
(Ord. No. 1506-89. Passed 6-12-89, eff. 6-19-89)
§ 171.07 Longevity Pay
   (a)   Beginning in 2001 and continuing through 2009, all regular full-time
employees of the City, except employees covered by a collective bargaining
agreement where the agreement includes a longevity payment schedule, members of
boards and commissions, members of the building trades paid on the basis of
building trades’ prevailing wages and employees whose longevity pay is
established by other sections of the Codified Ordinances, shall receive
longevity pay on or before March 31 of the current year in the amount set forth
below, based upon the length of the person’s service with the City on or before
March 1 of the current year, as follows:
 
Years         Annual Payment
5 through 9   $300.00
10 through 14 $475.00
15 through 19 $575.00
20 through 24 $700.00
Over 24       $800.00
 
   (b)   In 2010, only the employees covered by a collective bargaining
agreement where the agreement includes a longevity payment schedule, shall
receive longevity pay, if not otherwise suspended under a Memorandum of
Understanding (MOU) between the City of Cleveland and the respective union.
   (c)   Beginning in 2011 and continuing each calendar year thereafter, all
regular full-time employees of the City, except employees covered by a
collective bargaining agreement where the agreement includes a longevity
payment schedule, members of boards and commissions, members of the building
trades paid on the basis of building trades’ prevailing wages and employees
whose longevity pay is established by other sections of the Codified
Ordinances, shall receive longevity pay on or before March 31 of the current
year in the amount set forth below, based upon the length of the person’s
service with the City on or before March 1 of the current year, as follows:
 
Years         Annual Payment
5 through 9   $300.00
10 through 14 $475.00
15 through 19 $575.00
20 through 24 $700.00
Over 24       $800.00
 
(Ord. No. 89-10. Passed 3-22-10, eff. 3-29-10)
§ 171.071 Longevity Pay for Division of Police and Division of Fire
   Beginning in 2001 and continuing each calendar year thereafter, all uniform
members of the Division of Police and the Division of Fire shall receive
longevity pay to reward length of City service, pursuant to the following
schedule:
 
Years         Annual Payment
5 through 9   $300.00
10 through 14 $475.00
15 through 19 $575.00
20 through 24 $700.00
Over 24       $800.00
 
(Ord. No. 552-01. Passed 3-26-01, eff. 4-2-01)
§ 171.08 Absence of Officials; Acting Officials
   (a)   Whenever any officer in the administrative service other than the
Mayor is for any reason unable to attend to the performance of his or her
official duties, or whenever he or she expects for any reason to be absent from
the City on any day when his or her office is required to be kept open, he or
she shall at once notify his or her immediate superior of such disability or
absence. Such superior, if the nature of the office or its duties so requires,
shall designate another officer or employee in the same department to perform
the duties of such office, under the supervision of such superior officer, or
such superior officer may himself or herself perform such duties during such
time as the absence or disability of the officer continues.
   (b)   In the case of a director who may be performing the duties of Mayor as
Acting Mayor, he or she shall have power to designate one (1) of the officers
or employees of his or her department as acting director thereof. Such person
so duly designated as an acting official shall have, while so acting, all the
rights, privileges and powers which appertain to the office so filled by the
acting official. When any person so designated to perform the duties of an
officer who is absent or unable to perform his or her duties is required to
sign any official document pertaining to such office, he or she shall sign it
as acting director, acting commissioner or otherwise, using the word “acting”
before the title of the officer whose duties he or she is for the time
performing.
   (c)   In all cases covered by this section designations of acting officials
may be made either for specified periods or occasions, or in such more general
or continuing terms, conforming to the limitations of this section, as may be
desired by the designating official.
   (d)   Whenever a director of a department shall be Acting Mayor or disabled,
absent from the City or otherwise temporarily prevented from performing the
duties of his or her office, the person in his or her department who has been
designated as acting director thereof shall attend and vote at the meetings of
the Board of Control and shall have such rights, privileges and powers at such
meetings as the director would have if he or she were present in person.
(Ord. No. 96416. Passed 11-9-31)
§ 171.09 Extra Compensation for Serving in Higher Capacity
   (a)   Whenever, under Charter Section
73 the duties of the office of Mayor are being regularly discharged by the head
of one (1) of the departments therein provided for under the title of Acting
Mayor, and no salary is then being paid to the Mayor, the director so
performing such duties shall be paid the salary of the Mayor, in lieu of his or
her compensation as director.
   (b)   Whenever, under Section
171.08 any person is temporarily performing the functions of an office in an
acting capacity, he or she shall not thereby be entitled to additional
compensation beyond his or her regular compensation, except that when pursuant
to Section
171.08 the duties of director, commissioner or secretary are being discharged
by a person under the title of acting director, acting commissioner or acting
secretary, and no salary is then being paid to such director, commissioner or
secretary as the case may be, such acting director, acting commissioner or
acting secretary, shall be paid the salary of the director, commissioner or
secretary whose duties he or she is then performing in lieu of his or her
regular compensation, if such salary is greater than that of the office
regularly held by such acting director, acting commissioner or acting
secretary.
   (c)   However, whenever it is necessary to designate a lesser employee to
act temporarily in a higher capacity due to the absence on vacation or
otherwise of the employee in such higher capacity, the employee so temporarily
designated, if he or she has served in such acting capacity for one (1) day or
more in any one (1) payroll period, may with the approval of the director of
the department involved, under such rules as may be established by the Board of
Control, be compensated at the rate of compensation being paid to such absent
employee.
(Ord. No. 678-69. Passed 5-5-69, eff. 5-7-69)
   Note: The Board of Control has established rules for the compensation of all
employees temporarily serving in a higher capacity, pursuant to the authority
of this section.
§ 171.10 Acceptance of Outside Employment
   Members of Council, members of the Civil Service Commission, members of the
City Planning Commission, members of the boards or commissions of the City
which do not involve full-time employment and any officers or employees in the
administrative service of the City who are authorized by the Mayor to accept
compensation or salary from other sources or authorities, and officers or
employees in the administrative service who by the terms of their employment
are permitted to engage in employment outside the City service, may receive
salaries or compensation for such outside employment. No officer or employee in
the administrative service, the conditions of whose employment require his or
her full attention and time, shall accept any other employment than that of the
City, nor any salary or compensation for other employment, so long as he or she
continues in the service of the City, except as approved by the Mayor in
writing. Any such outside employment or the acceptance of any salary or
compensation therefor shall forfeit the right of such person to continue in the
employment of the City. This section shall not be construed to prohibit the
acceptance by any officer or employee of the City, of any pension or annuity to
which he or she may be otherwise entitled from any source whatsoever.
§ 171.11 Insurance Required
   The Director of Finance at City cost shall procure and maintain in effect at
all times bonds or policies of insurance in such form as shall be approved by
the Director of Law, protecting the City from loss by reason of burglary,
robbery, theft, forgery, counterfeiting or by fraudulent or dishonest acts by
City employees engaged in the handling of money or other property of the City.
(Ord. No. 1105-56. Passed 6-4-56, eff. 6-8-56)
§ 171.12 Type and Amount of Insurance Coverage Required
   The type and amount of bonds and insurance shall be as follows:
   (a)   Money and securities insurance covering various locations on insured
property while within the premises not less than eighty-five thousand dollars
($85,000.00) and outside premises not less than sixty thousand dollars
($60,000.00);
   (b)   Depositors forgery bond not less than fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00);
   (c)   Public employees honesty blanket bond or such other type of employee
crime insurance as is then available in the aggregate amount of not more than
one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) conditioned against fraudulent or
dishonest acts in the handling of money or other property including employees
of the Sinking Fund Commission; except as to those officials required to give
bond conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of their officer,
officers and employees of both the Judicial Division and Clerk’s Division of
the Municipal Court.
(Ord. No. 1830-92. Passed 10-5-92, eff. 10-9-92)
§ 171.13 Purchase of Insurance
   The Director of Finance with the approval of the Board of Control shall
purchase the bonds or policies required, after advertising as required for City
contracts, from the lowest and best bidder for a term not exceeding five (5)
years and upon the basis of all or any combination of such requirements as the
Board shall determine.
(Ord. No. 1105-56. Passed 6-4-56, eff. 6-8-56)
§ 171.14 Bond Approval and Premium Payment
   All official bonds required of officers or employees of the City shall be
executed by accredited and reliable surety companies authorized to engage in
the bonding business in the State, subject to the approval of the Director of
Finance as to the financial responsibility of the company, and the approval of
the Director of Law as to legal form and sufficiency of the bond. However, the
bond of the Director of Finance and of the Director of Law shall also be
approved by the Mayor. The premiums on all such bonds shall be paid by the City
from the appropriate funds provided for such purpose.
(Ord. No. 111-49. Passed 2-14-49)
§ 171.15 Bond of Mayor
   Before entering upon the duties of his or her office, the Mayor shall give
bond of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) conditioned upon the faithful
performance of the duties of his or her office during his or her incumbency
thereof, including the duties as member and President of the Sinking Fund
Commission, which Commission shall pay one-half (0.5) of the premium on the
bond.
(Ord. No. 381-A-42. Passed 6-8-42)
§ 171.16 Bonds of Directors, President of Council, Commissioner of Accounts and
City Treasurer
   Before entering upon the duties of his or her office each of the following
officers shall give bond in the sum set opposite his or her title, conditioned
upon the faithful performance of his or her duties during the period concurrent
with the term of the Mayor of the term for which elected, and shall give like
bond for each subsequent term of appointment or election:
Title Bond
Title                                                            Bond
Director of Law, as such, and as member of the Sinking Fund      $10,000
Commission
Director of Finance, as such, and as member of the Sinking Fund  $50,000
Commission
President of Council, as such, and as member of the Sinking Fund $5,000
Commission
Director of Public Utilities                                     $25,000
Director of Port Control                                         $25,000
Director of Public Service                                       $10,000
Director of Parks and Recreation                                 $10,000
Director of Public Health                                        $10,000
Director of Public Safety                                        $10,000
Director of Community Development                                $10,000
Commissioner of Accounts                                         $50,000
City Treasurer                                                   $3,000,000
Income Tax Administrator                                         $100,000
 
(Ord. No. 1830-92. Passed 10-5-92, eff. 10-9-92)
§ 171.17 Bond of the Bailiff of Municipal Court
   Before entering upon his or her duties as the Bailiff of Municipal Court,
the Bailiff shall give bond of not less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00)
conditioned for the faithful performance of his or her duties.
(Ord. No. 2058-51. Passed 12-17-51, eff. 12-21-51)
§ 171.18 Filing Bonds and Insurance; Record
   All official bonds, all policies of insurance and all other instruments of
indemnity or guaranty required under any provision of ordinance or law shall be
filed with the Commissioner of Accounts who shall preserve and keep safe the
same. No such instrument shall be surrendered from his or her custody except
upon the order of the Director of Law. He or she shall maintain a record in
which shall be entered under appropriate headings all such instruments and such
record shall show the nature of the instrument, the amount thereof, the purpose
for which issued, the principal and surety thereon, the department filing the
same, the date of the approval and by whom approved, the expiration date
thereof and other information as he or she may deem pertinent. The official
concerned with the taking or approving of any such instrument shall file the
same forthwith with the Commissioner for safe keeping and record.
(Ord. No. 2608-46. Passed 2-3-47)
§ 171.19 Lists of Bonded Employees
   The Mayor shall certify to the Civil Service Commission a list of positions
and offices, the incumbents of which are required to be bonded by or pursuant
to the terms of Section
171.14, together with the amount of the bond required in each case. He or she
shall also certify such lists or parts of lists as include the positions in any
administrative department to the director of such department and to the
Director of Law. The Secretary of the Sinking Fund Commission shall certify a
similar list covering the positions in the employ of the Sinking Fund
Commission. The Director of Finance shall certify to the Civil Service
Commission a statement of all bonds filed and recorded in his or her office as
required by Section
171.14.
(Ord. No. 71981. Passed 12-28-25)
§ 171.20 Appointing Officer Responsible for Bonding
   Each appointing officer or authority shall see that every officer or
employee appointed or subject to removal or suspension by him or her, and
required to be bonded, shall give such required bond, effective at the time of
appointment, or at the time when the requirement of such bond becomes
effective. Any such appointing officer or authority who neglects or refuses to
see that such bond is given shall be liable to the City for any loss which may
accrue to the City by reason of the lack of such bond.
(Ord. No. 71981. Passed 12-28-25)
§ 171.21 Appointments Not Effective until Bonding
   No appointment to any office or position shall be deemed to be effective
until the appointee thereto shall be covered by a valid bond, when such bond is
required by the Mayor or by Section
171.14. The Civil Service Commission shall not certify the payroll or account
of salary of any person in the classified service required by the Mayor or by
Section
171.14 to be bonded, for any period when the certificate of the Director of
Finance does not show such person to have been covered by a bond as required.
(Ord. No. 71981. Passed 12-28-25)
§ 171.22 Hospitalization Deduction
   The Treasurer, pursuant to the authority of RC 1739.15 is hereby authorized
to deduct from the salaries or wages of employees subscribing to any nonprofit
hospital service plan, incorporated and operating under the provisions of RC
1739.01 et seq. such amounts monthly as have been stipulated by such employees
in written authorization filed with the Treasurer requesting such deductions.
The Treasurer is hereby authorized to make remittance to such nonprofit
hospital service plans so incorporated and operating, of the aggregate amount
of sums so authorized to be deducted and to transmit the same to such
organizations on the fifteenth day of the month following the date of such
deductions.
(Ord. No. 1163-39. Passed 7-24-39)
§ 171.23 Voluntary Deductions for Public Employees Retirement System
   The Treasurer is hereby authorized to deduct from the salary or wages due
those officers and employees of the City who have filed with the Treasurer a
written request authorizing such deduction, the amount specified in such
authorization to be deducted at the time indicated in such authorization and to
transmit the money so deducted to the Public Employees Retirement System for
and on behalf of such officer or employee, as an agreed payment thereto
permitted under the statutes of Ohio relating to withdrawal of exemption from
membership in the System or for obtaining of pension credit for contributing
service during such period as may be allowed thereunder.
(Ord. No. 86-A-52. Passed 2-18-52, eff. 2-19-52)
§ 171.24 Voluntary Deductions for Employees Credit Unions
   The Commissioner of Accounts is hereby authorized to deduct from the salary
or wages due those officers and employees of the City who have filed with the
Commissioner a written request authorizing such deduction, the amount specified
in such authorization to be deducted at the time indicated in such
authorization. The Treasurer shall transmit money so deducted to the Treasurer
of the Civil Service Employees Association Credit Union, City of Cleveland
Employees Credit Union, Inc., the Cleveland Police Credit Union or the
Cleveland Firemen’s Credit Union as indicated in the authorization, for and on
behalf of the officer or employee for savings in the share account of such
officer or employee in such credit union.
(Ord. No. 1469-68. Passed 7-15-68, eff. 7-17-68)
§ 171.241 Voluntary Deductions for the Ohio Tuition Trust Authority’s College
Advantage Savings Plan
   The Commissioner of Accounts is authorized to deduct from the salary or
wages due those officers and employees of the City who have filed with the
Commissioner a written request authorizing deductions for the Ohio Tuition
Trust Authority’s College Advantage Savings Plan, the amount specified in the
authorization to be deducted at the time indicated in the authorization. The
Treasurer shall transmit money so deducted to the Ohio Tuition Trust Authority,
as indicated in the authorization, for and on behalf of the employee. The
Director of Human Resources is authorized to enter into any necessary
agreements with the Ohio Tuition Trust Authority to implement this program.
(Ord. No. 92-11. Passed 4-25-11, eff. 4-29-11)
§ 171.242 Voluntary Deductions for the RTA Commuter Advantage Program
   The Commissioner of Accounts is authorized to deduct from the salary or
wages due those officers and employees of the City who have filed with the
Commissioner a written request authorizing deductions for the RTA Commuter
Advantage Program, the amount specified in the authorization to be deducted at
the time indicated in the authorization, all in accordance with applicable
federal regulations. The Treasurer shall transmit money so deducted to the
Greater Cleveland Regional Transit Authority (GCRTA), as indicated in the
authorization, for and on behalf of the employee to purchase commuter passes.
This program constitutes a qualified transportation fringe benefit plan. The
Director of Human Resources is authorized to enter into any necessary
agreements with GCRTA to implement this program.
(Ord. No. 92-11. Passed 4-25-11, eff. 4-29-11)
§ 171.25 Voluntary Deductions for Payment of Group Life Insurance Premiums
   The Commissioner of Accounts is hereby authorized to deduct from the salary
or wages due those officers and employees of the City who have filed with the
Commissioner a written request authorizing such deductions, the amount
specified in such authorization to be deducted at the time indicated in such
authorization. The Treasurer shall transmit money so deducted to an insurer, as
indicated in the authorization, for and on behalf of the employee for the
payment of life insurance premiums in accordance with the provisions and
requirements of RC 3917.04.
(Ord. No. 1173-68. Passed 6-17-68, eff. 6-18-68)
§ 171.26 Voluntary Deductions for Payment of Fire and Casualty Insurance
Premiums
   The Commissioner of Accounts is hereby authorized to deduct from the salary
or wages due those officers and employees of the City who have filed with the
Commissioner a written request authorizing such deductions, the amount
specified in such authorization to be deducted at the time indicated in such
authorization. The Treasurer shall transmit money so deducted to an insurer as
indicated in the authorization, for and on behalf of the employee for the
payment of fire and casualty insurance premiums, including, but not by way of
limitation premiums for motor vehicle and homeowners insurance policies. The
written request authorizing such deduction shall be made on a form approved by
the Director of Law.
(Ord. No. 1154-72. Passed 12-18-72, eff. 12-26-72)
§ 171.27 Purchase of Savings Bonds
   (a)   The Treasurer is hereby authorized to deduct from the salary or wages
due those officers and employees of the City who have filed with the Treasurer
a written request authorizing such deduction, the amount specified in such
authorization, to be deducted at the times indicated in such authorization. The
amount is to be credited and applied upon the purchase of United States Savings
Bonds Series E, for the benefit of and in the name of the officer or employee
authorizing the deduction.
   (b)   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized and directed to enter
into an agreement with the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland in order to
qualify the City as a designated agent for the sale and issuance of United
States Savings Bonds Series E, and to obtain a stock of such bonds sufficient
to meet the City requirements for sale of such bonds to officers and employees
of the City.
(Ord. No. 1645-42. Passed 11-30-42)
§ 171.28 Vacation Leave
   (a)   Each full-time City officer or employee, including full-time hourly
rate employees, with thirty (30) days of continuous service with the City is
entitled to two (2) weeks of vacation leave with full pay. A full-time City
officer or employee with five (5) or more years of continuous service with the
City as of January first of any year is entitled to three (3) weeks of vacation
leave with full pay. A full-time City officer or employee with twelve (12) or
more years of continuous service with the City as of January first of any year
is entitled to four (4) weeks of vacation leave with full pay. A full-time City
officer or employee with twenty-two (22) years of continuous service with the
City as of January 1 of any year is entitled to five (5) weeks of vacation
leave with full pay.
   (b)   Each full-time City officer or employee, including full-time hourly
rate employees, shall have earned and be entitled to additional vacation time
for each month of service at the City computed by multiplying the number of
weeks he or she is entitled to under subsection (a) of this section by ten
percent (10%) or such other formula based on the City’s current payroll system
as approved by the Board of Control.
   (c)   The Mayor and the Clerk of Council, as appropriate, may in his/her
discretion grant any person in the unclassified service of the City additional
week(s) of vacation leave with full pay when he/she deems it necessary to
successfully recruit or retain a person who possess the experience, training,
or other relevant qualifications for any such positions.
   (d)   A former elected official of the City of Cleveland, who becomes a
full-time officer or employee, including a full-time hourly rate employee, will
be credited with the time served in such elected office for the purpose of
determining such officer’s or employee’s vacation time, as provided in
subsection (a) and (b) of this section.
   (e)   Upon separation from City service, an officer or employee shall be
entitled to compensation at his or her then current rate of pay for vacation
leave lawfully entitled pursuant to subsection (a) and (b) hereof and unused as
of the date of separation.
   (f)   An officer’s or employee’s service with the City shall not be deemed
interrupted by authorized leaves of absence or by periods of lay-off. However,
no vacation leave shall be earned under subsection (b) of this section by any
officer or employee during an unpaid leave of absence or lay-off period.
   (g)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to hourly rate craft
employees paid on the basis of building trades prevailing wages.
   (h)   The provisions of this section shall not replace, amend, or deprive
any employee of any vacation rights to which he or she may be entitled under
the terms of any collective bargaining agreement between any union and the City
approved by ordinance of Council.
   (i)   The Director of Human Resources, subject to the approval of the Board
of Control, shall promulgate procedures and regulations to carry out this
Section
171.28 of the Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 1092-2023. Passed 10-23-23, eff. 10-25-23)
§ 171.29 Unused Vacation Leave and Overtime Pay of Deceased Employee
   In case of the death of any officer or employee of the City, the unused
vacation and overtime pay to the credit of such officer or employee shall be
paid as wages or personal earnings in accordance with RC 2113.04, or to his or
her estate. The provisions of this section shall be effective from and after
January 1, 1958.
(Ord. No. 787-57. Passed 2-25-58, eff. 2-28-58)
§ 171.30 Holidays
   (a)   All full-time annual rate and hourly rate employees, except hourly
rate craft employees paid on the basis of building trades prevailing wages,
shall be exempted from work and be paid for the following named holidays:
      New Year’s Day (January 1);
      Martin Luther King, Jr. Day (Third Monday in January);
      Presidents’ Day (Third Monday in February);
      Good Friday (Friday before Easter);
      Memorial Day (Fourth Monday in May);
      Juneteenth National Independence Day (June 19);
      Independence Day (July 4);
      Labor Day (First Monday in September);
      Thanksgiving Day (Fourth Thursday in November);
      Christmas Day (December 25).
   (b)   All full-time annual rate and hourly rate employees, except hourly
rate craft employees paid on the basis of building trades prevailing wages,
shall be exempted from work for four (4) consecutive hours, as determined by
the appointing authority or designee of each such employee, and be paid for
those four (4) hours on the following day:
      General Election Day (First Tuesday after the first Monday each November)
   The eligibility of City employees in a union-represented bargaining unit is
subject to the terms of the City’s collective bargaining agreements and the
requirements of RC Chapter 4117.
   (c)   In addition to the foregoing named holidays, such employees shall be
exempted from work and be paid for two (2) personal holidays each calendar
year. The scheduling of such personal holidays shall be subject to the approval
of the appointing authority of each such employee.
(Ord. No. 1082-2024. Passed 10-7-24, eff. 10-10-24)
§ 171.31 Sick Leave
   (a)   All full-time annual rate City employees and all full-time hourly rate
employees, except hourly rate craft employees paid on the basis of building
trades prevailing wages, shall be entitled to sick leave with pay.
   (b)   The Board of Control shall establish by resolution rules and
regulations for those entitled to sick leave. Such resolution shall have regard
to absence due to illness, exposure to contagious disease which could be
communicated to other employees, death or serious illness in the employee’s
immediate family and any other equitable factor present in the absence of
employees on account of illness. Such resolution may provide for cumulation of
sick leave.
(Ord. No. 2294-80. Passed 10-27-80, eff. 10-29-80)
§ 171.311 Establishing a Sick Time Contribution Program for Employees of City
Council
   (a)   Notwithstanding the provisions of Section
171.31, the Clerk of Council may, at the Clerk’s discretion, authorize any
employee of the Council to contribute accumulated paid sick leave to another
employee of the Council as follows:
      (1)   Contribution of sick leave must be based upon a catastrophic health
condition of the receiving employee or a member of his or her immediate family.
      (2)   To be eligible to receive a contribution of sick leave, an employee
must have first exhausted his or her own accumulated sick leave, vacation time,
personal days, and compensatory time.
      (3)   A contributing employee may not be on the absence abuse list and
must retain at least one hundred (100) hours of accumulated leave after any
contribution.
   (b)   The Clerk of Council may adopt additional rules and regulations as the
Clerk deems appropriate to implement the authority granted hereby.
(Ord. No. 1233-15. Passed 11-9-15, eff. 11-11-15)
§ 171.32 Group Term Life Insurance
   (a)   All regular full-time officers and employees of the City, including
the Mayor and all members of Council and all regular full-time officers and
employees of the Cleveland Municipal Court, except hourly rate craft employees
paid on the basis of building trades prevailing wages, who have completed
ninety (90) days of continuous service with the City shall be provided with ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00) of group term life insurance.
   (b)   The Director of Finance at City cost shall purchase and maintain the
group term life insurance required by subsection (a) hereof.
(Ord. No. 752-86. Passed 4-14-86, eff. 4-21-86)
§ 171.33 Hospitalization for Certain Employees
   (a)   All regular full-time employees of the City except sworn members of
the Police and Fire Divisions, members of the building trades paid under
Section 173.62, or ordinances or parts of ordinances relating to the same
subject matter, employees of the Municipal Court whose compensation is fixed by
the judges thereof and elected officials of the City, shall be entitled to an
allowance for hospitalization protection. Eligible employees who do not have
the same or better coverage provided free by their spouses’ employers shall be
entitled to full payment of employee and dependent Blue Cross and Medical
Mutual coverage, or the equivalent, upon such terms and conditions as the Board
of Control shall establish and in accordance with the rules and regulations
established by the Office of Personnel Administration.
   (b)   “Regular full-time employee”, as used in this section, shall not
include temporary transitory employees or temporary emergency employees.
   (c)   The inclusion or exclusion of any group of employees to the benefits
of this section shall be determined by the Board of Control upon the
recommendation of the director of a department, the commissioner of a division
or the Mayor for any board, commission or miscellaneous employee.
(Ord. No. 936-A-78. Passed 8-22-78, eff. 8-24-78)
§ 171.34 Hospitalization for Sworn Members of Police and Fire Divisions
   Notwithstanding the provisions of Section
171.33 relating to the exclusion of sworn members of the Divisions of Police
and Fire, effective February 15, 1974, all sworn members of the Divisions of
Police and Fire shall be entitled to full payment of employee and dependent
hospitalization allowance according to the provisions as set forth in the
present plan covering members of the Divisions. A member shall be entitled to
participate in either of the following two (2) plans which are now in effect:
   BC-MM No. CC 7
   BC-MM Plan No. CC 7 FF
   or
   KAISER FOUNDATION PLAN
   No. 730-C
   with Following Riders:
   (a)   No wait maternity.
   (b)   D1 psychiatric.
   (c)   D1 drug prescription.
   (d)   Dependent children to age twenty-five (25).
   (e)   Handicapped for life.
   (f)   One hundred (100) day extended care.
(Ord. No. 2077-73. Passed over Mayor’s veto 2-11-74, eff. 2-12-74)
§ 171.35 Hospitalization for Mayor and All Elected Councilmen
   Notwithstanding the provisions of Section
171.33, all elected officers of the City, the Mayor and all elected Councilmen
and those appointed pursuant to Charter Section
24 and all judges of the Cleveland Municipal Court and those Court employees
whose compensation is fixed by such judges shall be entitled to full payment of
employee and dependent hospitalization allowance according to such plans as are
available to other employees of the City, or as may be negotiated.
(Ord. No. 2799-75. Passed 12-15-75, eff. 12-16-75)
§ 171.36 Prescription Drug Program
   Effective September 1, 1975, in addition to the hospitalization benefits
established pursuant to Section
171.33, employees in the following classifications shall be entitled to receive
the Blue Cross two dollar ($2.00) deductible prescription drug program or its
Kaiser Community Health Foundation equivalent:
   Automobile Body Repairman;
   Automobile Repair Foreman;
   Automobile Repair Helper;
   Automobile Repairman;
   Garageman;
   Machinist;
   Machinist Helper;
   Meter Maid;
   Police Radio Dispatcher;
   Tire Repairman;
   Trimmer and Upholstery Repairman;
   Tractor Driver;
   Truck Driver;
   Tow Truck Operator;
   Waste Collector Driver;
   Welder.
(Ord. No. 2161-75. Passed 10-27-75, eff. 10-27-75)
§ 171.37 Reimbursement of Tuition for Employee Education
   (a)    Any full-time officer or employee of the City may be reimbursed by
the City in an amount not to exceed five thousand dollars ($ 5,000.00) per
employee per calendar year for payments he or she has made for tuition, course
materials, and fees for a course of study at an accredited university, college,
high school, or continuing education program, that will assist the officer or
employee and improve his or her ability to perform his or her duties. Any full-
time officer or employee of the City may be reimbursed by the City for all
payments he or she has made for tuition, course materials, and fees for a
course of study at an accredited university, college, high school, or
continuing education program, if the course of study results in the receipt of
one or more professional or academic credentials required for the employee to
continue in his or her position within the City.
   (b)   Reimbursement of tuition, course materials, and fees is subject to the
following conditions:
      (1)   The officer or employee shall have received the prior written
approval of his or her director, or his or her appointing authority in the case
of those employees not in a department administered by a director to attend the
course of study;
      (2)   The officer’s or employee’s director, or appointing authority in
the case of those employees not in a department administered by a director,
shall have reported to the Mayor, or his or her designee, that the course of
study will assist the officer or employee and improve his or her ability to
perform his or her duties, will result in the receipt of one or more
professional or academic credentials, and/or is required for the employee to
continue in his or her position within the City;
      (3)   The officer or employee has successfully completed the course of
study; and
      (4)   Any additional conditions that the officer’s or employee’s
director, or appointing authority in the case of those employees not in a
department administered by a director, may require for reimbursement if those
additional conditions were provided to the officer or employee at the time the
director or appointing authority provided the prior written approval to attend
the course(s) of study.
   (c)   Two (2) times a year the Mayor, or his or her designee, shall submit
to Council for its review a list of the names of all individuals who received
approval for tuition reimbursements.
(Ord. No. 801-2025. Passed 8-13-25, eff. 8-18-25)
§ 171.371 Payment of Costs of Attracting Certain Personnel
   (a)   When the Mayor or a designee deems it necessary for the successful
recruitment of qualified persons for eligible positions in the service of the
City of Cleveland, as eligible positions are defined below, he or she may
authorize payment of costs to recruit such persons and may authorize payment of
reasonable and necessary expenses incurred by applicants who live outside of
the Cleveland metropolitan area for traveling to and from Cleveland for the
purpose of being interviewed for employment by the City. Reasonable and
necessary travel expenses shall include lodging, meals, incidentals, and
transportation from the applicant's place of residence, or mileage, provided
that payment for mileage shall not exceed the round-trip airfare of a common
carrier and provided further that no payment shall be authorized for:
      (1)   Fines, penalties, and/or forfeitures;
      (2)   Tobacco, alcoholic beverages, entertainment, gratuities, personal
telephone calls and telegrams, or other like personal items;
      (3)   First-class travel accommodations unless coach or economy
accommodations were not available; or
      (4)   Meals in lieu of other meals or food services provided during the
period of travel by a carrier and included in the fare charged.
   (b)   The Mayor or a designee may approve payment of costs to search for and
recruit and travel expenses for applicants for eligible positions, which are
positions that meet the following criteria:
      (1)   Director, Assistant Director, Secretary to the Director, Chief
Counsel, Commissioner, Deputy Commissioner, Special Assistant to the Mayor,
Executive Assistant to the Mayor and Secretary to the Mayor; or
      (2)   The following highly specialized technical personnel: Air Pollution
Control Engineer; Airport Chief Engineer; Airport Comptroller; Airport Safety
Chief; Architect; Air Trade Development Manager; Assistant Director of Law;
Superintendent of Electric Transmission and Distribution; Chief of Air
Pollution Monitoring; Chief Architect; Chief Assistant Director of Law;
Assistant Building Official; Chief Engineer - Civil; Chief Engineer -
Mechanical; Administer of Engineering & Planning; Master Plan Examiner; Chief
of Water Distribution and Water Plant Manager; Budget Administrator; City
Comptroller; City Treasurer; Income Tax Administrator; Consulting Engineer;
Deputy Commissioner of Cleveland Hopkins International Airport; Deputy
Commissioner of Convention Center/Stadium; Engineer of Hydraulic Surveys;
Manager of Data Processing Center; Manager of Parks and Urban Forestry;
Secretary to the Civil Service Commission; Superintendent of Electric
Transmission and Distribution.
   (c)   Payment of authorized travel expenses may be made directly to a
vendor, or the applicant may be reimbursed for authorized expenses paid out of
pocket. Claims for payment of authorized expenses, other than mileage and
incidentals, shall be submitted to the Mayor or a designee and shall be
accompanied by invoices and/or receipts showing payment of such claimed
expenses. Invoices and/or receipts showing payment of overnight lodging
expenses shall have clearly identified thereon the rate for the accommodations
utilized. The maximum amount that may be paid to any one (1) person who is a
candidate for one (1) of the eligible positions for travel and related
interview expenses shall be two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per
interview trip.
   (d)   The Director of Finance is authorized to pay funds or reimburse costs
for the recruiting and travel expense payments authorized in this section from
funds appropriated for this purpose.
   (e)   If necessary to obtain the services of persons for eligible positions,
as defined above, the City may pay moving expenses incurred by them in
relocating to the City upon presentation of verifying documents, as long as
those persons have moved from a distance consistent with the Internal Revenue
Service distance test for moving expense deductions.
   (f)   The phrase "moving expenses" includes expenses incurred for
transportation to Cleveland to secure housing, as well as food and lodging
expenses for a period not to exceed five (5) days, incurred while engaged in
securing housing. Moving expenses also shall include all lodging, food, and
transportation expenses of family and household goods and personal effects
which are incurred solely for the purpose of relocating, from departure of such
family and goods from the place of current residence until the time that the
family and possessions arrive in Cleveland, unless such expenses have been
otherwise reimbursed. The authorized maximum rate for moving expenses as
defined herein shall be ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00).
   (g)   The Director of Finance is authorized to pay funds or reimburse costs
for the moving expense payments authorized in this section from funds
appropriated for that purpose.
   (h)   A person who receives moving expenses shall sign an agreement that
should such person voluntarily leave the City's employ within one (1) year of
initial appointment to a position, he or she shall reimburse the City for all
moving expenses plus any applicable interest as calculated pursuant to relevant
Internal Revenue Code provisions. The Mayor may waive or modify the repayment
amount upon the showing of mitigating circumstances.
   (i)   The Director of Human Resources shall notify the Clerk of Council,
with a copy to each Council member, when any costs authorized by this section
are paid. Once fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) has been spent under this
section, additional legislation is required to authorize any further
expenditures under this section.
(Ord. No. 461-16. Passed 5-2-16, eff. 5-4-16)
§ 171.372 Agreements for Information Technology Training
   (a)   Any appointing authority of the City that determines that an employee
under the appointing authority’s control would benefit from information
technology training directly related to the employee’s City duties, and to
improve the ability of the employee to perform those duties, may enter into an
agreement with the employee under the terms provided in this section.
   (b)   Any agreement entered into under the authority of this section shall
contain such terms as may be necessary in the opinion of the appointing
authority and the Director of Law to protect the interests of the City and
shall at a minimum provide:
      (1)   That the City of Cleveland will pay the tuition, fees, and related
costs for the technical training;
      (2)   That the appointing authority will grant the employee time off
during the employee’s normal workday to attend the training;
      (3)   That the employee will attend and successfully complete the course
of study or classes and obtain certification, if applicable;
      (4)   That the employee will submit to the appointing authority
documentation of completion of the coursework and a copy of the certification,
if applicable; and
      (5)   That the employee will reimburse or consent to deduction from wages
the City of Cleveland for all costs of the training in the event that the
employee breaches any of terms of the agreement, or if the employee is
terminated by the City for cause, or if the employee fails to remain an
employee of the City for a period of two (2) years following completion of the
training or receiving the certification.
   (c)   The information technology training that is the subject of an
agreement authorized by this section may be provided by any public or private
educational institution, company, or entity that is competent to provide such
training, and to issue certification in the same, if applicable.
(Ord. No. 797-03. Passed 6-10-03, eff. 6-12-03)
§ 171.38 Ethical Conduct and Conflict of Interest
   No officer or employee of the City shall violate any of the prohibitions
contained in RC Chapter 102, as currently enacted or hereafter amended,
relating to ethical conduct and conflict of interest of public officials.
(Ord. No. 566-77. Passed 3-7-77, eff. 3-7-77)
§ 171.39 Special Death Benefit for Employees of the City of Cleveland
   Effective January 1, 2000, if a City employee is killed in the line of duty
or dies as a direct and proximate result of the performance of the employee’s
official work-related duties, the City shall, within ninety (90) days of the
employee’s death, make one (1) payment of One Hundred Thousand Dollars
($100,000.00) to the surviving spouse or, if there is no surviving spouse, to
the estate of the employee. This payment shall be in addition to any other
benefits or compensation to which the employee’s beneficiaries would be
entitled.
(Ord. No. 1305-2000. Passed 8-7-00, eff. 8-17-00)
§ 171.391 Health Care Benefits for Surviving Spouse and Dependents of Employees
Killed in the Line of Duty
   (a)   If a City employee is killed in the line of duty or dies as a direct
and proximate result of the performance of the employee’s official work-related
duties, the surviving spouse, until such time as the employee would have been
eligible to retire, and employee’s dependents shall be entitled to health care
benefits as available under the City’s plan.
   (b)   This ordinance applies to the spouse and dependents of employees
killed in the line of duty or who died as a direct and proximate result of the
performance of their official work-related duties on or after January 1, 1998.
   (c)   Eligible survivors who are entitled to the benefits must pay the same
contribution to the premium as paid by the City employees.
(Ord. No. 879-09. Passed 8-5-09, eff. 8-13-09)
§ 171.40 Use of City Credit Cards
   (a)   Authorization.
      (1)   A credit card held by the Clerk of Council may be used to pay the
following work-related expenses of the Clerk, member of Council, and Council
staff:
         A.   Transportation expenses while traveling on City business;
         B.   Lodging expenses while traveling on City business;
         C.   Food expenses while traveling on City business;
         D.   Food expenses as authorized by ordinance of Council;
         E.   Registration, tuition or enrollment expenses for meetings,
seminars, conferences, or retreats;
         F.   Office supplies; and
         G.   Other ordinary and necessary expenses of the City in which a
credit card is the only method of payment acceptable to the vendor.
      (2)   A credit card held by the Director of Law, or his or her designee,
may be used to pay the following work-related expenses:
         A.   Filing, registration, or related fees required by any court,
board or tribunal;
         B.   Any other cost assessed by a court, government office in the
United States, board or tribunal other than judgments or settlements;
         C.   Any cost of obtaining records, transcripts and other documents
from a court reporter, or a government office related to a legal matter; and
         D.   Other ordinary and necessary expenses of the City in which a
credit card is the only method of payment acceptable to the vendor.
      (3)   A credit card held by the Port Control Director, or his or her
designee, may be used to pay the following work-related expenses:
         A.   Emergency commodity purchases in which a credit card is the only
method of payment acceptable to the vendor;
         B.   Food expenses as authorized by ordinance of Council;
         C.   Registration, professional licenses, tuition or enrollment
expenses for meetings, seminars, conferences, or retreats;
         D.   Advertising and public notice expenses;
         E.   Computer software maintenance including web-page renew expenses;
         F.   Filing fees for land property splits; and
         G.   Other ordinary and necessary expenses of the City in which a
credit card is the only method of payment acceptable to the vendor.
      (4)   A credit card held by the Finance Director's designee may be used
to pay the following work-related expenses:
         A.   Transportation expenses while traveling on City business;
         B.   Lodging expenses while traveling on City business;
         C.   Food expenses while traveling on City business;
         D.   Food expenses as authorized by ordinance of Council;
         E.   Registration, professional licenses, tuition or enrollment
expenses for meetings, seminars, conferences, retreats or other similar events;
and
         F.   Other ordinary and necessary expenses of the City in which a
credit card is the only method of payment acceptable to the vendor.
      (5)   A credit card held by the Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies,
or his or her designee, may be used to pay the following work-related expenses:
         A.   Business licenses, registrations, and subscriptions;
         B.   Tuition and/or enrollment expenses for meetings, seminars, or
conferences;
         C.   Transportation expenses while traveling on City business;
         D.   Lodging expenses while traveling on City business; and
         E.   Other ordinary and necessary expenses of the City in which a
credit card is the only method of payment acceptable to the vendor.
      (6)   A credit card held by the Chief Financial Officer of the Department
of Public Utilities, or his or her designee, may be used to pay the following
work-related expenses:
         A.   Business licenses, registrations, and other professional dues and
subscriptions;
         B.   Tuition and/or enrollment expenses for meetings, seminars, or
conferences;
         C.   Training expenses and training supplies;
         D.   Professional services, program promotions, and participation
fees;
         E.   Equipment, supplies, software and maintenance;
         F.   Memberships;
         G.   Advertising and public notices;
         H.   Parking in City facilities, taxes, and food; and
         I.   Other ordinary and necessary expenses of the City in which a
credit card is the only method of payment acceptable to the vendor.
      (7)   A credit card held by the Judge of the Cleveland Housing Court, or
his or her designee, may be used to pay the following work-related expenses:
         A.   Transportation expenses while traveling on Court business;
         B.   Lodging expenses while traveling on Court business;
         C.   Food expenses while traveling on Court business;
         D.   Food expenses as authorized by the Judge of the Cleveland Housing
Court;
         E.   Registration, tuition or enrollment expenses for meetings,
seminars, conferences, or retreats;
         F.   Supplies and equipment; and
         G.   Other ordinary and necessary expenses of the City in which a
credit card is the only method of payment acceptable to the vendor.
      (8)   A credit card held by the Finance Department project coordinator
(travel coordinator), or his or her designee, may be used to pay the following
work-related expenses:
         A.   Transportation expenses while traveling on City business;
         B.   Lodging expenses while traveling on City business;
         C.   Food expenses while traveling on City business;
         D.   Food expenses as authorized by ordinance of Council;
         E.   Registration, professional licenses, tuition or enrollment
expenses for meetings, seminars, conferences, or retreats; and
         F.   Other ordinary and necessary expenses of the City in which a
credit card is the only method of payment acceptable to the vendor.
      (9)   A credit card held by the Director of Innovation and Technology, or
her or her designee or his or her designee, may be used to pay the following
work-related expenses:
         A.   Registration, professional licenses, tuition or enrollment
expenses for meetings, seminars, conferences, or retreats and other similar
events in connection with City business;
         B.   Advertising and public notices;
         C.   Web-page renewal, social media and other similar expenses; and
         D.   Other ordinary and necessary expenses of the City in which a
credit card is the only method of payment acceptable to the vendor.
      (10)   A credit card held by the Secretary to the Mayor, or his or her
designee, may be used to pay the following work-related expenses:
         A.   Registration, professional licenses, tuition or enrollment
expenses for meetings, seminars, conferences, or retreats and other similar
events in connection with City business; and
         B.   Advertising and public notices;
         C.   Food expenses as authorized by ordinance of Council;
         D.   Office supplies;
         E.   Web-page renewal, social media and other similar expenses; and
         F.   Other ordinary and necessary expenses of the City in which a
credit card is the only method of payment acceptable to the vendor.
      (11)   A credit card held by the Public Safety Director, or his or her
designee, may be used to pay the following expenses related to recruitment:
         A.   Food expenses as authorized by ordinance of Council;
         B.   Web-page renewal, social media and other similar expenses; and
         C.   Other ordinary and necessary expenses of the City in which a
credit card is the only method of payment acceptable to the vendor.
   Use of a City credit card for uses other than those listed in division (a)
of this section shall be considered an unauthorized use. Any items not on these
lists may be approved at the Finance Director's discretion.
   Use of a City credit card in a manner inconsistent with any restriction or
control placed on the card by the Director of Finance shall be considered an
unauthorized use.
   (b)   No late charges or finance charges shall be allowed as an allowable
expense on a City credit card unless authorized by the Director of Finance.
   (c)   Any debt incurred as a result of the use of a credit card under this
section shall be paid from moneys appropriated in the budget to specific
appropriation line items of the appointing authority for work-related expenses
listed in division (a) of this section.
   (d)   Use of any credit card under division (a) of this section shall be
limited to the amount appropriated in a specific appropriation line item for
the permitted use or uses designated in division (a) and not otherwise
encumbered.
   (e)   If the card is issued in the name of a specific officer or employee,
that officer or employee is liable in person and upon any official bond of the
officer or employee to reimburse the City Treasury for the amount charged to
the City beyond the authorized amount or the amount of unauthorized use. If the
card is issued to the office of an appointing authority, the appointing
authority is liable in person and upon any official bond of the appointing
authority for the amount charged to the City beyond the authorized amount or
for the amount of unauthorized use.
   (f)   Any time a City credit card authorized for use under this section is
used for more than the amount appropriated and not otherwise unencumbered or is
used for an unauthorized use, the City Treasury shall be reimbursed for any
amount spent beyond the appropriated, otherwise unencumbered amount, or for the
amount of unauthorized use, in the following manner:
      (1)   If the card is issued in the name of a specific officer or
employee, that officer or employee is liable in person and upon any official
bond of the officer or employee for reimbursing the City Treasury for any
amount charged on the card beyond the appropriated, otherwise unencumbered
amount or for the amount of the unauthorized use.
      (2)   If the card is issued in the name of the office of the appointing
authority, the appointing authority is liable in person and upon any official
bond of the appointing authority for reimbursement for any amount charged on
the card beyond the appropriated, otherwise unencumbered amount or for the
amount of the unauthorized use.
   (g)   Whenever any officer or employee who is authorized to use a City
credit card or the office of any other county appointing authority suspects the
loss, theft, or possibility of unauthorized use of the card, the officer or
employee shall notify the Director of Finance, Division of Treasury, Division
of Internal Audit, Division of Financial Reporting and Control and either the
officer's or employee's appointing authority immediately and in writing.
   (h)   If the Director of Finance determines there has been a credit card
expenditure beyond the appropriated, otherwise unencumbered or the authorized
amount or if the Director of Finance determines that there has been
unauthorized use of a credit card, and if the Director of Finance determines
that the City Treasury should be reimbursed for credit card expenditures beyond
the appropriated, otherwise unencumbered or the authorized amount, or for the
amount of the unauthorized use, the Director of Finance shall give written
notice to the officer or employee or appointing authority of liability to the
City Treasury in accordance with this section. If, within thirty (30) days
after issuance of the written notice, the City Treasury is not reimbursed for
the amount shown on the written notice, the Director of Law shall recover that
amount from the officer or employee or appointing authority who is liable under
this section by civil action in any court of appropriate jurisdiction.
   (i)   Use of a City credit card for any use other than those permitted under
division (a) of this section is a violation of RC 2913.21.
   (j)   The Director of Finance may revoke credit card privileges and reclaim
the credit cards as the Director deems necessary.
(Ord. No. 1081-2024. Passed 11-25-24, eff. 1-1-25) (BOC Res. No. 638-24.
Adopted 12-18-24)
§ 171.41 Travel Expenses
   Whenever it is necessary for the Mayor or any committee or member of Council
to travel outside of the City upon business or affairs of Council or pertaining
to the office of Mayor, all necessary expenses for transportation, hotel,
living and incidental purposes shall be paid out of appropriations made to
Council or the Mayor for the purpose of travel expense out of the City.
(Ord. No. 77214. Passed 1-31-27)
§ 171.42 Calculation of and Deduction for Maintenance
   In all cases where the nature or circumstances of the employment make it
necessary or expedient that the City furnish lodging, sustenance, clothing or
other personal services to any employee, the cost of such lodging, sustenance,
clothing and other personal services shall be determined, until otherwise
authorized by Council, by the appointing authority noting on each payroll a
deduction from the salary of such employee as that salary is otherwise fixed in
accordance with the provisions of the Charter and this section.
(Ord. No. 93-41. Passed 4-28-41)
§ 171.421 Charge for Use of City-Owned Cars for Commuting
   Each officer and employee authorized to drive a City vehicle to and from
work shall be charged a commuting fee in an amount to be determined by the
Director of Finance but not to exceed twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per week.
The Commissioner of Accounts is hereby authorized to deduct such charge from
the salary or wages due such officers and employees who have filed a written
authorization of such deductions.
(Ord. No. 2268-90. Passed 9-17-90, eff. 9-17-90)
§ 171.43 Vehicle Mileage Allowance
   In addition to the salary fixed for the position occupied in the City
service, any employee whose duties require the use of a motor vehicle, and any
person performing the functions of a public office as described in Section 7701
(a)(26) of the Internal Revenue Code and authorized by the appointing authority
to be eligible for vehicle mileage allowance, may be compensated for the use of
his or her vehicle in the performance of his or her duties at the rate not to
exceed the IRS Standard Rate per mile as set by the Director of Finance and
published in the City Record from time to time. The Director of Finance may
also establish rules and regulations governing reimbursement for mileage which
shall take effect after publication, in the City Record for two (2) consecutive
weeks. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply to Deputy Bailiffs of
the Municipal Court.
(Ord. No. 499-08. Passed 4-28-08, eff. 5-2-08)
§ 171.44 Deputy Bailiff’s Vehicle Mileage Allowance
   Within the maximum limitation imposed by the judges of the Municipal Court,
Deputy Bailiffs of the Court who use their own motor vehicle in transacting
their public duties, in addition to their salaries, may be allowed an expense
item for vehicle use covering gasoline, oil and maintenance, at the rate per
mile currently in effect with the union’s collective bargaining agreement for
each mile which each vehicle may travel in the performance of the official duty
of the Bailiff owning the same. This allowance is not part of the salary of the
Bailiff, but merely a reimbursement for the expenses incurred for use of the
Bailiff’s vehicle.
(Ord. No. 756-05. Passed 7-12-06, eff. 7-14-06)
§ 171.45 Probation Officer’s Vehicle Mileage Allowance
   Probation officers of the Municipal Court, when duly authorized by the
judges or by the Chief Probation Officer with the authority of the judges, in
addition to their salaries, shall be allowed an expense item covering gasoline,
oil and maintenance of their private vehicles when the same are used directly
in connection with the performance of their duties as probation officers. The
allowance shall be the rate per mile currently in effect with the union’s
collective bargaining agreement for each mile which each vehicle may travel in
the performance of the official duty of the probation officer owning the same,
as shall be evidenced by an affidavit duly executed by an affidavit duly
executed by each probation officer claiming the mileage, which affidavit shall
be in the form approved by the Director of Law. The affidavit shall be executed
and filed at the end of each calendar month covering the operation of the
vehicle during the preceding month. The allowance shall not be construed to be
a part of the salary or compensation of the probation officer, but shall be
construed as a reimbursement to him or her for the expense necessarily incurred
in the use of his or her vehicle on official business. The aggregate amount of
such reimbursement to a probation officer for any one (1) calendar month shall
not exceed one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00).
(Ord. No. 756-05. Passed 7-12-06, eff. 7-14-06)
§ 171.46 Polygraph Testing
   (a)   No polygraph, “lie detector” or other mechanical, chemical or
electronic “truth” seeking instrument, device or test shall be used nor shall
any attempt be made to use any such instrument, device or test as a condition
of employment or continued employment or in connection with any examination for
employment or promotion with respect to any position with the City, unless any
applicant, employee or officer freely consents in writing, to having such
instrument device or test used on his or her person.
   (b)   An examination given contrary to the provisions of this section shall
render the results of such polygraph, “lie detector”, or other mechanical,
chemical or electronic “truth” seeking results null and void, and the results
thereof shall not be used by any person for any purpose whatsoever.
   (c)   Whoever violates any provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than twenty-
five dollars ($25.00) nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00) or imprisoned not
more than ten (10) days or both. Any examination administered or the results
thereof used contrary to the provisions of this section shall constitute a
distinct and separate offense.
(Ord. No. 2928-76. Passed 12-20-76, eff. 12-30-76)
§ 171.47 Reserved
§ 171.48 Reserved
§ 171.49 Officers’ and Employees’ Right to Free Expression
   (a)   Every officer and employee, whether in the classified or unclassified
service of the City, shall have and enjoy the right of free speech, as
guaranteed to them as citizens of the United States and the State, as provided
in the United States Constitution and the Constitution of the State, and may
freely discuss any matters, including but not limited to matters relating to
religion or politics.
   (b)   No officer or employee of the City, whether in the classified or
unclassified service of the City, shall promulgate or enforce or attempt to
promulgate or enforce any order, rule, regulation or directive, either written
or oral which prohibits or attempts to prohibit any officer or employee from
exercising his, her or their right to free speech, as Constitutionally and
legally guaranteed, except that the provisions of this section shall not
protect speech or conduct or both, which are clearly disruptive of the work of
such officer or employee or his or her co-workers or which clearly constitutes
an act of insubordination to a lawful order or directive of a person in a
supervisory capacity, which order or directive is necessary and related to the
carrying out of the authorized business of the City, and which is directly
related to the assigned duties and tasks of such employee.
(Ord. No. 2160-76. Passed over Mayor’s veto 10-4-76, eff. 10-5-76)
§ 171.50 Right of Officers and Employees to Meet and Discuss
   (a)   Every officer, appointed or elected official or employee in the
classified or unclassified service of the City has the right to meet with and
discuss any matter, with any other officer, appointed or elected official or
employee of the City, where such meetings and discussions are on a voluntary
basis and the parties thereto consent to such meeting and discussion; provided
such meetings do not unduly interfere with the carrying out of the assigned
duties and functions of any of the parties involved.
   (b)   No person, whether in the classified or unclassified service of the
City shall invoke or attempt to invoke any disciplinary or other punitive
action or sanctions against any officer, appointed or elected official or
employee, whether in the classified or unclassified service of the City, nor
shall any person in the classified or unclassified service of the City
promulgate or enforce or seek to promulgate or enforce any directive, order,
rule or regulation, written or oral, which prevents or seeks to prevent the
free exercise of the right provided for in this section.
(Ord. No. 2160-76. Passed over Mayor’s veto 10-4-76, eff. 10-5-76)
§ 171.51 Effect of Existing Regulations
   All existing orders, directives, rules or regulations, whether written or
oral, in conflict with and inconsistent with the provisions of Sections
171.49 and
171.50 are hereby declared to be illegal, null and void and unenforceable
against any officer, employee or appointed or elected official of the City,
whether in the classified or unclassified service of the City.
(Ord. No. 2160-76. Passed over Mayor’s veto 10-4-76, eff. 10-5-76)
§ 171.52 Existing Eligible List Prohibits Promotion, Appointment, Assignment or
Transfer
   (a)   Notwithstanding any other rule, regulation or ordinance to the
contrary, no officer or employee of the City shall, directly or indirectly
promote, appoint, assign or transfer, either temporarily or permanently, any
officer or employee under his or her jurisdiction or control, to serve and/or
act in a higher capacity, position, classification, grade or rank, other than
in his or her regular and legal classification, when there is in existence an
appropriate civil service eligible list for such higher position,
classification, grade or rank as the case may be, regardless of whether such
employee receives the compensation commensurate with such higher capacity
position, classification, grade or rank.
   (b)   Any such promotion, appointment, assignment or transfer made in
violation of this section, shall be considered to be made in violation of the
civil service provisions of the City Charter and a fraud upon the impartial
execution of the provisions thereof, and shall subject the violator thereof to
an immediate forfeiture of office or employment.
(Ord. No. 2501-76. Passed 10-25-76, eff. 11-4-76)
§ 171.53 Employees’ Right to Counsel in Disciplinary Hearings
   (a)   Notwithstanding any other City ordinance, rule or regulation to the
contrary, every employee in the service of the City shall have the right at all
times to have present and be represented by the counsel of his or her choice,
including legal counsel, at any disciplinary hearing, which includes all the
formal or informal preliminary steps, stages or levels of hearings,
investigations, or interrogations of any kind, including but not limited to the
questioning of any employee, which may result in or lead to any disciplinary
and/or criminal charges being brought against any such employee.
   (b)   Any disciplinary or other proceedings which have been initiated and/or
are pending, but not yet consummated or concluded either by way of formal
hearing and/or a final order which proceedings were initiated, investigated, or
undertaken in violation of the foregoing provisions, shall be forthwith
dismissed and the disciplinary proceedings represented thereby shall be forever
barred and any affected employee(s) shall be immediately reinstated with full
back pay and all other emoluments of office.
   (c)   Every disciplinary hearing, held in violation of the provisions of
this section shall be void ab initio.
   (d)   Whoever violates or attempts to violate the rights of any employee, as
set forth herein, is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(Ord. No. 2430-76. Passed 11-15-76, eff. 11-16-76)
§ 171.54 Deferred Compensation Plan
   (a)   There is hereby established a Deferred Compensation Board, consisting
of the Mayor, President of Council, Director of Finance and the Director of
Law.
   (b)   The Deferred Compensation Board is hereby authorized to establish and
administer a voluntary deferred compensation plan for City officers and
employees.
   (c)   The City, by and through its Director of finance, may contract with
any officer or employee to defer any portion of that officer’s or employee’s
income allowed under the plan. The City may, but shall not be obligated to, use
the amounts deferred to purchase a fixed or variable life insurance or annuity
contract from any life underwriter duly licensed by this State who represents
an insurance company licensed to contract business in this State or purchase
such other investment as is approved by the United States Internal Revenue
Service and the State of Ohio. Such contract or other investment shall be held
in the name of and shall be the sole property of the City.
   (d)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the Board
designated to administer the deferred compensation plan is hereby authorized to
invest the moneys held pursuant to the deferred compensation plan in fixed and
variable life insurance and annuity contracts or such other investments as are
approved by the United States Internal Revenue Service and the State of Ohio.
   (e)   The deferred compensation plan established pursuant to this section
shall exist and serve in addition to any retirement, pension or benefit system
established for the benefit of officers and employees of the City and no
deferral of income under the deferred compensation plan shall effect a
reduction of any retirement, pension or other benefit provided by law.
   (f)   It is the intention of this section that amounts deferred under the
deferred compensation plan by participating officers and employees shall not be
considered as income paid to the participants, except for purposes of Municipal
income tax. The City shall own and have all rights to any sums deferred
pursuant to subsection (c) hereof and any earnings thereon, which sums will not
be held in any way as collateral security for the fulfilling of the obligations
of the City but shall be held as a general, unpledged, and unrestricted asset
of the City until distributed to the participants in accordance with the plan.
(Ord. No. 1896-77. Passed 7-18-77, eff. 7-25-77)
§ 171.55 Temperatures and Weather Conditions
   (a)   Notwithstanding any agreement, memoranda of understanding, resolutions
or ordinances to the contrary, the directors of the several departments of the
City may order their respective employees to continue to provide City services
as required, regardless of temperature or other weather conditions.
   (b)   Any agreements, memoranda of understanding, resolutions or ordinances
prohibiting City employees from working because of weather conditions,
including but not limited to low temperatures, are hereby revoked and of no
affect.
(Ord. No. 403-77. Passed 2-14-77, eff. 2-25-77)
§ 171.56 Compensation for School Crossing Guards
   On days when schools are closed due to weather conditions, all school
crossing guards scheduled to work on such days, shall be compensated at their
regular rate of pay and be paid the same as if they had reported to work and
had in fact worked the day the school or schools were closed due to weather
conditions.
(Ord. No. 2145-79. Passed 11-24-80, eff. 11-28-80)
§ 171.57 Military Service Leave of Absence; Benefits During Service
   (a)   All officers and employees of the City who are members of the Ohio
organized militia or members of other reserve components of the armed forces of
the United States, including the Ohio national guard, are entitled to a leave
of absence from their respective positions without loss of pay for the time
they are performing service in the uniformed services, for periods of up to one
(1) month, for each year in which they are performing service in the uniformed
services.
   (b)   As used in this section:
      (1)   "Year" means calendar year.
      (2)   "Month" means twenty-two (22) eight (8) hour work days or one
hundred seventy-six (176) hours, or for a public safety employee, twenty-two
(22) eight (8) hour work days or one hundred seventy-six (176) hours, or
twenty-two (22) ten (10) hour work days or two hundred twenty (220) hours, or
twenty-two (22) twelve (12) hour work days or two hundred sixty-four (264)
hours, or seventeen (17) twenty-four (24) hour work days or four hundred eight
(408) hours, within one (1) year.
      (3)   "Officer and employee" means any person holding a position in
employment with the City that requires working a regular schedule of twenty-six
(26) consecutive biweekly pay periods, or any other regular schedule of
comparable consecutive pay periods, which is not limited to a specific season
or duration. "Officer and employee" does not include student help;
intermittent, seasonal, or external interim employees; or individuals covered
by personal services contracts.
      (4)   "Service in the uniformed services" means the performance of duty,
on a voluntary or involuntary basis, in a uniformed service, under competent
authority, and includes active duty, active duty for training, initial active
duty for training, inactive duty for training, full-time national guard duty,
and performance of duty or training by a member of the Ohio organized militia
pursuant to RC Chapter 5923. "Service in the uniformed services" includes also
the period of time for which a person is absent from a position of public or
private employment for the purpose of an examination to determine the fitness
of the person to perform any duty described in this division.
      (5)   "Uniformed services" means the armed forces, the Ohio organized
militia when engaged in active duty for training, inactive duty training, or
full-time national guard duty, the commissioned corps of the public health
service, and any other category of persons designated by the president of the
United States in time of war or emergency.
      (6)   "Public safety employee" means, notwithstanding any collective
bargaining agreement to the contrary, a City employee who is employed by the
Divisions of Fire, Emergency Medical Service, or Police under the Department of
Public Safety.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in division (d) of this section, any
officer or employee of the City, who is entitled to the leave provided under
division (a) of this section, and who is called or ordered to the uniformed
services for longer than a month, for each year in which the employee performed
service in the uniformed services, because of an executive order issued by the
president of the United States, because of an act of congress, or because of an
order to perform duty issued by the governor pursuant to RC 5919.29 is
entitled, during the period designated in the order or act, to a leave of
absence and to be paid, during each monthly pay period of that leave of
absence: The difference between the officer's or employee's gross monthly wage
or salary as an officer or employee and the sum of the officer's or employee's
gross uniformed pay and allowances received that month.
   (d)   No officer or employee shall receive payments under division (c) of
this section if the sum of the officer's or employee's gross uniformed pay and
allowances received in a pay period exceeds the officer's or employee's gross
wage or salary as an officer or employee for that period or if the officer or
employee is receiving pay under division (a) of this section.
   (e)   Each officer or employee who is entitled to leave provided under
division (a) of this section shall submit the published order authorizing the
call or order to the uniformed services or a written statement from the
appropriate military commander authorizing that service, prior to being
credited with that leave.
   (f)   Any officer or employee whose employment is governed by a collective
bargaining agreement with provision for the performance of service in the
uniformed services shall abide by the terms of that collective bargaining
agreement with respect to the performance of that service, except that no
collective bargaining agreement may afford fewer rights and benefits than are
conferred under this section.
   (g)   For purposes of hospitalization, life insurance, vacation leave, sick
leave and longevity pay, a person on a military leave of absence shall be
deemed to be in the service of the City.
(Ord. No. 706-2025. Passed 7-9-25, eff. 7-14-25)
§ 171.58 Compensation While on Jury Duty
   Each regular full-time employee of the City shall be entitled to receive
compensation at his or her regular rate of pay for each normal working day
spent in jury service, provided that such compensation shall be paid only upon
deposit with the City Treasurer of any remuneration received by any such
employee for serving as a juror.
(Ord. No. 1909-81. Passed 2-8-82, eff. 2-10-82)
§ 171.59 Payment for Tool Insurance
   (a)   On September 1, 1984 and on each September 1 of each year thereafter,
every City employee who is in one (1) of the classifications listed in division
(b) below and who is required to use privately owned tools in his or her work
for the City shall be entitled to receive a payment of one hundred sixty
dollars ($160.00). On July 1, 1984, and on each July 1 or each year thereafter,
each City employee who is in one (1) of the classifications listed in division
(c) below and who is required to use privately owned tools in his or her work
for the City shall be entitled to receive a payment of two hundred-forty
dollars ($240.00). This payment shall be in addition to all other compensation
regularly paid to such employee and shall be used for the purchase of insurance
covering the privately owned tools required in such employee’s service for the
City. Each employee shall be responsible for obtaining insurance coverage with
and paying the premium to the insurance agent and carrier of his or her choice,
provided that the City shall have the right to ascertain the existence of such
insurance coverage.
   (b)   Employees in the following classifications shall be eligible for the
one hundred sixty dollars ($160.00) benefit provided by this section:
      (1)   Machinist;
      (2)   Machinist Helper;
      (3)   Machinist Foreman.
   (c)   Employees in the following classifications shall be eligible for the
two hundred-forty dollars ($240.00) benefit provided by this section:
      (1)   Auto body repairman;
      (2)   Automobile repairman helper;
      (3)   Automobile repairman;
      (4)   Automobile repairman foreman;
      (5)   Blacksmith;
      (6)   Garageman;
      (7)   Tire repairman;
      (8)   Welder;
      (9)   Heavy duty mechanic;
      (10)   Small equipment repairman.
(Ord. No. 1862-84. Passed 10-15-84, eff. 10-18-84)
§ 171.60 Dental Care Insurance
   (a)   Effective December 1, 1981, all elected officers, full-time officers
and regular full-time employees of the City and its Municipal Court, except
members of the building trades paid on the basis of building trades’ prevailing
wages, are eligible to receive dental insurance benefits. An eligible employee
or officer who does not have the same or better coverage provided free by his
or her spouse’s or parents’ employer shall be provided with employee and
dependent dental insurance coverage, subject to such administrative terms and
conditions as the Board of Control establishes.
   (b)   The Director of Finance shall periodically contract for the issuance
of a policy of dental insurance on a joint venture basis, which joint venture
shall include at least one (1) minority insurance agency, covering all
employees and officers who are entitled to dental care benefits pursuant to
subsection (a) hereof.
   (c)   As used in this section, “regular full-time employees” does not
include temporary transitory employees or temporary emergency employees.
(Ord. No. 2317-81. Passed 10-5-81, eff. 10-7-81)
§ 171.601 Dental Care Insurance Exception
   Notwithstanding the provisions of Section
171.60 to the contrary, an officer holding the rank of sergeant, lieutenant,
captain, deputy inspector or inspector, in the Division of Police, are not
entitled to receive dental insurance benefits from the City.
(Ord. No. 2567-81. Passed 11-9-81, eff. 11-13-81)
§ 171.61 City Employees Entitled to Benefits of Federally Administered Loan and
Grant Programs for Home Loans and Grants
   All city employees, except the Mayor and the Directors of all city
departments, and members of Council, shall be entitled to apply for and receive
loans and/or grants of federally city-administered funds under existing or
future homeowner rehabilitation, repair or home purchasing or building
programs, subject to the same laws, ordinances, rules and regulations that
apply to non-city employees under any such program.
(Ord. No. 1046-05. Passed 7-13-05, eff. 7-20-05)
§ 171.62 Benefits for Executive Assistants – Council Members
   (a)   All Executive Assistants for Council Members who are chosen by the
Council of the City of Cleveland pursuant to Section
31 of the Charter of the City and are employed part-time shall be entitled to
the benefits described in Sections
171.32,
171.33 and
171.60 of these Codified Ordinances.
   (b)   All Executive Assistants for Council Members who are chosen by the
Council of the City of Cleveland pursuant to Section
31 of the Charter of the City and are employed part-time shall be entitled to
the benefits described in Sections
171.28,
171.30(b) and
171.31 of these Codified Ordinances at the rate of either sixty percent (60%)
or eighty percent (80%), depending upon the number of hours worked, of the
benefit provided to full-time employees in each of these Sections of the
Codified Ordinances.
   (c)   All Executive Assistants for Council Members who are chosen by the
Council of the City of Cleveland pursuant to Section
31 of the Charter of the City and are employed part-time may be entitled to the
benefit described in Section
171.30(a).
   (d)   For purposes of this section, a “part-time employee” is one who works
a minimum of twenty-four (24) hours per week and less than forty (40) hours per
week.
(Ord. No. 1290-06. Passed 8-9-06, eff. 8-16-06)
§ 171.621 Benefits for Council Employees
   (a)   All Council Employees who are chosen by the Council of the City
pursuant to Section
31 of the Charter of the City and who are employed part-time shall be entitled
to the benefits described in Sections
171.32,
171.33 and
171.60 of these Codified Ordinances.
   (b)   All Council Employees who are chosen by the Council of the City
pursuant to Section
31 of the Charter of the City and who are employed part-time shall be entitled
to the benefits described in Sections
171.28,
171.30(b) and
171.31 of these Codified Ordinances at the rate of either sixty percent (60%)
or eighty percent (80%), depending upon the number of hours worked, of the
benefit provided to full-time employees in each of these Sections of the
Codified Ordinances.
   (c)   All Council Employees who are chosen by the Council of the City
pursuant to Section
31 of the Charter of the City and who are employed part-time may be entitled to
the benefit described in Section
171.30(a).
   (d)   For purposes of this section, a “part-time employee” is one who works
a minimum of twenty-four (24) hours per week and less than forty (40) hours per
week.
(Ord. No. 1290-06. Passed 8-9-06, eff. 8-16-06)
§ 171.63 Incentive Pay for Airport Emergency Medical Technicians
   (a)   Any full-time employee serving in the classification of Airport Safety
Chief or Airport Safetyman who is, while so serving, first certified, under the
requirements of RC 4731.82 through 4731.99, as having the following additional
qualifications shall be entitled to receive incentive pay as follows:
      (1)   On certification as emergency medical technician-ambulance (“EMT-
A”) on or after January 1, 1983, a one-time payment of five hundred dollars
($500.00).
      (2)   On certification as advanced emergency medical technician-ambulance
(“ADV EMT-A”) on or after January 1, 1983, a one-time payment of two hundred
dollars ($200.00).
      (3)   On certification as emergency medical technician-paramedic
(“Paramedic”) on or after January 1, 1983, a one-time payment of five hundred
dollars ($500.00).
   (b)   Effective January 1, 1984, any employee serving in a classification
listed in division (a) above and certified as EMT-A, ADV EMT-A or Paramedic
shall be entitled to receive while so serving and during the continuance of
such certification, additional incentive pay for each paid hour worked, as
follows:
      (1)   For certification as EMT-A: Airport Safetyman: Forty cents ($0.40)
per hour; Airport Safety Chief: Fifty cents ($0.50) per hour;
      (2)   For certification as ADV EMT-A: Fifty cents ($0.50) per hour;
      (3)   For certification as Paramedic: One dollar ($1.00) per hour.
   (c)   “Paid hour worked” as used in this section includes, in addition to
hours actually worked, hours of paid time off such as vacation, sick leave, and
holidays.
   An employee having two (2) or more of the above mentioned qualifications
shall not be entitled to hourly incentive pay for more than one (1) of such
qualifications at one time.
   An employee may be required to present written evidence proving initial and
continuing certification of qualification in the categories used in division
(a) of this section.
   The incentive pay and additional incentive pay authorized in this section
may be paid notwithstanding maximum compensation schedules established by
either ordinances relating to compensation.
(Ord. No. 387-03. Passed 3-10-03, eff. 3-11-03)
§ 171.64 Rehabilitation Contracts
   (a)   The Mayor, directors of departments, and such person as a board or
commission may designate are hereby authorized to enter into contract with the
Industrial Commission of Ohio, Rehabilitation Division for the reimbursement of
all or a portion of an officer’s or employee’s wages, as contemplated by RC
Chapter 4121.
   (b)   Any and all monies received pursuant to contract entered into under
subsection (a) hereof as reimbursement for an officer’s or employee’s wages,
shall be credited to the personnel and related expense character of the current
appropriation measure of the department, division, office, board or commission
employing such officer or employee.
(Ord. No. 2986-84. Passed 1-14-85, eff. 1-18-85)
§ 171.65 Domestic Partner Benefits – Repealed
(Ord. No. 840-15. Passed 7-22-15, eff. 7-27-15)
§ 171.66 Residency Requirements
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, all employees of the
City may reside only within the geographical boundaries of the State of Ohio.
   (b)   In order to ensure adequate response times to emergencies and
disasters, certain employees or classifications are designated as emergency
responders who shall reside within Cuyahoga County or any one of the following
adjacent counties: Lake, Geauga, Summit, Medina, Lorain or Portage, within the
state of Ohio:
      (1)   All employees of the Department of Public Safety;
      (2)   All employees of the Department of Port Control, Divisions of
Cleveland Hopkins International Airport, Burke Lakefront Airport and Harbor;
      (3)   All employees of the Department of Public Utilities, Divisions of
Cleveland Public Power, Water, and Water Pollution Control;
      (4)   All employees of the Department of Public Works, Divisions of
Property Management, Motor Vehicle Maintenance, Waste Collection, and Streets;
      (5)   All employees of the Mayor's Office of Capital Projects;
      (6)   In the Department of Innovation and Technology, Managers, Assistant
Managers, Telephone Operator, Citizens Information Representative;
Telecommunications Technician, Telecommunications Analyst I, Budget Analyst,
Supervisor of Systems and Tech Support, PC Technician, Supervisor of Hardware
Evaluation, Systems Analyst, Data Base Coordinator, and Web Developer;
      (7)   In the Department of Aging, Administrative Managers;
      (8)   In the Department of Public Health, Program Coordinator for
Emergency Preparedness, Public Information Officer, Lead Epidemiologist;
      (9)   All Chiefs, Executive Assistants, and Special Assistants of the
Office of the Mayor;
      (10)   All Directors, Assistant Directors, Deputy Directors, and
Commissioners, of all departments;
      (11)   Clerk of Council; and
      (12)   Such other positions in the several departments that are
identified by the appointing authority and approved by the Civil Service
Commission as requiring adequate response times to emergencies and disasters.
   (c)   No officer or employee of the City shall, in any way, falsify or
misstate verbally or in writing on any application, paper, document or form,
which relates to his or her employment with the City, that the officer or
employee is a resident of the State of Ohio, Cuyahoga County, or adjacent
counties when in fact he or she is not a bona fide resident of the State of
Ohio, Cuyahoga County, or adjacent counties.
   (d)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any officer or
employee on the payroll of the City of Cleveland on the first effective date of
this section who remains employed with the City of Cleveland.
   (e)   The Director of Human Resources is authorized and directed to adopt
administrative regulations to implement the provisions of divisions (a) and
(b). The regulations shall provide a transitional period of not more than 180
days following employment within which an employee must establish either Ohio
residency or residency within Cuyahoga County or adjacent counties, as required
by this section.
   (f)   The Director of Human Resources is further encouraged to consider
additional administrative regulations, to the extent permitted by law,
providing for employment incentives for any city employees who maintain or
adopt city residency, and to present those regulations for council
consideration.
(Ord. No. 545-12. Passed 3-4-13, eff. 3-5-13)
   Note: Pursuant to Sections 9 and 10 of Ord. No. 521-2024, any references to
the Division of Park Maintenance and Properties and Commissioner of Park
Maintenance and Properties shall be amended to read Division of Park
Maintenance and Commissioner of Park Maintenance. Pursuant to Section 9 of Ord.
No. 1081-2024, any references to the Division of Information Technology and
Services and the Commissioner of Information Technology and Services shall be
amended to read Department of Innovation and Technology and Director of
Innovation and Technology.
§ 171.67 Paid Safe Leave
   (a)   Definitions.
      (1)   "Domestic violence" means, as defined in RC 3113.31, the occurrence
of one (1) or more of the following acts against a family or household member
or against a person in a dating relationship:
         A.   Attempting to cause or recklessly causing bodily injury;
         B.   Placing another person by threat or force in fear of imminent
serious physical harm or committing a violation of RC 2903.211, Menacing by
Stalking, or RC 2911.211, Aggravated Trespass.
         C.   Committing any act with respect to a child that would result in
the child being an abused child, as defined in RC 2151.031;
         D.   Committing a sexually oriented offense. (RC 3113.31(A)(1))
      (2)   "Family or household member" means any of the following:
         A.   Any of the following who is residing with or has resided with the
offender:
            1.   A spouse, a person living as a spouse, or a former spouse of
the offender;
            2.   A parent, foster parent, or a child of the offender, or
another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the offender;
            3.   A parent or a child of a spouse, person living as a spouse, or
former spouse of the offender, or another person related by consanguinity or
affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse, or former spouse of the
offender.
         B.   The natural parent of any child of whom the offender is the other
natural parent or is the putative other natural parent. (RC 3113.31(A)(3))
      (3)   "Person living as a spouse" means a person who is living or has
lived with the offender in a common law marital relationship, who otherwise is
cohabiting with the offender, or who otherwise has cohabited with the offender
within five (5) years prior to the date of the alleged occurrence of the act in
question. (RC 3113.31(A)(4))
      (4)   "Dating relationship" means a relationship between individuals who
have, or have had, a relationship of a romantic or intimate nature. "Dating
relationship" does not include a casual acquaintanceship or ordinary
fraternization in a business or social context. (RC 3113.31(A)(8))
      (5)   "Sexual assault" means any conduct enumerated in RC Chapter 2907,
Sex Offenses, including rape, sexual battery, unlawful sexual conduct with a
minor, gross sexual imposition, sexual imposition, or importuning.
      (6)   "Stalking" means any conduct enumerated in RC 2903.211, Menacing by
Stalking, including engaging in a pattern of conduct that knowingly causes
another person to believe that the offender will cause physical harm or mental
distress to the other person or a family or household member of the other
person.
   (b)   Use of Paid Safe Leave. Any full-time or part-time non-union City
employee who is a victim, or is a parent or legal guardian of a child victim,
of domestic violence, sexual assault, or stalking, shall be entitled to take
paid leave from work for any of the following:
      (1)   Seeking medical attention related to physical or psychological
injuries caused by domestic violence, sexual assault, or stalking;
      (2)   Obtaining services from a victim-services organization;
      (3)   Obtaining psychological or other counseling;
      (4)   Participating in safety planning, temporarily or permanently
relocating, or taking any other actions reasonably necessary to increase the
safety of the employee or employee's family or household member from future
domestic violence, sexual assault or stalking; or
      (5)   Seeking legal assistance or remedies to ensure the health and
safety of the employee, including preparing for or participating in any civil
or criminal legal proceeding related to or derived from domestic violence,
sexual assault, or stalking.
   (c)   Period of Paid Safe Leave Time.
      (1)   Full-time non-union City employees shall be entitled to sixty (60)
hours paid safe leave time annually. Part-time non-union City employees shall
be entitled to thirty (30) hours paid safe leave time annually.
      (2)   Paid safe leave time may be taken intermittently or on a reduced
work schedule.
      (3)   Employees are not required to expend available, accrued benefit
time, including vacation, personal, compensatory, or sick time, before using
paid safe leave time.
   (d)   Certification – Forms of Documentation.
      (1)   Employees seeking paid safe leave shall submit at least one (1)
form of acceptable documentation to the Director of Human Resources, or his or
her designee. Acceptable forms of documentation include the following:
         A.   Documentation from an employee, agent, or volunteer of a victim-
services organization, an attorney, a member of the clergy, or a medical or
other professional from whom the employee has sought assistance in addressing
domestic violence, sexual assault or stalking; or
         B.   A police report or court record; or
         C.   Other corroborating evidence deemed sufficient by the Director.
      (2)   The Director may require any additional documentation necessary to
substantiate the request.
   (e)   Regulations and Procedures. The Director of Human Resources may
promulgate regulations and procedures to carry out the provisions of this
section.
(Ord. No. 756-2022. Passed 12-5-22, eff. 2-5-23)
§ 171.68 Paid Parental Leave
   (a)   All regular full-time annual and hourly rate City employees who have
completed thirty (30) days of continuous employment shall be entitled to twelve
(12) weeks of paid parental leave during the twelve (12) month period following
the birth, adoption, or appointment of legal guardianship by a court of law of
a child at one hundred percent (100%) of their regular base rate of pay. Hourly
rate craft employees paid on the basis of building trades prevailing wages are
not eligible. The eligibility of City employees in a union-represented
bargaining unit is subject to the terms of the City's collective bargaining
agreements and the requirements of RC Chapter 4117. "Parental leave" shall mean
a leave of absence following the birth of a newborn, the placement of a newly
adopted child, or the appointment of legal guardianship of a child by a court
of law.
   (b)   Where paid parental leave is taken for a qualifying reason under The
Family Medical Leave Act of 1993 ("FMLA"), paid parental leave shall run
concurrently with FMLA leave, shall be counted against FMLA leave available to
employees using the paid parental leave benefit, and shall be in addition to,
and not reduce an employee's balance of other accrued paid leave provided to
the employee by the City except as provided in divisions (e) and (h)(3) below.
   (c)   An employee who would otherwise be eligible for paid parental leave
under division (a) above and who experiences a pregnancy loss, as defined by
the rules and regulations established pursuant to division (i), shall be
eligible for three (3) weeks of paid parental leave.
   (d)   If after a live birth or after the placement of a newly adopted child
the child dies during the period of time that the employee is on paid parental
leave, the employee shall be entitled to the full extent of the paid parental
leave permitted under division (a) above, and the paid parental leave shall not
terminate due to the death of the child. All other provisions of paid parental
leave shall apply.
   (e)   If an employee takes leave under divisions (c) or (d) above, the
employee is ineligible to take bereavement leave made available through Section
171.31 of these Codified Ordinances.
   (f)   In addition to the twelve (12) weeks of paid parental leave, every
eligible employee shall be entitled to up to twenty (20) hours of intermittent
paid leave in a twelve (12) month period at one hundred percent (100%) of their
regular base pay to attend pre-natal medical and related appointments up to the
birth of a child(ren). The employee's balance of other accrued paid leave that
the City provided to the employee shall not be reduced by the taking of the
foregoing leave.
   (g)   In addition to the twelve (12) weeks of paid parental leave, every
eligible employee who pursues a legally-sanctioned adoption shall be entitled
to up to twenty (20) hours of intermittent paid leave in a twelve (12) month
period at one hundred percent (100%) of their base rate of pay to attend
required meetings or interviews to obtain approval for an adoption of a child
(ren). The employee's balance of other accrued paid leave that the City
provided to the employee shall not be reduced by the taking of the foregoing
leave.
   (h)   All of the following apply to employees granted paid parental leave
under this section:
      (1)   They shall remain eligible for all employer-paid and employer-
provided benefits and shall continue to accrue other forms of paid leave while
on paid parental leave.
      (2)   They are ineligible to receive overtime pay, and no portion of
their parental leave shall be included in calculating their overtime pay.
      (3)   They are ineligible to receive holiday pay. A holiday occurring
during the leave period shall be counted as one day of paid parental leave and
shall be paid as such.
   (i)   The Director of Human Resources shall establish rules and regulations
governing paid parental leave. Such rules and regulations shall include the
permissible grounds for paid parental leave, procedures for taking leave,
allowances for intermittent leave, and any other relevant considerations not
inconsistent with this section or FMLA.
(Ord. No. 630-2023. Passed 7-12-23, eff. 9-15-23)
§ 171.99 Penalty
   (a)   Whoever violates any provision of Sections
171.38 or
171.39, in addition to any other penalty provided under the Charter, shall be
fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or imprisoned not more
than six (6) months, or both.
   (b)   Whoever violates the provisions of Section
171.46 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, fined not less than twenty-five
dollars ($25.00) nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00) or imprisoned not more
than ten (10) days, or both. Any examination administered or the results
thereof used contrary to the provisions of Section
171.46 constitutes a distinct and separate offense.
   In addition to the penalties herein prescribed, any officer or employee of
the City who violates any of the provisions of Section
171.46 shall be subject to immediate dismissal from City service.
   (c)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of Sections
171.49 to
171.51 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. However, no part
of the fine provided for a misdemeanor of the fourth degree shall be waived or
otherwise suspended by a judicial officer hearing and deciding the case, and
each day a violation occurs constitutes a separate and distinct offense.
   In addition to the penalties herein provided, whoever violates any of the
provisions of Sections
171.49 to
171.51 shall be subject to disciplinary action, according to the Charter and
these Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 2160-76. Passed over Mayor’s veto 10-4-76, eff. 10-5-76)
CHAPTER 173 – COMPENSATION
173.01   Payment of Salaries and Wages
173.02   Soliciting, Receiving and/or Depositing Contributions from City
Employees
173.03   Fixing of Compensation
173.04   Civil Service Commission Resolutions
173.05   Unclassified Service Positions
173.06   Mayor
173.07   Members of Council
173.071   Reimbursement of Expense for Members of Council
173.08   President of Council
173.081   President of Council’s Ward Executive Assistant
173.09   Chief Justice and Judges of Municipal Court
173.10   Clerk of Municipal Court
173.11   Reserved
173.12   Reserved
173.13   Landmarks Commission
173.14   Community Relations Board
173.15   Civil Service Commission
173.16   Board of Zoning Appeals
173.17   Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals
173.18   Cleveland Commission on Black Women and Girls
173.19   Board of Examiners of Plumbers – Repealed
173.20   Boxing and Wrestling Commission
173.21   Police Review Board
173.22   Reserved
173.23   Prosecuting Attorney and Staff from Cuyahoga County
173.24 to 173.27   Reserved
173.28   Department of Public Safety Medical Coordinator
173.29   Reserved
173.30   Junior Assistant Secretary of Fire
173.31   Superintendent of Motorized Fire Equipment
173.32   Office of Civil Defense
173.33 to 173.35   Reserved
173.36   Consultant-Water Pollution Control
173.37 to 173.54   Reserved
173.55   Assistant Coordinator of Recreation with Joint Recreation Council
173.56 to 173.62   Reserved
173.63   Additional Hourly Employees
173.64   Unskilled Laborers
173.65   City Planning Commission
173.66   Civil Service Examinations; Lunches
173.67   Fair Housing Board
   Note: Section 3 of Ordinance No. 2040-99, passed October 30, 2000, effective
November 7, 2000, reads as follows: “That, pursuant to Charter Section
191, the salaries of any current officer or member of a board or commission
shall not be increased during the term for which he or she was elected or
appointed and those current officers or members shall continue to be paid at
the rate established when they were elected or appointed.”
Charter reference:
   Mayor’s salary, Charter §
69
Cross-reference:
   Deductions from wages, CO
171.22 et seq.
   Longevity pay, CO
171.07
   Pay for shift differential, CO
171.06
   Soliciting or receiving improper compensation, CO
615.11
Statutory reference:
   Power to fix salaries, RC 731.04, 731.08
   Salaries not to be changed during term, O Const Art II § 20; RC 731.07
§ 173.01 Payment of Salaries and Wages
   (a)   All officers and employees of the City, except as may be otherwise
provided in the Charter or ordinances of the City, shall be entitled to receive
their respective wages every two (2) weeks, twenty-six (26) or twenty-seven
(27) times per year, and the Director of Finance and the City Treasurer shall
take all necessary steps toward this pay procedure.
   (b)   For the purpose of calculating the amount of pay to be received each
two (2) week period, annual salaries shall be divided by two thousand and
eighty (2,080) hours to establish the hourly rate. The regular two (2) week pay
period shall then consist of eighty (80) hours times the hourly rate.
   (c)   Payments made pursuant to the method of computation set forth in
division (b) of this section in years containing twenty-seven (27) pay periods
shall not be deemed to be in excess of authorized annual compensation.
(Ord. No. 1669-85. Passed 10-21-85, eff. 10-23-85)
§ 173.02 Soliciting, Receiving and/or Depositing Contributions from City
Employees
   (a)   Notwithstanding any other ordinances or resolutions of the City to the
contrary, no person, in the classified or unclassified service of the City,
whether elected or appointed, shall solicit, receive and/or deposit, in any
City or other account for the use of the City, either directly or indirectly,
any contribution of money from any person in the classified or unclassified
service of the City, except the directors of the several departments where such
contribution is for the use of the City, as a donation, gift or otherwise,
without having first obtained the approval of Council.
   (b)   Any contributions of money collected or on deposit in violation of
this section shall forthwith be returned to the persons entitled thereto.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than five
hundred dollars ($500.00).
(Ord. No. 2320-76. Passed 10-4-76, eff. 10-14-76)
§ 173.03 Fixing of Compensation
   (a)   Salaries and compensation of officers and employees of the City,
except those required to be fixed by Council, shall be fixed by the appointing
authority within the schedule of compensation established by Council pursuant
to Charter Section
191, in accordance with ability, fitness, seniority and efficiency.
   (b)   On and after January 1, 1977, no change in the schedule of
compensation so established shall be made except in the following manner:
      (1)   In case of classified positions an ordinance shall be introduced in
Council subsequent to November 15 of any given year and passed not later than
the effective date of the annual appropriation ordinance for the year following
such November date, which ordinance, when so passed, shall be in effect for not
less than one (1) year thereafter.
   (c)   No change in the rate of any person fixed in accordance with such
schedule of compensation shall be made more often than once in any twelve (12)
month period except as the result of the change of position of such person.
   (d)   Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to operate as a
prohibition against the subsequent passage of any legislation relating to the
schedules of compensation pending in Council at the effective date of this
section or introduced in Council prior to December 31, 1976.
(Ord. No. 1295-77. Passed 5-2-77, eff. 5-3-77)
§ 173.04 Civil Service Commission Resolutions
   Any resolution adopted by the Civil Service Commission requiring
implementation by Council under the provisions of Charter Section
191 or any other section of the Charter shall be filed with the Clerk of
Council. The provisions and conditions of the resolution shall be incorporated
by reference as though fully rewritten in any ordinance passed by Council to
implement the Civil Service Commission resolution.
(Ord. No. 229-69. Passed 1-27-69, eff. 1-28-69)
§ 173.05 Unclassified Service Positions
   The salary of any position in the unclassified service and not included
herein shall be fixed by ordinance or as may be provided by ordinance.
(Ord. No. 93-41. Passed 4-28-41)
§ 173.06 Mayor
   (a)   Commencing January 1, 1990, the salary of the Mayor shall be eighty
thousand dollars ($80,000.00) per year. Commencing June 1, 1990, the salary of
the Mayor shall be eighty-two thousand five hundred dollars ($82,500.00) per
year. The annual salary of the Mayor for the year 1991 shall be eighty- five
thousand dollars ($85,000.00). The annual salary of the Mayor for the year 1992
shall be eighty-seven thousand five hundred dollars ($87,500.00). The annual
salary of the Mayor for the year 1993 shall be ninety thousand dollars
($90,000.00).
   (b)   Commencing April 1, 1994, the salary of the Mayor shall be ninety-
three thousand six hundred dollars ($93,600.00) per year and shall be increased
in 1995 and in each year thereafter by an amount which shall be computed by
applying that percentage of the immediately preceding year’s salary that is
equal to the percentage for increases in salaries and wages established for
that year in a majority of the collective bargaining agreements between the
City and the various unions recognized by the City. Such increase shall be
effective on the same date as the effective date for salary or wage increases
in a majority of the collective bargaining agreements.
   (c)   The salary of the Mayor shall be paid in twelve (12) equal monthly
installments, as provided by Charter Section
69.
(Ord. No. 2534-93. Passed 12-13-93, eff. 12-13-93)
§ 173.07 Members of Council
   (a)   On and after January 2, 1982, and thereafter on January 2nd of each of
the years 1983 and 1984, the salary of each member of Council as heretofore
fixed by Ordinance No. 2927-76, passed December 20, 1976, shall be increased by
the amount of ten percent (10%) over the previous year’s salary and on January
2nd of the year 1985 said salary shall be increased by the amount of five
percent (5%) over the previous year’s salary, except that of Council President,
as member of Council shall receive twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00)
per annum.
   (b)   The annual salary of members of Council for the year 1986 shall be
twenty-six thousand six hundred sixty-four dollars ($26,664.00). The annual
salary of members of Council for the years 1987 through 2005 shall be twenty-
six thousand six hundred sixty-four dollars ($26,664.00) adjusted upward by an
amount equal to six percent (6%) of the immediate preceding year’s salary,
provided, however, that such upward adjustment shall not be made in any year in
which a majority of the collective bargaining agreements between the City and
the various unions recognized by the City do not provide for salary or wage
increases.
   (c)   Commencing January 1, 2006, the annual salary of members of Council
shall be increased each year by an amount which shall be computed by applying
that percentage of the immediately preceding year’s salary that is equal to the
percentage for increases in salaries and wages established for that year in a
majority of the collective bargaining agreements between the City and the
various unions recognized by the City. Such increase shall be effective on
January 1st of each year.
   (d)   The salaries of members of Council shall be paid in equal semimonthly
installments, as provided by Charter Section
27.
(Ord. No. 85-02. Passed 1-14-02, eff. 1-18-02)
§ 173.071 Reimbursement of Expense for Members of Council
   The members of Council shall be entitled to be reimbursed the cost of
expenses incurred by them in the performance of their official duties in an
amount not to exceed one thousand and two hundred dollars ($1,200.00) per
month. Requests for reimbursement shall be submitted monthly in writing to the
Clerk of Council. Expenses submitted for reimbursement must be substantiated by
written documentation in accordance with guidelines for the reporting of
expenses by members of Council promulgated by the President of Council and
approved by the rules Committee of the Council based upon the applicable
reporting requirements of the federal income tax code for employee expense
reimbursement programs. Notwithstanding the requirements of Section
171.43, members of Council may be reimbursed for the use of their vehicles in
the performance of their official duties at the rate for mileage allowance
promulgated by the Internal Revenue Service. Notwithstanding any ordinance to
the contrary, any Council Member may increase his or her Executive Assistant’s
hourly rate of pay in excess of the standard rate in effect for Council Member
Executive Assistants consistent with the aforementioned Council expense
reimbursement policy.
(Ord. No. 621-06. Passed 4-3-06, eff. 4-7-06)
§ 173.08 President of Council
   On and after January 2, 1982, the President of Council, in addition to the
salary he or she receives as a member of Council, shall receive compensation of
ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per annum, payable as his or her salary.
(Ord. No. 3061-80. Passed 12-31-80, eff. 12-31-80)
§ 173.081 President of Council’s Ward Executive Assistant
   Notwithstanding any ordinance to the contrary, the President of Council’s
Ward Executive Assistant shall receive compensation of five thousand dollars
($5,000.00) per year in addition to the compensation established by ordinance
for Councilmember Ward Executive Assistants and in addition to any funds the
Council President’s Ward Executive Assistant may receive at the option of the
Council Member pursuant to the Business Expense Reimbursement Policies and
Procedures.
(Ord. No. 575-06. Passed 3-27-06, eff. 3-31-06)
§ 173.09 Chief Justice and Judges of Municipal Court
   The Chief Justice and each judge of the Cleveland Municipal Court shall
receive compensation as may be established by RC 1901.11, provided that three-
fifths (3/5) of such compensation shall be payable from the City Treasury in
semimonthly installments.
(Ord. No. 2197-73. Passed 12-3-73, eff. 12-10-73)
§ 173.10 Clerk of Municipal Court
   In addition to the compensation payable out of the Treasury of Cuyahoga
County, pursuant to RC 1901.31(C) and 1901.11, the Clerk of the Municipal Court
shall receive further compensation in the amount of not less than four thousand
dollars ($4,000.00) per annum, and not more than six thousand dollars
($6,000.00) per annum, as determined by the Director of Finance in accordance
with the aforementioned sections of the Ohio Revised Code. The further
compensation shall be payable in semimonthly installments out of the City
Treasury.
(Ord. No. 2244-51. Passed 1-14-52, eff. 1-15-52)
§ 173.11 Reserved
§ 173.12 Reserved
§ 173.13 Landmarks Commission
   (a)   The salaries of the members of the Landmarks Commission shall be seven
thousand two hundred dollars ($7,200.00) per annum, except that the member
designated by the Mayor as Chairman shall receive additional compensation of
five hundred and seventy-five dollars ($575.00) per annum.
   (b)   Beginning in year 2022, the salaries of the members of the Landmarks
Commission for new terms shall be eight thousand nine hundred sixty-three
dollars ($8,963.00) per annum, except that the member designated by the Mayor
as Chairperson shall receive additional compensation of five hundred and
seventy-five dollars ($575.00) per annum.
(Ord. No. 770-2021. Passed 9-20-21, eff. 9-21-21)
§ 173.14 Community Relations Board
   (a)   The salaries of the members of the Community Relations Board shall be
seven thousand two hundred dollars ($7,200.00) per annum, except that the
member designated by the Mayor as Chairman shall receive additional
compensation of five hundred and seventy-five dollars ($575.00) per annum.
   (b)   Beginning in year 2022, the salaries of the members of the Community
Relations Board for new terms shall be eight thousand nine hundred sixty-three
dollars ($8,963.00) per annum, except that the member designated by the Mayor
as Chairperson shall receive additional compensation of five hundred and
seventy-five dollars ($575.00) per annum.
(Ord. No. 770-2021. Passed 9-20-21, eff. 9-21-21)
§ 173.15 Civil Service Commission
   (a)   The salaries of the members of the Civil Service Commission shall be
seven thousand eight hundred twenty dollars ($7,820.00) per annum, except that
the member designated by the Commission as President shall receive additional
compensation of five hundred seventy-five dollars ($575.00) per annum. The
member designated by the Mayor as the Secretary of the Commission shall receive
additional compensation in an amount to be determined by the Mayor within the
schedule of compensation established by the Council for that position.
   (b)   Beginning in year 2022, the salaries of the members of the Civil
Service Commission for new terms shall be eight thousand nine hundred sixty-
three dollars ($8,963.00) per annum, except that the member designated by the
Commission as President shall receive additional compensation of five hundred
and seventy-five dollars ($575.00) per annum. The member designated by the
Mayor as the Secretary of the Commission shall receive additional compensation
in an amount to be determined by the Mayor within the schedule of compensation
established by the Council for that position.
(Ord. No. 770-2021. Passed 9-20-21, eff. 9-21-21)
§ 173.16 Board of Zoning Appeals
   (a)   The salaries of the members of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be
seven thousand eight hundred twenty dollars ($7,820.00) per annum, except that
the member appointed by the Mayor as Chairman shall receive additional
compensation of five hundred seventy-five dollars ($575.00) per annum.
   (b)   Beginning in year 2022, the salaries of the members of the Board of
Zoning Appeals for new terms shall be eight thousand nine hundred sixty-three
dollars ($8,963.00) per annum, except that the member appointed by the Mayor as
Chairperson shall receive additional compensation of five hundred and seventy-
five dollars ($575.00) per annum.
(Ord. No. 770-2021. Passed 9-20-21, eff. 9-21-21)
§ 173.17 Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals
   (a)   Each member of the Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals
shall be compensated one hundred forty-five dollars ($145.00) per diem for each
official Board meeting attended. The Chairman shall be compensated one hundred
seventy-five dollars ($175.00) per diem for each official Board meeting
attended. The alternate members shall be compensated forty-one dollars ($41.00)
per diem for each official Board meeting attended as an alternate, except that
an alternate who is not a City resident at the time of attending a meeting
shall not be entitled to any compensation.
   (b)   In no instance shall the aggregate amount paid under division (a)
above to any member exceed seven thousand eight hundred twenty dollars
($7,820.00) per year, that of the Chairman nine thousand five hundred forty-
five dollars ($9,545.00) per year and that of any alternate member exceed two
thousand four hundred fifteen dollars ($2,415.00) per year exclusive of the
compensation received when serving in the place of a Board member.
   (c)   Beginning in year 2022, each member of the Board of Building Standards
and Building Appeals for a new term shall be compensated three hundred seventy-
four dollars ($374.00) per diem for each official Board meeting attended. The
Chairperson shall be compensated three hundred ninety-eight dollars ($398.00)
per diem for each official Board meeting attended. The alternate members shall
be compensated one hundred eighty-seven dollars ($187.00) per diem for each
official Board meeting attended as an alternate, except that an alternate who
is not a City resident at the time of attending a meeting shall not be entitled
to any compensation.
(Ord. No. 770-2021. Passed 9-20-21, eff. 9-21-21)
§ 173.18 Cleveland Commission on Black Women and Girls
   Except for the Mayor, his or her designee, the member of Council and the
city employee, all of whom shall remain uncompensated, the salaries of the
members of the Cleveland Commission on Black Women and Girls shall be eight
thousand nine hundred sixty-three dollars ($8,963.00) per annum.
(Ord. No. 466-2023. Passed 5-1-23, eff. 5-2-23)
§ 173.19 Board of Examiners of Plumbers – Repealed
(Ord. 377-03. Passed 5-19-03, eff. 5-27-03)
§ 173.20 Boxing and Wrestling Commission
   (a)   The salaries of the members of the Boxing and Wrestling Commission
shall be seven thousand two hundred dollars ($7,200.00) per annum, except that
the member designated by the Mayor as Chairman shall receive additional
compensation of five hundred and seventy-five dollars ($575.00) per annum.
   (b)   Beginning in year 2022, the salaries of the members of the Boxing and
Wrestling Commission for new terms shall be eight thousand nine hundred sixty-
three dollars ($8,963.00) per annum, except that the member designated by the
Mayor as Chairperson shall receive additional compensation of five hundred and
seventy-five dollars ($575.00) per annum.
(Ord. No. 770-2021. Passed 9-20-21, eff. 9-21-21)
§ 173.21 Police Review Board
   (a)   The salaries of the members of the Police Review Board shall be seven
thousand two hundred dollars ($7,200.00) per annum, except that the member
designated by the Mayor as Chairman shall receive additional compensation of
five hundred and seventy-five dollars ($575.00) per annum.
   (b)   Beginning in year 2022, the salaries of the members of the Police
Review Board for new terms shall be eight thousand nine hundred sixty-three
dollars ($8,963.00) per annum, except that the member designated by the Mayor
as Chairperson shall receive additional compensation of five hundred and
seventy-five dollars ($575.00) per annum.
(Ord. No. 770-2021. Passed 9-20-21, eff. 9-21-21)
§ 173.22 Reserved
§ 173.23 Prosecuting Attorney and Staff from Cuyahoga County
   Pursuant to RC 1901.34, the Director of Law as the Prosecuting Attorney of
the Municipal Court, and the Chief Assistant Prosecutor, the First Assistant
and each Assistant Prosecutor of the Court may accept compensation from the
Treasury of Cuyahoga County in an amount fixed by the Board of County
Commissioners.
(Ord. No. 595-2000. Passed 10-23-00, eff. 11-1-00 without the signature of the
Mayor)
§§ 173.24 to 173.27 Reserved
§ 173.28 Department of Public Safety Medical Coordinator
   (a)   The Director of Public Safety shall assign not more than one (1)
member from the Division of Police to the position of Department of Public
Safety Medical Coordinator at an annual compensation to be fixed by the
Director within the schedule of compensation herein established:
 
                                                Minimum    Maximum
Department of Public Safety Medical Coordinator $21,572.40 $22,072.40
 
   (b)   The status within the uniform ranks of such member while so serving in
such assignment, shall remain unchanged, and notwithstanding the compensation
fixed for such position, he or she shall not acquire any right to promotion
other than such rights to promotion which apply to the rank held at the time of
assignment.
(Ord. No. 1130-80. Passed 6-16-80, eff. 6-18-80)
§ 173.29 Reserved
§ 173.30 Junior Assistant Secretary of Fire
   In addition to the ranks established by Section
173.29, the Division of Fire shall include outside the ranks, the position of
Junior Assistant Secretary of Fire at an annual compensation to be fixed by the
Director of Public Safety within the schedule of compensation hereby
established:
 
                                   Minimum    Maximum
Junior Assistant Secretary of Fire $15,069.86 $15,569.84
 
(Ord. No. 1225-76. Passed 6-21-76, eff. 6-26-76)
§ 173.31 Superintendent of Motorized Fire Equipment
   There shall be in the Division of Fire a position to be known as
Superintendent of Motorized Fire Equipment at an annual compensation to be
fixed by the Director of Public Safety within the schedule of compensation
hereby established:
 
                                           Minimum    Maximum
Superintendent of Motorized Fire Equipment $25,072.48 $25,572.48
 
   The position shall have the incidences prescribed by RC 124.53.
(Ord. No. 267-78. Passed 2-6-78, eff. 2-7-78)
§ 173.32 Office of Civil Defense
   The compensation of the Director of Civil Defense shall be fixed by the
Mayor within the schedule hereby established and the compensation of the other
officers and employees of the Office shall be fixed by the Director within the
schedule:
 
                                 Minimum    Maximum
Director of Civil Defense        $11,382.00 $14,556.00
Deputy Director of Civil Defense $7,692.00  $10,752.00
Principal Civil Defense Aide     $6,636.00  $9,240.00
Senior Civil Defense Aide        $5,262.00  $7,422.00
Junior Civil Defense Aide        $4,194.00  $5,910.00
 
(Ord. No. 1930-63. Passed 1-13-64, eff. 1-13-64)
§§ 173.33 to 173.35 Reserved
§ 173.36 Consultant-Water Pollution Control
   There is hereby established in the Department of Public Utilities the
position of Consultant-Water Pollution Control whose compensation shall be
fixed by the appointing authority at not more than thirty-four thousand dollars
($34,000.00) per annum. The Director of Public Utilities is authorized to
employ one (1) person for this position. The person shall serve under the
direct jurisdiction of the Director as the chief of the Clean Water Task Force.
(Ord. No. 50-A-69. Passed 1-27-69, eff. 1-28-69)
§§ 173.37 to 173.54 Reserved
§ 173.55 Assistant Coordinator of Recreation with Joint Recreation Council
   Notwithstanding and in addition to the provisions of Section
173.56, the Commissioner of Recreation shall be reimbursed one thousand eight
hundred dollars ($1,800.00) per annum for his or her duties as Assistant
Coordinator of Recreation with the Recreation Council of the City and the
Cleveland Board of Education.
(Ord. No. 286-67. Passed 2-6-67, eff. 2-8-67)
§§ 173.56 to 173.62 Reserved
§ 173.63 Additional Hourly Employees
   In all cases where it is necessary or desirable to employ a person by the
hour in a classification not included in Sections 173.60 and 173.62 but for
which classification an annual salary is provided in Sections
173.37 to 173.59, and as the same from time to time subsequently have been
amended, the minimum and maximum hourly rate shall be determined by dividing
both the minimum and maximum salary by the number of hours regularly
constituting a work year for the concerned division or department determined as
provided in Section
171.05.
(Ord. No. 1866-56. Passed 7-16-56, eff. 7-19-56)
§ 173.64 Unskilled Laborers
   Ordinary unskilled laborers in the employ of the City shall be paid such
rates of compensation, not exceeding the maximum rates prevailing in private
employment in the City for like services, as may be established by rule of the
Mayor. The rules of the Mayor establishing rates of compensation under this
section may be revoked, altered, and amended at any time. Such rules may
classify the unskilled labor positions in the City employment according to
their character and may fix for each class or grade thereof an appropriate
rate, by hour, day, week or month, as the nature of the case may require.
§ 173.65 City Planning Commission
   (a)   Each member of the City Planning Commission, except the member of
Council serving thereon, shall receive compensation of seven thousand eight
hundred twenty dollars ($7,820.00) per annum, payable monthly.
   (b)   Beginning in year 2022, each member of the City Planning Commission
for a new term, except the member of Council servicing thereon, shall receive
compensation of eight thousand nine hundred sixty-three dollars ($8,963.00) per
annum, payable monthly. The salary of the member designated by the Mayor as
Chairperson shall receive additional compensation of five hundred and seventy-
five dollars ($575.00) per annum.
(Ord. No. 770-2021. Passed 9-20-21, eff. 9-21-21)
§ 173.66 Civil Service Examinations; Lunches
   The Civil Service Commission may expend such funds as are reasonably
necessary to provide food or beverages to persons who serve as panel members,
raters or monitors during the City’s Civil Service examinations.
(Ord. No. 2389-92. Passed 2-8-93, eff. 2-16-93)
§ 173.67 Fair Housing Board
   (a)   The salaries of the members of the Fair Housing Board shall be seven
thousand two hundred dollars ($7,200.00) per annum, except that the member
designated as Chairman shall receive additional compensation of five hundred
and seventy-five dollars ($575.00) per annum.
   (b)   Beginning in year 2022, the salaries of the members of the Fair
Housing Board for new terms shall be eight thousand nine hundred sixty-three
dollars ($8,963.00) per annum, except that the member designated as Chairperson
shall receive additional compensation of five hundred and seventy-five dollars
($575.00) per annum.
(Ord. No. 770-2021. Passed 9-20-21, eff. 9-21-21)
TITLE XIII: FISCAL MANAGEMENT
   Chapter
177   Bonds and Notes
   Chapter
178   Deposit and Investment of City Funds
   Chapter
179   Sinking Fund
CHAPTER 177 – BONDS AND NOTES
177.01   Compliance with Chapter
177.02   Authentication
177.03   Payment of Principal and Interest
177.04   Procedure for Sale
177.05   Public Sale
177.06   Time and Place of Opening of Bids
177.07   Private Sale of Certain Notes
177.08   Proceeds of Sale of Bonds and Notes
177.09   Interest Earned on Money in Special Bond Fund Accounts
177.10   Expenses, Services and Legal Opinion
177.11   Applicability of Terminology
177.12   Recording of Bonds and Notes
177.13   Copy of Ordinance Authorizing Sale
177.14   Issuance of Registered Bonds
177.15   Payment or Transfer of Registered Bonds
177.16   Exchange of Bonds; Fee
177.17   Reissuance of Lost or Destroyed Evidence of Indebtedness
Cross-reference:
   Bonds, policies of insurance and instruments of indemnity to be filed with
Commissioner of Accounts, CO
171.18
   Corporate seal to be affixed to bonds and notes, CO
105.01
   Duties of Sinking Fund Commission, CO
Ch. 179
   Legal and accounting services for bond issues, CO
127.09
§ 177.01 Compliance with Chapter
   The issuance and sale of all bonds or notes of the City except those issued
under Sections
3, 10, and 12 of Article XVIII of the Ohio Constitution and other bonds or
notes payable solely from earnings or revenues of a project or activity and for
the payment of which the full faith and credit of the City are not pledged,
shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter except as otherwise
provided in the particular ordinance for the issuance and sale thereof, or
required by statute enacted pursuant to the authority of the Constitution of
the State.
(Ord. No. 1748-80. Passed 10-8-80, eff. 10-8-80)
§ 177.02 Authentication
   Bonds and notes shall be signed by the Mayor and by the Director of Finance,
or in case of the vacancy in the office or disability or absence of either of
them, by the person who may be acting in the capacity of the official named
during such vacancy, disability or absence, and shall be sealed with the
corporate seal of the City. One (1) of such signatures may be a facsimile
signature and the seal of the City may be a facsimile seal.
(Ord. No. 770-68. Passed 4-8-68, eff. 4-10-68)
§ 177.03 Payment of Principal and Interest
   The principal and interest of bonds, except as otherwise provided in the
particular ordinance for the issuance and sale thereof shall be payable at the
Morgan Guaranty Trust Company of New York, at the Chase Manhattan Bank, N.A. of
New York, or at AmeriTrust Company, Cleveland, Ohio, at the option of the
holder. Interest coupons having engraved or printed thereon a facsimile
signature of the fiscal officer of the City shall be attached to all such
bonds. Except as otherwise provided in the particular ordinance for the
issuance and sale thereof, the interest on bonds issued after January 1, 1956,
including bonds authorized and sold but not delivered, shall be payable semi-
annually on June 1 and December 1 of each year until the principal sum is paid
commencing in the fiscal year in which the first of such bonds mature, and the
interest on notes shall be payable at maturity at the office of the Treasurer.
(Ord. No. 1748-80. Passed 10-8-80, eff. 10-8-80)
§ 177.04 Procedure for Sale
   All bonds and notes shall be prepared by the Director of Law and shall
express upon their face the purpose for which they are issued, the fact that
they are issued pursuant to law, the Charter, this chapter, the ordinance under
which issued and such other recitals as may be required by laws of Ohio. They
shall bear such consecutive numbers as the Director of Finance shall determine.
All such bonds and notes shall first be offered at par and accrued interest to
the Trustees of the Sinking Fund. If the Trustees refuse to take any or all of
them, the Director of Finance shall offer them to the Mayor and the Director of
Law for purchase for the credit of the Treasury Investment Account.
(Ord. No. 2641-A-55. Passed 2-27-56, eff. 3-1-56)
§ 177.05 Public Sale
   Bonds and notes having a maturity of more than one (1) year from date not
sold at private sale pursuant to Section
177.04 or pursuant to the general laws of Ohio shall be advertised for sale and
sold by the Director of Finance at public sale, as provided by law. The sale
may be advertised in financial journals. Anyone desiring to do so may present a
bid for such bonds based upon their bearing a different rate of interest from
that fixed in the particular ordinance. However, where a fractional rate is
bid, such fraction shall be one-eighth of one percent (0.125%) or multiples
thereof. In case the Director accepts a bid based upon a rate of interest other
than that fixed in the ordinance to issue bonds, such acceptance shall be
subject to approval by resolution of Council, which resolution shall be
certified to the County Auditor.
(Ord. No. 1748-80. Passed 10-8-80, eff. 10-8-80)
§ 177.06 Time and Place of Opening of Bids
   The office of the Director of Finance in the City Hall shall be the place of
sale of all bonds; delivery shall be made at the office or at such bank as may
be agreed upon by the Director and the purchaser. All proposals for bonds shall
be sealed, received up to 12:00 noon, City time, of the day the sale is to take
place and shall be opened immediately thereafter in the office. Every bidder
shall file with his or her bid cash, a bank cashier’s check or official’s
check, or a certified check, or any combination thereof, in an amount not less
than one percent (1%) of the bonds bid for and payable to the order of the
Treasurer of the City of Cleveland. Such bank cashier’s or official’s check
shall not be issued by and such certified check shall not be one certified by
the bidder. Such cash, bank cashier’s or official’s check, or certified check
of the successful bidder shall be retained unused pending delivery of the bonds
to such bidder and, in the event such bidder does not comply with the terms of
the notice of sale and his or her bid, shall be forfeited to the City as full
liquidated damages. Bids may be made separately for each issue or for “all or
none.” However, split rate bids will not be considered on any single issue but
different interest rates may be bid for different issues. The right of the City
to reject any or all bids shall be specifically reserved and shall be exercised
by the Director.
(Ord. No. 1748-80. Passed 10-8-80, eff. 10-8-80)
§ 177.07 Private Sale of Certain Notes
   Except as otherwise permitted by the laws of Ohio, notes having a maturity
of not more than one (1) year from date may be advertised for sale and sold in
the manner provided in Section
177.05 or may be sold by the Director of Finance at private sale bearing
interest at a rate or rates not in excess of the rate or rates fixed in the
particular ordinance, at a price of not less than par and accrued interest to
the date of delivery.
(Ord. No. 1748-80. Passed 10-8-80, eff. 10-8-80)
§ 177.08 Proceeds of Sale of Bonds and Notes
   Upon the sale of such bonds and notes, the premium and the accrued interest
and the amount for interest, if any, shall be paid into the Sinking Fund. The
par value realized from the sale except the amount, if any, for interest shall
be placed in the City Treasurer or, pursuant to the ordinance authorizing such
bonds or notes, deposited with a trustee, fiscal agent or escrow agent, to the
credit of the bond fund for the purpose for which issued, specified in the
ordinance authorizing such bonds or notes. The amount shall be deemed
appropriated for the purpose for which bonds or notes have been issued and
sold, and shall be disbursed from the Fund upon proper vouchers in payment of
the purpose.
(Ord. No. 1748-80. Passed 10-8-80, eff. 10-8-80)
§ 177.09 Interest Earned on Money in Special Bond Fund Accounts
   The interest earned by reason of the investment of money to the credit of a
special bond fund for the purpose for which such bonds have been issued shall
be paid into the Sinking Fund or the Bond Retirement Fund of the City.
(Ord. No. 104-59. Passed 1-26-59, eff. 1-29-59)
§ 177.10 Expenses, Services and Legal Opinion
   (a)   The cost of advertising the sale of the cost of printing and signing
of bonds and notes of the City and of an official statement and related
documents, and the cost of the approving opinion herein provided for and the
cost of such professional reports as the Director of Finance may deem necessary
for the sale of the bonds or notes shall be paid from the proceeds of such
bonds or notes, unless the payment of such costs is otherwise provided for.
   (b)   The Director of Finance shall have authority to procure the printing
of bonds and notes of the City and of an official statement and related
documents. Without competitive bidding, when in the judgment of the Board of
Control, it is in the best interests of the City that such requirement be
waived.
   (c)   The Director of Finance shall have authority to procure the services
of financial advisors and the preparation of professional reports, including
but not limited to accounting, engineering, and other professional reports, as
he or she may deem necessary or desirable for the sale of the bonds or other
obligations.
   (d)   When bonds or other obligations of the City are to be sold, the
Director of Law shall have the authority hereunder to procure an opinion as to
the validity of such bonds or other obligations from an attorney accustomed to
passing upon such questions, for the use and benefit of the City and of any
bidder on or purchaser of such bonds or notes.
   (e)   The provisions of this section apply to all bonds and notes of the
City, including those issued under Sections
3, 10, and 11 of Article XVIII of the Ohio Constitution and other bonds or
notes payable solely from earnings or revenues of a project or activity and for
the payment of which the full faith and credit of the City are not pledged.
(Ord. No. 2886-87. Passed 12-21-87, eff. 12-29-87)
§ 177.11 Applicability of Terminology
   The designation of specific officials wherever set forth in this chapter or
in the particular ordinance issuing bonds shall include the person who may be
acting in the capacity of any designated official during the vacancy in such
office or the disability or absence of such designated official.
(Ord. No. 2641-A-55. Passed 2-27-56, eff. 3-1-56)
§ 177.12 Recording of Bonds and Notes
   All bonds and notes issued by the City shall be recorded in the Office of
the Sinking Fund Commission. The record shall show the date of issue, for what
purpose issued, rate of interest, amount of issue, when the principal and
interest are due and where payable.
(Ord. No. 1748-80. Passed 10-8-80, eff. 10-8-80)
§ 177.13 Copy of Ordinance Authorizing Sale
   Forthwith upon passage of an ordinance authorizing the issue of bonds or
notes, the Director of Finance shall deliver a certified copy thereof to the
County Auditor.
(Ord. No. 2641-A-55. Passed 2-27-56, eff. 3-1-56)
§ 177.14 Issuance of Registered Bonds
   On demand of the owner or holder of any of its coupon bonds, the Sinking
Fund Commission may issue instead thereof a registered bond of the City not
exceeding in amount the coupon bonds offered in exchange. The registered bond
shall be signed and sealed as other Municipal bonds are signed and sealed, and
bear the same rate of interest, be payable both principal and interest at the
same time and place as the coupon bonds for which the exchange is made and
shall be of such denomination as the holder of the coupon bonds may elect.
(Ord. No. 2641-A-55. Passed 2-27-56, eff. 3-1-56)
§ 177.15 Payment or Transfer of Registered Bonds
   When due, the interest and principal of such registered bonds shall be paid
only to the person, corporation, or firm appearing by the records of the City
to the owner thereof, or order. Such registered bonds may be transferred on
such record by the owner in person or by a person authorized to do so by power
of attorney duly executed. The exchange and registration here required shall be
transacted by the Sinking Fund Commission at their business office where a
registry shall be kept for that purpose which shall show the date, series,
denomination and owner of such registered bonds, and the number and series of
the coupon bonds for which they were exchanged.
(Ord. No. 2641-A-55. Passed 2-27-56, eff. 3-1-56)
§ 177.16 Exchange of Bonds; Fee
   No registered bonds shall be issued by the Sinking Fund Commission until the
bonds and coupons offered in exchange shall have been cancelled or destroyed.
The Commission shall make its own rules for the cancellation or destruction of
coupon or registered bonds offered in exchange and shall charge the holder of
the coupon or registered bond a fee of not less than one dollar ($1.00) as
compensation for the expense of making the exchange of each registered bond.
(Ord. No. 2641-A-55. Passed 2-27-56, eff. 3-1-56)
§ 177.17 Reissuance of Lost or Destroyed Evidence of Indebtedness
   Whenever bonds, notes, checks, or certificates of indebtedness, issued by
the City, are lost or destroyed, the Director of Finance as Secretary of the
Sinking Fund Commission, acting on behalf of the City, may reissue to the
holder duplicates thereof in the same form and signed as the original
obligations were signed, which obligation so issued shall plainly show upon its
face that it is a duplicate of such lost bond, note, check, or certificate,
upon proof of such loss or destruction, upon payment of the reasonable expense
thereof, and upon being furnished with a bond of indemnity, satisfactory to the
Director of Finance as Secretary of the Sinking Fund Commission, against all
loss or liability for or on account of the obligations so lost or destroyed.
(Ord. No. 2377-85. Passed 10-21-85, eff. 10-23-85)
CHAPTER 178 – DEPOSIT AND INVESTMENT OF CITY FUNDS
178.01   Definitions
178.02   Disposition of Public Monies
178.03   Designation of Eligible Depositories
178.04   Definitions
178.05   Annual Lending Disclosure and Affidavit of Intent
178.06   Annual Submission and Review of Disclosure; Creation of Reinvestment
Review Committee; Annual Report
178.07   Affidavit
178.08   Agreements with Eligible Depositories; Related Services
178.09   Notice of Branch Closings
178.10   Security for Repayment of Deposits
178.11   Securities Dealers and Brokers
178.12   Investments
178.13   Custody of Securities
178.14   Cash Management and Investment Policy
178.15   Limitation on the Investment of Moneys
178.16   Deposit of Bond Funds
178.17   Exemption from Conflict-of-Interest Laws; Defaulting Depositories
178.18   Applicability of Uniform Depository Act; Applicability to Bond Issues
178.181   Deposits and Investments in Institutions Practicing Predatory Lending
Prohibited
178.19   Miscellaneous Provisions
178.20   Reserved
§ 178.01 Definitions
   As used in this chapter, unless another definition is provided or the
content otherwise requires, the following definitions shall apply:
   (a)   “Active deposit” means a public deposit necessary to meet current
demands on the City Treasury, and that is deposited in any of the following:
      (1)   A commercial account that is payable or withdrawable in whole or
part on demand;
      (2)   A negotiable order of withdrawal account as authorized in the
“Consumer Checking Account Equity Act of 1980,” 94 Stat. 146, 12 U.S.C. 1832
(a);
      (3)   A money market deposit account as authorized in the “Garn-St.
Germain Depository Institutions Act of 1982,” 96 Stat. 1501, 12 U.S.C. 3503.
   (b)   “Business day” means any day other than Saturday, Sunday, or any day
on which Cleveland City Hall is closed.
   (c)   “City Treasurer” means the custodian of all public money of the City
appointed pursuant to Section
99 of the Charter.
   (d)   “Depository” or “depositories” means any national bank, subject to
inspection by either the U.S. Comptroller of the Currency or the Superintendent
of Banks for the State of Ohio, any bank as defined by RC 1101.01, subject to
inspection by the Superintendent of Banks for the State of Ohio, any federal
savings and loan association, and any savings bank chartered pursuant to RC
Chapter 1161.
   (e)   “Eligible depository” or “eligible depositories” means any depository
designated by the Director of Finance pursuant to this chapter to receive or
hold the active deposits of the City.
   (f)   “Public deposit” means public monies deposited in a depository.
   (g)   “Public monies” means all monies in the treasury of the City or monies
coming lawfully into the possession or custody of the City Treasurer.
   (h)   “Trustee” means any national bank, subject to inspection by either the
U.S. Comptroller of the Currency or the Superintendent of Banks for the State
of Ohio, and any bank as defined by RC 1101.01, subject to inspection by the
Superintendent of Banks for the State of Ohio, which is designated as a trustee
for purposes of this chapter.
   (i)   “Uniform Depository Act” means RC Chapter 135 and any amendment or
supplement thereto. Wherever any provision of the Uniform Depository Act is
made applicable under this chapter, such provision is applicable only to the
extent that it is not in conflict with or inconsistent with the Charter, any
other provision in this chapter or any other ordinance or resolution passed by
the City Council.
(Ord. No. 919-01. Passed 6-11-01, eff. 6-20-01)
§ 178.02 Disposition of Public Monies
   (a)   All public monies coming under the custody and control of the City
Treasurer shall be deposited or invested by the City Treasurer as provided in
this chapter. The City Treasurer may retain, however, in the Treasury or in
such other offices of the City as may be necessary, such amounts of public
money as may be needed in the opinion of the Director of Finance to transact
the daily business of the Treasury or such offices.
   (b)   The City Treasurer shall deposit in active deposits such amounts of
public monies as are needed in the opinion of the Director of Finance to
provide the needed cash flow to pay City warrants and checks issued and
outstanding, and a reasonable surplus in addition to the amount needed to pay
such warrants and checks. All public monies of the City not deposited in active
deposits or retained pursuant to division (a) of this section shall be invested
in accordance with Section
178.12 of this chapter.
   (c)   Each division of the City receiving public monies shall deposit all
public monies coming into its custody or control with an eligible depository on
the business day next following the day of receipt if the total amount of such
monies received exceeds one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). If the total amount
of the monies received does not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), the
monies shall be deposited on or before the third business day following the day
of receipt. Any division of the City depositing public monies shall report such
deposit in writing to the City Treasurer within twenty-four (24) hours of
making the deposit.
   (d)   Before noon of each business day, the City Treasurer shall prepare a
sworn statement delineating the total amount deposited in each eligible
depository of the City during the preceding day, the number and amount of
payment instruments issued on each eligible depository during the preceding
business day and such other information as required by the Director of Finance.
Copies of the statement shall be furnished to the Commissioner of Accounts and
the City Controller. All money paid to the Treasurer shall be paid upon the
order or draft of the Commissioner of Accounts and receipts therefor shall be
given in duplicate, one (1) of which shall have printed on its face the word
“original” and the other, the word “duplicate.” The duplicates of receipts for
money shall be filed with the Commissioner of Accounts and each receipt shall
state the amount received, from whom received and to what fund the same is to
be applied.
   (e)   The City Controller shall maintain the records of the amount of
deposits made by the City Treasurer with each eligible depository and
instruments issued by the City Treasurer on each eligible depository. The City
Controller shall duly certify to the correctness of the City Treasurer’s daily
sworn statements, prepared in accordance with division (c) of this section, if
they are found to be correct upon comparison with their respective books. Such
sworn statements shall be kept on file in the office of the City Controller. If
any such sworn statement is found to be incorrect, the City Controller shall
forthwith give notice of such fact to the City Treasurer and the Director of
Finance. After the end of each month, the City Controller shall reconcile the
statements of the respective eligible depositories to the City Treasurer’s
daily statements and the City’s accounting records. If the accounting records
are found to be incorrect, the City Controller shall forthwith give notice of
such fact to the Commissioner of Accounts and the City Treasurer.
   (f)   The Commissioner of Accounts shall maintain books which will show the
cash balance of each fund, and shall issue no warrant payable from any such
fund unless there is money belonging thereto for the payment of the warrant in
full.
(Ord. No. 1660-04. Passed 10-11-04, eff. 10-13-04)
§ 178.03 Designation of Eligible Depositories
   (a)   The City Treasurer shall provide notification, electronically or
written by first-class mail, to all depositories having an office which
receives deposits within the City, and such other depositories as determined by
the Director of Finance, at least sixty (60) days prior to the date of
designation of eligible depositories by the Director of Finance pursuant to
division (b) of this section. Such notice shall:
      (1)   Request the depository to apply in writing for all or a portion of
the City’s public deposits on or before a date specified in the notice;
      (2)   Identify the term of the proposed agreement with the depository,
which period shall be two (2) years unless extended under the terms of the
agreement;
      (3)   Require each depository to submit in its application for
designation as an eligible depository the following:
         A.   The amount of the City’s active deposits that the depository will
accept for deposit;
         B.   The rate or rates of interest, if any, that will be paid on the
City’s active deposits;
         C.   The location of the depository’s offices in the City or, if no
offices are located in the City, the location of its nearest offices;
         D.   A complete listing of all services provided by the depository and
the amount of any service charges to be paid by the City for such services;
         E.   Audited financial statements of the depository;
         F.   The information, statement and affidavit required by Sections
178.04 to
178.07; and
         G.   Such other data or information deemed relevant by the Director of
Finance.
   The application submitted by the depository shall be used by the Director of
Finance to designate the City’s eligible depositories in accordance with
division (b) of this section and shall be made available to the Council for
review.
   (b)   The Director of Finance shall designate one (1) or more depositories
as the eligible depository or eligible depositories of the City's active
deposits. The designation of such eligible depository or eligible depositories
shall be for a period of two (2) years unless extended under the terms of the
agreement, provided that, if more than one (1) depository is designated an
eligible depository, the period of such designations shall be the same for all
of the eligible depositories. The Director of Finance shall consider the
following in making such designation:
      (1)   The rate or rates of interest paid on active deposits;
      (2)   The convenience of the location of the depository’s offices;
      (3)   The service charges, if any, that will have to be paid for the
services of the depository;
      (4)   The financial stability of the depository;
      (5)   Compliance with the requirements of Sections
178.04 through
178.07;
      (6)   Such additional information as may be required by the cash
management and investment policy promulgated pursuant to Section
178.14; and
      (7)   Any terms or conditions of the depository before accepting the
City’s active deposits.
   (c)   The Director of Finance shall submit the names of all eligible
depositories to the City Council at the time of their designation by the
Director. The City Council shall have thirty (30) days from the date of
submission of the names by the Director of Finance to disapprove the
designation of any depository as an eligible depository. Upon expiration of the
thirty (30) day period, the Director of Finance may enter into a contract
pursuant to Section
178.08 with any eligible depository not disapproved by the City Council within
the thirty (30) day period.
   (d)   As an exception to the process set forth in divisions (a), (b) and (c)
of this section, the Director of Finance is authorized to designate as an
eligible depository any depository which did not receive the notification
required by division (a) of this section and which has opened an office which
receives deposits in the City during the term of a contract entered into
pursuant to Section
178.08 with the City's other eligible depositories. Any depository seeking such
designation shall submit an application in writing to the Director of Finance
containing the information specified in division (a)(3) of this section and the
Director of Finance shall consider the factors delineated in division (b) of
this section in making such designation. The period of such designation and the
term of the contract entered into with the eligible depository pursuant to
Section
178.08 shall expire on the same date that the contracts with the City's other
eligible depositories expire. The Director of Finance shall notify the Council
of the name of any eligible depository designated pursuant to this division but
the provisions of division (c) of this section shall not apply and the Director
of Finance is authorized to enter into a contract with the eligible depository
pursuant to Section
178.08 upon designation.
   (e)   The limitations on the aggregate amount of public monies (as defined
in the Uniform Depository Act) which may be deposited with eligible
depositories as set forth in the Uniform Depository Act shall be applicable to
deposits made by the City in eligible depositories pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. No. 868-2019. Passed 8-21-19, eff. 8-26-19)
§ 178.04 Definitions
   For purposes of Sections
178.04 to
178.07, inclusive, certain terms are defined as follows:
   (a)   “Female Business Enterprise” means a company certified by the City as
a Female Business Enterprise in accordance with Chapter
187 of the Codified Ordinances or some other standard authorized by the
Council.
   (b)   “Full Service Banking” means banking services which include, but are
not limited to, use of on-site loan officers, automatic teller machines, and
Saturday hours.
   (c)   “Low to Moderate Income” means eighty percent (80%) of the median
income for the Cleveland Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area as defined in
the most recent report issued by the United States Bureau of the Census.
   (d)   “Minority Business Enterprise” means a company certified by the City
as a Minority Business Enterprise in accordance with Chapter
187 of the Codified Ordinances or some other standard authorized by the
Council.
   (e)   “Minority Neighborhoods” means Statistical Planning Areas (SPAs) in
the City with more than fifty percent (50%) non-white population.
   (f)   “Neighborhood development” means an organized, community-based effort
involving government, non-profit neighborhood groups, financial institutions,
private individuals and resident leadership with the purpose of revitalizing
residential, commercial and industrial areas in urban neighborhoods.
   (g)   “Small Business” means a company with one hundred and fifty (150) or
fewer employees or sales under five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) per year.
(Ord. No. 2353-93. Passed 2-14-94, eff. 2-23-94)
§ 178.05 Annual Lending Disclosure and Affidavit of Intent
   The Director of Community Development shall collect, evaluate, and analyze
and provide to the Director of Finance, a report summarizing his or her
findings relating to the following information which must be submitted by any
depository desiring designation as an eligible depository:
   (a)   Residential Lending Information. The total number and the total dollar
value of residential loans for one (1) to four (4) family dwellings applied for
and originated during the previous calendar year in each of the following
categories:
      (1)   Home purchase loans, both federally subsidized and conventional;
      (2)   Refinancings of home purchase loans;
      (3)   Home improvement loans;
      (4)   Home equity loans;
      (5)   Multi-family loans; and
      (6)   Non-occupant loans.
   These totals shall be provided for the entire City, for each Statistical
Planning Area within the City and for all of Cuyahoga County.
   (b)   Commercial Lending Information. The total number and the total dollar
value of commercial loans applied for and originated during the previous
calendar year (1) for the entire City, (2) for each Statistical Planning Area
within the City, (3) for all of Cuyahoga County, (4) for minority business
enterprises in each Statistical Planning Area within the City and for the
entire City, and (5) for female business enterprises in each Statistical
Planning Area within the City and for the entire City;
   (c)   The most recent annual report or SEC 10-K report with quarterly
financial updates;
   (d)   A statement with timetable(s) describing current and proposed
initiatives to address the credit needs of the City, its residents and
businesses, including low and moderate income and minority residents, in the
following categories:
      (1)   Home purchase mortgage loans;
      (2)   Mortgage loans to non-occupant borrowers for small rental
properties;
      (3)   Home improvement loans;
      (4)   Small personal loans;
      (5)   Consumer product(s) and service(s);
      (6)   Commercial loan product(s) for small businesses, minority business
enterprises and female business enterprises;
      (7)   Participation in City-sponsored neighborhood development programs
and consortiums;
      (8)   Equitable contributions to community based non-profit organizations
in the City;
      (9)   Provision of full service banking in City neighborhoods;
      (10)   Program to market loan products and services throughout the City
to include (i) low and moderate income neighborhoods, (ii) minority
neighborhoods, (iii) small businesses, (iv) minority business enterprises and
(v) female business enterprises;
      (11)   Goals established for service and production levels for target
groups identified above.
   (e)   The affidavit set forth in Section 178.07, executed by a duly
authorized officer of such financial institution;
   (f)   The most recent "Community Reinvestment Act Statement" issued by the
depository;
   (g)   The most recent "Community Reinvestment Act Evaluation" issued by the
federal regulatory agency authorized to conduct such evaluations;
   (h)   A copy of the depository's branch closing policy;
   (i)   A written initiative (a "Community Reinvestment Initiative") regarding
community reinvestment within the City containing provisions acceptable to the
Director of Community Development;
   (j)   Information regarding the number of minorities, females and City
residents employed by the depository as lending officers and as members of its
board of directors and senior management staff;
   (k)   Any additional information requested by the Director of Community
Development.
   Except where otherwise specified, the information shall be made on forms
provided by or prescribed by the Director of Community Development.
(Ord. No. 868-2019. Passed 8-21-19, eff. 8-26-19)
§ 178.06 Annual Submission and Review of Disclosure; Creation of Reinvestment
Review Committee; Annual Report
   (a)   On an annual basis, each eligible depository shall submit to the
Director of Community Development the information set forth in Section
178.05, as well as a statement describing its level of participation in
residential and commercial development as required in the sworn affidavit set
forth in Section
178.07.
   This information and this statement shall be used to determine whether the
eligible depository has acted in compliance with its sworn affidavit and
whether it will be considered for designation as an eligible depository in the
future and as well as to inform policy decisions by the City regarding
investment of City funds and purchase of services.
   All such information required in this section will be available for public
inspection.
   (b)   The annual review process will be administered by the Reinvestment
Review Committee, composed of eight (8) members, including:
      (1)   The Director of Finance, who shall serve as Chairperson and shall
select committee members as set forth below;
      (2)   One (1) member chosen from the Department Development;
      (3)   One (1) member chosen from the Department of Community Development;
      (4)   One (1) representative from the citywide bank clearinghouse;
      (5)   Two (2) members of community organizations whose principal purpose
is neighborhood development; and
      (6)   Two (2) members from City Council chosen by City Council.
   The Committee shall coordinate the implementation of Sections
178.05 to
178.07, inclusive. The Committee shall issue a report analyzing and evaluating
the information contained in the depository applications submitted pursuant to
Section
178.03 prior to submission of the names of the eligible depositories by the
Director of Finance to the Council pursuant to Section
178.03. In the report, the Committee shall make a recommendation to City
Council as to which institutions have acted in compliance with their sworn
affidavit and any applicable federal law requirements.
(Ord. No. 868-2019. Passed 8-21-19, eff. 8-26-19)
   Note: Pursuant to Section 11 of Ord. No. 1226-2025, any references to the
Department of Economic Development (and, by extension, the Director of Economic
Development) shall be amended to read the Department of Development (and, by
extension, the Director of Development).
§ 178.07 Affidavit
   The affidavit required by Section
178.05 shall be in the following form and shall contain the information herein
required:
STATE OF OHIO
COUNTY OF CUYAHOGA
SS: AFFIDAVIT OF INTENT
I, _______________, a duly-authorized representative of _______________
(hereinafter "Financial Institution"), being first sworn, depose and say as
follows:
   1.   That for the purpose of becoming an eligible depository for active
deposits of the City of Cleveland, the undersigned affiant states that
Financial Institution will develop or continue lending and financing
opportunities and make "best efforts" to undertake a defined lending program of
committed action in support of residential and commercial development in
Cleveland's neighborhoods.
   Affiant states that such best efforts shall include, but are not limited to:
      A.   The presence of identifiable trained personnel in real estate with
responsibility and lending authority and a clearly defined focus on
"neighborhood development" finance as defined in Section
178.04 of the Codified Ordinances of Cleveland, Ohio, 1976.
      B.   Cooperation with and support of non- profit neighborhood development
organizations in the successful implementation of “neighborhood development”
finance, through vehicles such as grants, below-market financing and equity
investments.
      C.   A willingness to participate in the financing of publicly-subsidized
neighborhood development projects.
      D.   A commitment to affirmatively market and make available banking
services throughout Cleveland’s neighborhoods.
      E.   The cooperative establishment of investment services through
incentive programs such as linked deposits and compensating balance
transactions.
   2.   Further, the affiant certifies that neither Financial Institution, nor
any of its affiliates, (i) will make predatory loans as defined in
Chapter 659 of the Codified Ordinances of Cleveland, Ohio, 1976; (ii) will
violate Section 1349.27 of the Ohio Revised Code.
   3.   Further, the affiant agrees to submit the information required in
Section
178.05 of the Codified Ordinances of Cleveland, Ohio, 1976, to the Director of
Community Development on an annual basis.
   4.   Further, the affiant agrees to submit statements and information of
such affirmative participation as required in this affidavit which has occurred
within the annual review period.
(Ord. No. 868-2019. Passed 8-21-19, eff. 8-26-19)
§ 178.08 Agreements with Eligible Depositories; Related Services
   (a)   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized to enter into contract
with the eligible depositories designated pursuant to Section
178.03 for the provision of the City’s requirements for various banking
services, including, but not limited to, check clearing and collection, account
maintenance, bank statement preparation, lockbox services, wire transfers,
investment support facilities, safekeeping and custody services, ACH services
and other professional services deemed necessary to support the ongoing banking
requirements of the City. The contracts authorized herein shall be prepared by
the Director of Law and shall contain such terms and conditions as are deemed
necessary by the Directors of Finance and Law to protect the City’s interest,
including provision for the payment of fees for the banking services, whether
through the maintenance of compensating balances or by monthly billing for
services rendered and provision for the loss of the designation as an eligible
depository, the withdrawal of the City’s deposits and the termination of the
contract with the eligible depository because of the failure of the eligible
depository to comply with the terms of the contract.
   (b)   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized to enter into contract
with financial institutions and various financial and information service
organizations to obtain data and services which will facilitate the processing
of City deposits and investments.
(Ord. No. 2353-93. Passed 2-14-94, eff. 2-23-94)
§ 178.09 Notice of Branch Closings
   Each contract with an eligible depository authorized by Section
178.08 shall contain a requirement that the eligible depository provide written
notice to the Mayor and the Director of Finance one hundred and twenty (120)
days prior to the closing of any branch of such eligible depository located
within the City. The notice shall identify the location of the branch, the date
on which it is anticipated that the branch will close and the reason for
closing the branch.
(Ord. No. 2353-93. Passed 2-14-94, eff. 2-23-94)
§ 178.10 Security for Repayment of Deposits
   (a)   The City Treasurer, before making the initial deposit in an eligible
depository designated pursuant to Section
178.03 or before making an investment in a certificate of deposit pursuant to
division (b)(8) of Section
178.12, shall require the eligible depository to pledge to and deposit with the
City Treasurer, as security for the repayment of all public monies to be
deposited in the eligible depository, eligible securities in the aggregate
market value equal to one hundred and ten percent (110%) of the amount of
public monies to be at the time so deposited. In the case of any deposit other
than the initial deposit made during the period of designation, the amount of
the aggregate market value of securities required to be pledged and deposited,
shall be equal to one hundred and ten percent (110%) of the amount of public
monies on deposit in such public depository plus one hundred and ten percent
(110%) of the amount to be so deposited. The City Treasurer may require
additional eligible securities to be deposited to provide for any depreciation
which may occur in the market value of any of the securities so deposited. This
paragraph shall not apply to a pooled security arrangement authorized under
division (c) of this section.
   (b)   The following securities shall be eligible securities for the purposes
of this section:
      (1)   Bonds, notes or other obligations of or guaranteed as to principal
and interest by the United States or those for which the faith of the United
States is pledged for the payment of principal and interest thereon, by
language specifically appearing therein and not merely by interpretation or
otherwise;
      (2)   Bonds, notes, debentures, or other obligations or securities issued
by any U.S. government agency, or the export-import bank of Washington;
      (3)   Bonds and other obligations of the State of Ohio guaranteed as to
principal and interest by the State of Ohio or those for which the full faith
and credit of the State of Ohio is pledged for the payment of principal and
interest thereon by language specifically appearing therein and not merely by
interpretation or otherwise;
      (4)   Bonds and other obligations of any county, township, school
district, municipal corporation, including the City, or other legally
constituted taxing subdivision of the State of Ohio, which is not, at the time
of such deposit, in default in the payment of principal or interest on any of
its bonds or other obligations, for which the full faith and credit of the
issuing subdivision is pledged;
      (5)   Obligations guaranteed as to principal and interest by the Ohio
student loan commission;
      (6)   A no-load money market mutual fund that is registered as an
investment company under the "Investment Company Act of 1940," 54 Stat. 789, 15
U.S.C. 80a-1 to 80a-64, and that has the highest letter or numerical rating
provided by at least one (1) nationally recognized standard rating service,
consisting exclusively of obligations described in division (b)(1) or (b)(2) of
this section and repurchase agreements secured by such obligations.
   (c)   The City shall not accept as eligible securities for purposes of this
section any securities which are part of a pool of securities authorized in RC
135.182, unless authorized in advance and in writing by the Director of Finance
and the City Treasurer.
   (d)   If the eligible depository fails to pay over any part of the deposit
made therein as provided by law, the City Treasurer shall sell at public sale
any of the eligible securities deposited with the City Treasurer pursuant to
this section. Thirty (30) days notice of such sale shall be given in a
newspaper of general circulation within the City of Cleveland. Pursuant to
division (C) of RC 135.18, when a sale of eligible securities has been so made
and upon payment to the City Treasurer of the purchase money, the City
Treasurer shall transfer such eligible securities, whereupon the absolute
ownership of such eligible securities shall pass to the purchasers, and any
surplus remaining after deducting the amount due the City of Cleveland and the
expenses of sale shall be paid to the eligible depository.
   (e)   An eligible depository may, by written notice to the City Treasurer,
designate a qualified trustee and deposit the eligible securities required by
this section with the trustee for safekeeping for the account of the City
Treasurer and the eligible depository, as their respective rights to and
interest in such securities under this section may appear and be asserted by
written notice to or demand upon the trustee pursuant to division (D) of RC
135.18. In such case, the City Treasurer shall accept the written receipt of
the trustee describing the securities which have been deposited with the
trustee by the eligible depository, a copy of which shall also be delivered to
the eligible depository. Thereupon all such securities so deposited with the
trustee are, pursuant to division (D) of RC 135.18 deemed to be pledged with
the City Treasurer and to be deposited with him or her, for all the purposes of
this section. The qualified trustee designated to perform the duties pursuant
to this division (e) must be approved by the Director of Finance prior to
designation by the eligible depository.
   (f)   The City Treasurer may make provisions for the exchange and release of
securities and the substitution of other eligible securities therefor.
   (g)   Pursuant to division (I) of RC 135.18, any federal reserve bank or
branch thereof located in the State of Ohio, without compliance with RC
1109.03, 1109.04, 1109.17 and 1109.18 or any provision of this chapter and
without becoming subject to RC 1109.15 or any other law of Ohio relative to the
exercise by corporations of trust powers generally, is qualified to act as
trustee for the safekeeping of securities under this section.
   (h)   Notwithstanding the fact that an eligible depository is required to
pledge eligible securities in certain amounts to secure deposits of public
monies, a trustee shall have no duty or obligation to determine the
eligibility, market value, or face value of any securities deposited with the
trustee by an eligible depository. This applies in all situations including,
without limitation, a substitution or exchange of securities.
   (i)   Any charges or compensation of a designated trustee for acting as such
under this section shall be paid by the eligible depository and in no event
shall be chargeable to the City or to the City Treasurer or to any officer of
the City. Pursuant to RC 135.18, such charges or compensation shall not be a
lien or charge upon the securities deposited for safekeeping prior or superior
to the rights to and interests in such securities of the City or of the City
Treasurer. Pursuant to RC 135.18, the City Treasurer and the City Treasurer's
bondsmen or surety shall be relieved from any liability to the City or to the
eligible depository for the loss or destruction of any securities deposited
with a qualified trustee pursuant to this section.
(Ord. No. 6-18. Passed 1-22-18, eff. 1-25-18)
§ 178.11 Securities Dealers and Brokers
   The Director of Finance is authorized to designate securities dealers and
brokers for the purpose of purchasing and selling, but not holding or
safekeeping, securities on behalf of the City. Only those securities dealers
and brokers so designated by the Director of Finance shall be eligible to
purchase and sell securities on behalf of the City. Any dealer or broker
designated pursuant to this section shall be licensed by the State of Ohio and
shall submit the following information to the Director of Finance prior to
annual designation by the City:
      (1)   A sworn statement by an authorized representative of the dealer or
broker pledging to adhere to “Capital Adequacy Standards” established by the
Federal Reserve Bank and acknowledging that the dealer or broker understands
that the City has relied upon this pledge in employing the dealer or broker;
      (2)   Audited financial statements for the most recent audit year showing
the amount of liquid capital of the dealer or broker and, if applicable, of the
parent company of such dealer or broker, and compliance with “Capital Adequacy
Standards” established by the Federal Reserve Bank;
      (3)   A written statement from a certified public accountant certifying
that it found no material weaknesses in the internal systems controls of the
dealer or broker and, if applicable, of the parent company of such dealer or
broker, incident to “Capital Adequacy Standards” established by the Federal
Reserve Bank; and
      (4)   Such additional information as may be required by the Cash
Management and Investment Policy promulgated pursuant to Section
178.14.
   The Director of Finance shall not employ any dealer or broker and shall
terminate any contract with a dealer or broker which fails to provide the
statements and information required by this section; lacks experience or
familiarity in providing service to large institutional accounts; is perceived
by the Director of Finance to be in financial difficulty or when the Director
of Finance deems the employment of the dealer or broker not to be in the best
interest of the City.
(Ord. No. 2353-93. Passed 2-14-94, eff. 2-23-94)
§ 178.12 Investments
   (a)   All public monies of the City not deposited in active deposits, or
kept by the City Treasurer as a cash reserve as may be prescribed by the
Director of Finance, shall be invested by the City Treasurer pursuant to this
section and the Cash Management and Investment Policy promulgated pursuant to
Section
178.14. All securities shall be purchased through eligible depositories or
securities dealers or brokers designated pursuant to Section
178.11. All security transactions shall occur on a delivery versus payment
basis.
   (b)   The City Treasurer may invest in any of the following classifications
of obligations, which are hereby determined to be eligible investments:
      (1)   Bonds, notes or other obligations of the United States, or those
for which the full faith and credit of the United States is pledged for the
payment of principal and interest thereon, including without limitation
Treasury Bills, Treasury Notes, Treasury Bonds, Farmers Home Administration
Insured Notes (FHAs) and securities issued by the Government National Mortgage
Association (GNMAs);
      (2)   Bonds, notes, debentures or other obligations or securities issued
by any U.S. government agency fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by
the full faith and credit of the United States;
      (3)   Bonds, notes, debentures or other obligations or securities, issued
by any U.S. government agency, which are not fully guaranteed as to principal
and interest by the full faith and credit of the United States but which have a
sufficiently broad and orderly marketplace to ensure easy and cost- effective
liquidation, such as the debt of the Federal Home Loan Bank (FHLBs) and the
Federal National Mortgage Association (FNMAs);
      (4)   Bonds and notes of the State of Ohio;
      (5)   The State of Ohio Treasurer’s Investment Pool established pursuant
to RC 135.45;
      (6)   Bonds and notes of any municipal corporation, village, county,
township or other political subdivision of Ohio (including the City of
Cleveland to the extent permitted by law), for which the full faith and credit
of the subdivision is pledged, so long as such subdivision has not defaulted in
the payment of principal or interest on its bonds or notes within the last ten
(10) years;
      (7)   A specific repurchase agreement with a term of not to exceed one
(1) year with any eligible depository or securities dealer or broker designated
pursuant to Section
178.11 which has entered into a master repurchase agreement pursuant to
division (c) of this section, under the terms of which agreement the City
Treasurer purchases for the City, and such eligible depository or securities
dealer or broker agrees to unconditionally repurchase, any of the securities
listed in divisions (b)(1), (b)(2) or (b)(3) of this section;
      (8)   Fully insured and/or fully collateralized certificates of deposit
of eligible depositories; and
      (9)   U.S. government money market mutual funds, as defined in the Cash
Management and Investment Policy promulgated pursuant to Section
178.14, issued by open ended investment companies registered with the U.S.
Securities and Exchange Commission which have the objective of maintaining a
constant net asset value per share, and which have portfolios limited to fully
delivered repurchase agreements or securities described in division (b)(1) and
(b)(8) of this section with an average maturity of one hundred twenty (120)
days or less.
   (c)   Specific repurchase agreements authorized by division (b)(7) of this
section shall be governed by the requirements of the Master Repurchase
Agreement entered into between the City and all eligible depositories or
securities dealers or brokers designated pursuant to Section
178.11. The City Treasurer may enter into a specific repurchase agreement only
if:
      (1)   The Director of Finance and the eligible depository or securities
dealer or broker designated pursuant to Section
178.11 has entered into a Master Repurchase Agreement on a continuing basis
during a specified period which shall not extend beyond the end of the period
of designation of the eligible depository pursuant to Section
178.03 or of the securities dealer or broker pursuant to Section
178.11;
      (2)   The market value of purchased securities on the purchase date shall
be at least as follows:
         A.   One hundred and one percent (101%) of the purchase price if the
purchased securities are U.S. Treasury Bills, Notes, or Bonds which mature in
one (1) year or less from the purchase date;
         B.   One hundred and two percent (102%) of the purchase price if the
purchased securities are U.S. Treasury Bills, Notes, or Bonds which mature in
more than one (1) year but not more than ten (10) years from the purchase date;
and
         C.   One hundred and two percent (102%) of the purchase price if the
purchased securities are U.S. government agency securities which mature not
more than ten (10) years from the purchase date.
      (3)   There shall be a simultaneous delivery of purchased securities and
payment of the purchase price through a custodial bank pursuant to a separate
agreement by and between the City and the custodial bank;
      (4)   In the event the eligible depository or securities dealer or broker
fails to perform any of its obligations under the specific repurchase
agreement, the eligible depository or securities dealer or broker shall be
liable for the repurchase price and interest thereon at the same rate as the
specific repurchase agreement plus reasonable counsel’s fees and other costs
and expenses incurred by the City as a result of the default and, further, the
custodial bank shall remit to the City all purchased securities, margin
securities and cash delivered to satisfy the margin requirement, and the City
may sell any or all purchased securities and/or margin securities to any
purchaser at private or public sale and apply the proceeds thereof to the
eligible depository’s or securities dealer or broker’s liability;
      (5)   In the event the City fails to perform any of its obligations under
the specific repurchase agreement, the City’s interest in purchased securities
and any margin securities and/or cash delivered to satisfy the margin
requirement shall be deemed released, and the eligible depository or securities
dealer or broker is irrevocably authorized to instruct the custodial bank to
deliver all such securities and cash to the eligible depository against
simultaneous credit to the City’s account of the purchase price;
      (6)   The master repurchase agreement may be terminated by either party
on ten (10) business days written notice to the other party and the custodial
bank, provided, however, that such termination shall not affect any specific
repurchase agreement outstanding.
   (d)   The City Treasurer may sell any eligible investments or close any
accounts held as investments for cash for a sum not less than their current
market price.
   (e)   The Director of Finance and his or her designees, the City Treasurer,
the Mayor, the Director of Law and the members of City Council shall not be
held accountable or personally liable for any loss occasioned by the sale of
eligible investments or by the closing of insured deposit accounts authorized
pursuant to division (d) of this section at a price lower than their cost or
balance. Any loss or expense in making such sales or closings shall be payable
as other expenses of the City.
   (f)   Except as provided in this division (f), investments authorized by
division (b) of this section shall not be made at a price in excess of the
current market price or at a yield below the current market yield. In
furtherance of the public purposes of (i) creating or preserving jobs and
employment opportunities in the City, and to improve the economic welfare of
the people of the City, through the acquisition, construction, improvement or
equipping of facilities for industry, commerce, distribution and research, and
(ii) to enhance the availability of adequate housing, and to improve the
economic and general well-being of the people of the City, by providing, or
assisting in providing, housing, including shelters to provide temporary
housing for individuals and families, the Director of Finance may invest public
monies at a price in excess of the current market price or at a yield below the
current market yield, subject, in the case of providing housing, to RC 176.04;
provided, that at no time shall public monies invested pursuant to this
division (f) exceed five percent (5%) of all of the public monies of the City.
   (g)   If any eligible investments purchased under the authority of this
section are issuable to a designated payee or to the order of a designated
payee, the name of the City Treasurer and the title of the City Treasurer’s
office shall be so designated. If any such eligible investments are registrable
either as to principal or interest or both, then such securities shall be
registered in the name of the Director of Finance as such.
   (h)   Interest earned on any eligible investments authorized by this section
shall be collected by the City Treasurer and credited by the Director of
Finance or the Director’s designee to the proper fund of the City as required
by law.
   (i)   Whenever eligible investments acquired pursuant to this section mature
and become due and payable, the City Treasurer shall present them for payment
according to their tenor, and shall collect the monies payable thereon. The
monies so collected shall be treated as public monies subject to the provisions
of this chapter.
   (j)   The Director of Finance or the Director’s designee shall maintain
accounts on which shall be made appropriate entries of all transactions
relating to the investment of public monies. The City Treasurer shall keep a
record of the number and maturity of interest coupons on instruments in which
the City has invested.
   (k)   The Director of Finance shall, upon request of the Mayor or the City
Council, provide periodic reports in such detail as required by the Mayor or
the City Council of all investments purchased, sold and held by the City.
   (l)   The members of City Council, the Director of Finance, the Director of
Law and the City Treasurer shall not be personally liable for or with respect
to investments pursuant to this section and the members of City Council, the
Director of Finance and the Director of Law shall not be personally liable for
any unauthorized investment by the City Treasurer.
(Ord. No. 2353-93. Passed 2-14-94, eff. 2-23-94)
§ 178.13 Custody of Securities
   (a)   All eligible investments in certificated form acquired by the City
Treasurer pursuant to Section
178.12 of this chapter shall be kept in a safe deposit box or vault belonging
to an eligible depository, and such safe deposit box or vault shall be opened
only upon a warrant or order of the Commissioner of Accounts or a person duly
authorized as the Acting Commissioner of Accounts in the presence of the
Director of Finance, or the Director of Law, or both of them, or persons duly
authorized as Acting Director of Finance or Law. The warrant or order to open
such safety deposit box or vault shall direct the deposit or removal of such
certificates, clipping of coupons or other official business reason for opening
the box or vault. A report of stating the items placed in or removed from the
box or vault or other official business conducted with respect to the contents
of the box or vault shall, on the same day of the opening of the box or vault,
be signed by the officer witnessing such opening and the City Treasurer, and
such report shall be retained by the Commissioner of Accounts.
   (b)   In lieu of the custody authorized by division (a) of this section, the
City Treasurer may deposit such certificates with a qualified trustee as set
forth in division (I) of RC 135.18 or division (F) of RC 135.181.
   (c)   Upon the expiration of the term of office of the City Treasurer or in
the event of vacancy in the office of the City Treasurer by reason of death,
resignation, removal from office or otherwise, the City Treasurer or the City
Treasurer’s legal representative shall transfer and deliver to the successor
all such certificates held by the City Treasurer. For the certificates so
transferred and delivered, such City Treasurer shall be credited with and the
City Treasurer’s successor shall be charged with the amount of money invested
in such certificates.
(Ord. No. 2353-93. Passed 2-14-94, eff. 2-23-94)
§ 178.14 Cash Management and Investment Policy
   In order to ensure the safety of public monies and the legality of City
investments, the Director of Finance shall promulgate a cash management and
investment policy for the City consistent with the provisions of this chapter,
which shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   The goals and objectives of the policy;
      (2)   Identification of the funds to be managed and invested in
accordance with the policy, including identification of different investment
strategies for different funds and the term of different types of investments;
      (3)   A list of authorized investments, including the extent to which the
City may invest in specific eligible investment instruments;
      (4)   The policies and procedures for daily investments and the
documentation of transactions, including the safekeeping of securities;
      (5)   Reporting requirements to be prepared by the Director of Finance or
the Director’s designee;
      (6)   Procedures for evaluation of eligible depositories and securities
dealers; and
      (7)   A system of internal controls governing the deposit and investment
of public monies and a procedure for reviewing and monitoring these controls.
   On an annual basis, the Cash Management and Investment Policy shall be
reviewed by the Director of Finance and, if the Director deems necessary, be
revised and updated. A copy of the Cash Management and Investment Policy
promulgated or revised and updated pursuant to this section shall be delivered
to the Clerk of City Council by April 1st of each year and published in the
City Record.
(Ord. No. 2353-93. Passed 2-14-94, eff. 2-23-94)
§ 178.15 Limitation on the Investment of Moneys
   Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter to the contrary, moneys
received for or on account of the operations of the Division of Water and the
Division of Cleveland Public Power, Department of Public Utilities, shall not
be invested in general obligations of the City. Further, no moneys received
from airport operations and deposited in segregated bank accounts established
for the following airport funds shall be invested in general obligations of the
City:
   (a)   The Operating and Maintenance Fund;
   (b)   The Renewal and Replacement Fund;
   (c)   The Improvement Fund; and
   (d)   The Surplus Fund.
(Ord. No. 2353-93. Passed 2-14-94, eff. 2-23-94)
§ 178.16 Deposit of Bond Funds
   (a)   The City Treasurer shall separately deposit monies received for the
construction and acquisition of permanent improvements from each sale of
general obligation bonds of the City, or notes issued in anticipation of the
issuance of such bonds, in one (1) or more segregated bank accounts in one (1)
or more eligible depositories.
   (b)   The Director of Finance may designate any one (1) or more of the
eligible depositories as a fiscal agent with respect to such segregated bank
accounts, and shall enter into a written fiscal agent agreement with such
designee. Such fiscal agent agreements shall provide that, before making any
disbursement from such segregated bank accounts, the Treasurer, in addition to
complying with all other requirements of law, shall obtain the approval of the
fiscal agent. The fiscal agent shall approve disbursements from such a
segregated bank account only for the purposes for which the bonds or notes, the
proceeds of which have been deposited in such account, have been issued, as set
forth in the ordinance or resolution authorizing the issuance of such bonds or
notes, and for such other purposes properly chargeable as expenses from bond
funds under the laws of the State.
(Ord. No. 2353-93. Passed 2-14-94, eff. 2-23-94)
§ 178.17 Exemption from Conflict-of-Interest Laws; Defaulting Depositories
   (a)   An officer, director, stockholder, employee, or owner of any interest
in a depository receiving active deposits pursuant to RC sections 135.01 to
135.21, inclusive, and Chapter
178 of the Codified Ordinances shall not be deemed to be interested, either
directly or indirectly, as a result of such active deposits of public monies
for the purpose of any law of the State of Ohio prohibiting an officer of the
state or of any subdivision, including the City, from being interested in any
contract of the state or of the subdivision as provided in RC 135.11.
   (b)   The provisions of RC sections 135.51 through 135.54 relating to
defaulting depositories are hereby incorporated by reference into this chapter
and the City, its Council, officers and employees may act in accordance with
those provisions in the event of any default on the part of any eligible
depository.
(Ord. No. 2353-93. Passed 2-14-94, eff. 2-23-94)
§ 178.18 Applicability of Uniform Depository Act; Applicability to Bond Issues
   (a)   The provisions of the Uniform Depository Act shall not be applicable
to the City except to the extent such provisions are expressly incorporated
into this chapter.
   (b)   Any ordinance authorizing the issuance of general obligations bonds,
special obligation bonds, including revenue bonds and mortgage revenue bonds,
or notes in anticipation of such bonds which are issued by the City, which
specifically provides for the deposit and investment of the proceeds thereof or
monies derived from or securing such bonds or notes, shall preempt the
provisions of this chapter except to the extent specifically provided to the
contrary in such ordinance; provided, however, that any trustee or depository
selected from and after the effective date of this ordinance to hold such
proceeds or monies must be an eligible depository.
(Ord. No. 2353-93. Passed 2-14-94, eff. 2-23-94)
§ 178.181 Deposits and Investments in Institutions Practicing Predatory Lending
Prohibited
   (a)   (1)   Neither the Director of Finance nor the City Treasurer shall
keep any City funds on deposit in any bank or other financial institution that
makes predatory loans, or that has an affiliate that, or is an affiliate of a
bank or other financial institution that makes predatory loans.
      (2)   Neither the Director of Finance nor the City Treasurer shall keep
any City funds on deposit in any bank or other financial institution that
violates RC 1349.27, or that has an affiliate that, or is an affiliate of a
bank or other financial institution that violates RC 1349.27.
   (b)   (1)   Neither the Director of Finance nor the City Treasurer shall
allow City monies to remain invested, or hereafter make investments in, stocks,
securities, or other obligations of any business entity that makes predatory
loans, or has an affiliate that, or is an affiliate of a bank or other
financial institution that makes predatory loans.
      (2)   Neither the Director of Finance nor the City Treasurer shall allow
City monies to remain invested, or hereafter make investments in, stocks,
securities, or other obligations of any business entity that violates RC
1349.27, or has an affiliate that, or is an affiliate of a bank or other
financial institution that violates RC 1349.27.
   (c)   (1)   Neither the Director of Finance nor the City Treasurer shall
allow City monies to remain invested, or hereafter make investments in,
securities collateralized by any interest in loans originating or purchased by
any business entity that makes predatory loans, or has an affiliate that, or is
an affiliate of a bank or other financial institution that makes predatory
loans.
      (2)   Neither the Director of Finance nor the City Treasurer shall allow
City monies to remain invested, or hereafter make investments in, securities
collateralized by any interest in loans originating or purchased by any
business entity that violates RC 1349.27, or has an affiliate that, or is an
affiliate of a bank or other financial institution that violates RC 1349.27.
   (d)   The divestiture required by divisions (b) and (c) shall be completed
within six (6) months of receipt by the City Treasurer of notice from the
Director of Finance or the Director of Consumer Affairs that a business entity
makes predatory loans, or has an affiliate that, or is an affiliate of a bank
or other financial institution that makes predatory loans. During the six (6)
month period, the City Treasurer shall make regular reports to the City Council
concerning the progress of divestiture. If, prior to expiration of the six (6)
month time limit for divestiture, the Finance Director or City Treasurer
determines that completion of divestiture within the six (6) month time limit
will necessitate substantial losses to the City then the City Treasurer shall
request from City Council an extension of time within which to complete
divestiture.
   (e)   As used in this section, the terms “predatory loan” and “affiliate”
shall have the same meanings as set forth in Section
659.01 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Cleveland, 1976.
(Ord. No. 737-02. Passed 4-22-02, eff. 4-25-02)
§ 178.19 Miscellaneous Provisions
   (a)   The Director of Finance, the City Treasurer, the Director of Law, the
Mayor and members of City Council and their bondsmen or sureties shall be
relieved from any liability for the loss of any public monies deposited or
invested pursuant to and in compliance with this chapter, including but not
limited to losses occasioned by the failure of any eligible depository.
   (b)   The provisions of RC 731.55 shall be applicable to the City and the
insurance authorized by such section may be procured by the Mayor and the costs
of such insurance shall be paid by the City.
(Ord. No. 2353-93. Passed 2-14-94, eff. 2-23-94)
§ 178.20 Reserved
CHAPTER 179 – SINKING FUND
179.01   Definitions
179.02   Designation of Escrow Agent
179.03   Sinking Fund Accounts
179.04   Transfer of Moneys and Investments to Escrow Agent
179.05   Deposits of Revenues in the Voted Obligations Account
179.06   Deposits of Revenues in the Unvoted Tax Supported Obligations Account
179.07   Deposits of Revenues in the Unvoted Self-Supporting Obligations
Account
179.08   Deposits of Revenues in the Unvoted Bond and Note Redemption Account
179.09   Reserved
179.10   Deposits in and Disbursements From Sinking Fund Accounts
179.11   Transfers and Advances Between Sinking Fund Accounts
179.12   Investment of Moneys in Sinking Fund Accounts
179.13   Reports of Escrow Agent
179.14   Statements and Reports of Sinking Fund Commission
179.15   Compliance by City Officials
179.16   Sinking Fund Commission: Officers and Employees
179.17   Sinking Fund Commission: Meetings and Procedures
179.18   Authority of Secretary
Charter reference:
   Sinking Fund Commission, Charter §
110
Cross-reference:
   Receipt of moneys from sale of bonds and notes, CO
177.08
   Records of bonds and notes issued by City, CO
177.12
Statutory reference:
   Sinking Fund, RC 739.01, 5705.09
§ 179.01 Definitions
   As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
   (a)   “Sinking Fund”: the Sinking Fund provided for in this chapter, which
constitutes the Bond Retirement Fund of the City required by RC 5705.09(C).
   (b)   “Sinking Fund Commission”: the commission consisting of the Mayor, the
Director of Finance, and the President of the Council, established pursuant to
Section
110 of the Charter of the City of Cleveland to manage and control the Sinking
Fund in the manner provided by ordinance and by general law to the extent not
provided by ordinance.
   (c)   “Escrow Agent”: the agent designated by the Sinking Fund Commission
pursuant to Section
179.02 for the purposes set forth in this chapter.
   (d)   “Debt Charges”: the principal of and call premium, if any, and
interest on general obligation bonds or notes of the City.
   (e)   “Voted Obligations”: general obligation bonds of the City authorized
by vote of the electors and notes issued in anticipation of such bonds.
   (f)   “Unvoted Tax Supported Obligations”: general obligation bonds of the
City, not authorized by vote of the electors, and notes issued in anticipation
of such bonds, other than Self-Supporting Obligations, payable from ad valorem
property taxes levied within the limitations provided by law, irrespective of
whether such bonds or notes are secured by other receipts of the City in
addition to such ad valorem property taxes, and including any such general
obligation bonds, and notes issued in anticipation of such bonds, which are not
or cease to be Self-Supporting Obligations.
   (g)   “Self-Supporting Obligations”: general obligation bonds of the City,
and notes issued in anticipation of such bonds, issued for permanent
improvements (as defined in RC 133.01) which constitute or are part of an
Enterprise of the City, to the extent that the City’s Self-Supporting Revenues
from such Enterprise are sufficient and available to meet the annual debt
charges on such bonds issued or to be issued for the purposes of such
Enterprise. “Voted Self- Supporting Obligations” are Self-Supporting
Obligations which are Voted Obligations; “Unvoted Self-Supporting Obligations”
are all other Self- Supporting Obligations.
   (h)   “Self-Supporting Revenues”: the annual income to the City, including
charges, prices, fees, and rentals, from the operation or ownership of an
Enterprise, after deducting therefrom the City’s annual cost of operation and
maintenance (other than depreciation) of such Enterprise and any payments or
deposits required to be made by the City under any ordinance, trust indenture,
trust agreement or other agreement which pertains to revenue or mortgage
revenue bonds or notes issued for the purposes of such Enterprise or which
otherwise creates a prior pledge or lien on such income for payments of any
obligations other than debt charges on general obligation bonds or notes of the
City.
   (i)   “Enterprise”: a water system, electric power or distribution system,
airports, or ports, or any motor vehicle parking system, solid waste
collection, disposal, or recovery system or other facility, or group or system
of facilities, determined to be an enterprise for purpose of this chapter
pursuant to an ordinance authorizing the issuance of Self-Supporting
Obligations for the purposes of such system or facility.
   (j)   “Ten-Mill Limitation”: the ten-mill limitation defined in RC 5705.02.
(Ord. No. 944-96. Passed 6-10-96, eff. 6-19-96)
§ 179.02 Designation of Escrow Agent
   For the purposes set forth in this chapter, the Sinking Fund Commission
shall designate as Escrow Agent a bank incorporated under the laws of this
State or for the United States which has its principal office in the State of
Ohio and which has a reported capital and surplus of not less than one hundred
million dollars ($100,000,000.00). The Sinking Fund Commission shall select the
Escrow Agent by soliciting proposals and receiving bids and shall designate as
Escrow Agent the bank which satisfies the requirements set forth in the
preceding sentence of this section and which the Sinking Fund Commission
determines to have submitted the lowest and best proposal. The Sinking Fund
Commission shall enter into a written contract with the Escrow Agent, which
contract shall incorporate by reference this chapter and applicable provisions
of ordinances providing for the issuance or securing of bonds or notes. The
Sinking Fund Commission may at any time designate a successor Escrow Agent in
accordance with the provisions of this section. The provisions of Chapter
127 with respect to depositories and the deposit of moneys of the City with
depositories shall not apply to the Escrow Agent or the deposit with the Escrow
Agent of moneys for the credit of Sinking Fund accounts.
(Ord. No. 1748-80. Passed 10-8-80, eff. 10-8-80)
§ 179.03 Sinking Fund Accounts
   The following accounts shall be established for the Sinking Fund:
   (a)   Voted Obligations Account to be held for and applied solely to the
payment of debt charges on Voted Obligations;
   (b)   Unvoted Tax Supported Obligations Account to be held for and applied
solely to the payment of debt charges on Unvoted Tax Supported Obligations
(other than the payment of principal on bond anticipation notes except for the
amount of such notes required to be retired pursuant to RC 133.22 if such notes
are outstanding for more than five (5) years);
   (c)   Unvoted Self-Supporting Obligations Account to be held for and applied
solely to the payment of debt charges on Unvoted Self-Supporting Obligations;
and
   (d)   Unvoted Bond and Note Redemption Account to be held for and applied
solely to the payment of debt charges and accrued interest on unvoted general
obligation bonds, and notes issued in anticipation of such bonds, which are to
be retired from the proceeds of the issuance of renewal notes, or bonds or
refunding bonds, or from special assessments or other monies transferred for
such purposes.
   The Sinking Fund Commission may from time to time establish sub-accounts
within any of the accounts of the Sinking Fund described in subsections (a)
through (d) of this section, provided that each such sub- account shall be for
a purpose or purposes within the purposes of such account and shall not be
inconsistent with any other provision of this chapter, or any ordinance
authorizing the issuance of bonds or notes.
(Ord. No. 944-96. Passed 6-10-96, eff. 6-19-96)
§ 179.04 Transfer of Moneys and Investments to Escrow Agent
   Upon designation of the Escrow Agent pursuant to Section
179.02, the Sinking Fund Commission shall transfer to and deposit with the
Escrow Agent all moneys and investments held in the Sinking Fund or in any
other fund of the City for the payment of debt charges on Voted Obligations,
Unvoted Tax Supported Obligations, and Unvoted Self-Supporting Obligations, and
shall direct that such moneys and investments be credited to the following
accounts:
   (a)   All such moneys and investments derived from collections of ad valorem
property taxes levied outside the ten-mill limitation for the then current
budget year shall be credited to the Voted Obligations Account;
   (b)   All such moneys and investments derived from collection of ad valorem
property taxes within the ten-mill limitation for the then current budget year
shall be credited to the Unvoted Tax Supported Obligations Account;
   (c)   All such moneys and investments held for the payment of debt charges
on voted Self-Supporting Obligations shall be credited to the Voted Obligations
Account;
   (d)   All such moneys and investments held for the payment of debt charges
on Unvoted Self-Supporting Obligations shall be credited to the Unvoted Self-
Supporting Obligations Account; and
   (e)   All such moneys and investment which represent the proceeds of renewal
notes or bonds or refunding bonds, special assessments, or other moneys to be
applied to the payment of debt charges on unvoted general obligation bonds, and
notes issued in anticipation of such bonds, shall be credited to the Unvoted
Bond and Note Redemption Account.
   Upon the designation of any successor Escrow Agent pursuant to Section
179.02, the moneys and investments of the Sinking Fund, including each such
account, shall be transferred promptly to such Successor Escrow Agent.
(Ord. No. 944-96. Passed 6-10-96, eff. 6-19-96)
§ 179.05 Deposits of Revenues in the Voted Obligations Account
   In addition to the deposit of moneys and investments to the Voted
Obligations Account required by subsections (a) and (c) of Section
179.04, the Sinking Fund Commission shall deposit or cause to be deposited with
the Escrow Agent revenues to be credited to the Voted Obligations Account as
follows:
   (a)   The Sinking Fund Commission shall instruct the County Auditor of
Cuyahoga County that, upon each distribution or advance of ad valorem property
taxes to the City (including payments pursuant to RC 321.24(F) and 323.156),
the County Auditor shall issue a separate warrant to the Escrow Agent to be
credited to the Voted Obligations Account, which warrant shall represent the
portion of such distribution or advance allocable to levies outside the ten-
mill limitation for payment of debt charges on Voted Obligations.
   (b)   The Sinking Fund Commission shall deposit or cause to be deposited
with the Escrow Agent for the credit of the Voted Obligations Account, such
revenues (including Self-Supporting Revenues), other than revenues derived from
levies of ad valorem property taxes, which are to be applied to the payment of
debt charges on Voted Obligations pursuant to ordinances providing for the
issuance or securing of Voted Obligations, tax budgets, appropriation measures,
or law; provided, however, that the Sinking Fund Commission shall deposit or
cause to be deposited with the Escrow Agent such Self-Supporting Revenues for
the credit of the Voted Obligations Account only if and to the extent available
after application of the Self- Supporting Revenues of an Enterprise to the
payment of all debt charges on unvoted general obligations issued for such
Enterprise by deposit thereof with the Escrow Agent for the credit of the
Unvoted Self- Supporting Obligations Account.
(Ord. No. 1748-80. Passed 10-8-80, eff. 10-8-80)
§ 179.06 Deposits of Revenues in the Unvoted Tax Supported Obligations Account
   In addition to the deposit of moneys and investments to the Unvoted Tax
Supported Obligations Account required by subsection (b) of Section
179.04, the Sinking Fund Commission shall deposit or cause to be deposited with
the Escrow Agent revenues to be credited to the Unvoted Tax Supported
Obligations Account as follows:
   (a)   The Sinking Fund Commission shall instruct the County Auditor of
Cuyahoga County that, upon each distribution or advance of ad valorem property
taxes to the City (including payments pursuant to RC 321.24(F) and 323.156),
the County Auditor shall issue a separate warrant to the Escrow Agent to be
credited to the Unvoted Tax Supported Obligations Account, which warrant shall
represent the portion of such distribution or advance allocable to levies
within the ten-mill limitation for payment of debt charges on Unvoted Tax
Supported Obligations.
   (b)   The Sinking Fund Commission shall deposit or cause to be deposited
with the Escrow Agent for the credit of the Unvoted Tax Supported Obligations
Account such revenues, other than Self-Supporting Revenues and revenues derived
from levies of ad valorem property taxes, which are to be applied to the
payment of debt charges on Unvoted Tax Supported Obligations pursuant to
ordinances providing for the issuance or securing of bonds or notes, tax
budgets, appropriation measures, or law.
(Ord. No. 1748-80. Passed 10-8-80, eff. 10-8-80)
§ 179.07 Deposits of Revenues in the Unvoted Self-Supporting Obligations
Account
   In addition to the deposit of moneys and investments to the Unvoted Self-
Supporting Obligations Account required by subsection (d) of Section
179.04, the Sinking Fund Commission shall deposit or cause to be deposited with
the Escrow Agent for the credit of the Unvoted Self-Supporting Obligation
Account the Self-Supporting Revenues to the extent necessary to pay debt
charges on Unvoted Self-Supporting Obligations pursuant to ordinances providing
for the issuance or securing of Unvoted Self-Supporting Obligations, tax
budgets, appropriation measures, or law.
(Ord. No. 1748-80. Passed 10-8-80, eff. 10-8-80)
§ 179.08 Deposits of Revenues in the Unvoted Bond and Note Redemption Account
   In addition to the deposit of moneys and investments to the Unvoted Bond and
Note Redemption Account required by subsection (c) of Section
179.04, the Sinking Fund Commission shall deposit or cause to be deposited with
the Escrow Agent for the credit of the Unvoted Bond and Note Redemption
Account: any proceeds from the issuance of unvoted general obligation bonds or
revenue or mortgage revenue bonds, or notes issued in anticipation of such
bonds, which are to be used for the purpose of retiring, renewing, or refunding
such bonds or notes; any other money transferred for such purpose; and any
proceeds from cash payments or advance payments of special assessments in
anticipation of which bonds or notes were issued.
(Ord. No. 63410-A. Passed 9-22-24)
§ 179.09 Reserved
§ 179.10 Deposits in and Disbursements From Sinking Fund Accounts
   With respect to any deposit with the Escrow Agent of revenues which the
Sinking Fund Commission is required to make or cause to be made to various
Sinking Fund accounts pursuant to Sections
179.05 through
179.08, inclusive, the Sinking Fund Commission shall make such deposits or
cause such deposits to be made in such amounts and at such times (pursuant to
ordinances providing for the issuance or securing of bonds or notes where
applicable provision is made) to allow for the payment of debt charges from
such accounts in the amounts and at the times required by the ordinances and
agreements pertaining to the various obligations for the payment of the debt
charges on which such accounts are respectively held. The Escrow Agent shall,
at the times and in the amounts required by such ordinances and agreements,
make disbursements from the appropriate Sinking Fund accounts to the paying
agents responsible for the payment of debt charges on the various obligations.
(Ord. No. 944-96. Passed 6-10-96, eff. 6-19-96)
§ 179.11 Transfers and Advances Between Sinking Fund Accounts
   The Sinking Fund Commission shall not authorize, and the Escrow Agent shall
not make, any transfer from any Sinking Fund account to any other Sinking Fund
account or to any other fund except for (a) the transfer of funds in the
Reserve Account to the Unvoted Tax Supported Obligations Account and the
Unvoted Self- Supporting Obligations Account in connection with the elimination
of the Reserve Account, and (b) in the event there are no longer outstanding
any obligations for the payment of debt charges on which a Sinking Fund account
is held, then the Sinking Fund Commission may authorize and instruct the Escrow
Agent in writing to transfer the balance in such account to any other Sinking
Fund account.
(Ord. No. 944-96. Passed 6-10-96, eff. 6-19-96)
§ 179.12 Investment of Moneys in Sinking Fund Accounts
   (a)   Subject to the restrictions set forth in this section, the Sinking
Fund Commission shall, by written instruction, direct the investment by the
Escrow Agent of moneys credited to the various Sinking Fund accounts. The
Sinking Fund Commission shall authorize and the Escrow Agent shall effect the
investment of moneys credited to the Sinking Fund accounts only in the
following obligations:
      (1)   Direct obligations of the United States of America or obligations,
the timely payment of the principal of and interest on which is fully
guaranteed by the United States of America;
      (2)   Certificates of deposit, demand deposits or time deposits of any
state bank or trust company or national banking association, including the
Escrow Agent or any affiliate of the Escrow Agent, which is a member of the
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), (including any investment in
pools of those certificates of deposit, demand deposits or time deposits owned
by the bank, trust company or national banking association), provided that any
such certificate of deposit, demand deposit or time deposit is
         A.   Continuously and fully insured by FDIC; or
         B.   Issued by an entity that has (or guaranteed by an entity’s parent
holding company that has) either unsecured, unguaranteed and uninsured
commercial paper rated in the highest rating category, or unsecured,
unguaranteed and uninsured long-term obligations rated in the third highest or
higher rating category, by a rating service or agency that maintains a rating
on obligations of the City payable from any of the Sinking Fund accounts; or
         C.   Fully secured, to the extent not insured by FDIC, by obligations
of the type described in paragraph (1) above (i) that have a market value at
all times at least equal to the uninsured principal amount of the deposit, (ii)
that are held by the Escrow Agent (except in case of a certificate of deposit,
demand deposit or time deposit of the Escrow Agent) or any Federal Reserve Bank
or depository of the United States of America, as custodian for the institution
issuing the deposit, together with the undertaking of such institution, in form
satisfactory to the Escrow Agent, that the aggregate market value of the
obligations securing such deposit at all times will be maintained in an amount
meeting the requirements of this subparagraph C., and (iii) in which the Escrow
Agent has a prior perfected first lien and which are not subject to any third-
party claims;
      (3)   Repurchase agreements collateralized by securities described in
paragraph (1) above with any registered broker/dealer under the jurisdiction of
the Securities Investors’ Protection Corporation or any state bank or trust
company or national banking association, including the Escrow Agent, if such
broker/dealer, bank or trust company has (or its parent holding company has, if
it provides a guarantee of the obligation) unsecured, uninsured and
unguaranteed commercial paper rated in the highest rating category, or
unsecured, uninsured and unguaranteed long-term obligations rated in the third
highest or higher rating category, by a rating service or agency that maintains
a rating on obligations of the City payable from any of the Sinking Fund
accounts, provided that:
         A.   A master repurchase agreement or specific written repurchase
agreement governs the transaction;
         B.   The securities are held by the Escrow Agent or an independent
third party acting solely as agent for the Escrow Agent free and clear of any
lien, and such third party is (i) a Federal Reserve Bank, or (ii) a bank that
is a member of the FDIC and that has combined capital, surplus and undivided
profits of not less than fifty million dollars ($50,000,000.00), and the Escrow
Agent shall have received written confirmation from such third party that it
holds such securities, free of any lien, as agent for the Escrow Agent;
         C.   A perfected first security interest in such securities under the
Uniform Commercial Code or book entry procedures prescribed by federal
regulations, is created for the benefit of the Escrow Agent (as demonstrated by
an opinion of counsel upon which the Escrow Agent may rely as to perfection and
priority);
         D.   The repurchase agreement has a term of thirty (30) days or less,
or the Escrow Agent will value the collateral securities no less frequently
than once every seven (7) days and will liquidate the collateral securities if
any deficiency in the required collateral percentage is not restored within two
(2) business days of such valuation;
         E.   The fair market value of the securities in relation to the amount
of the repurchase obligation, including principal and interest, is equal to at
least one hundred percent (100%).
      (4)   Investment contracts (which term shall not include repurchase
agreements) fully collateralized by securities described in paragraph (1)
above, with an institution that has (or its parent holding company has, if it
provides a guarantee of the obligation) either unguaranteed and uninsured
commercial paper rated in the highest rating category, or unsecured,
unguaranteed and uninsured long-term obligations rated in the third highest or
higher rating category, by a rating service or agency that maintains a rating
on obligations of the City payable from any of the Sinking Fund accounts;
      (5)   Obligations of any state of the United States of America or any
political subdivision of any state, other than the City, for the payment of
which the full faith and credit of the state or political subdivision is
pledged, provided that such obligations are rated in the second highest or
higher rating category by a rating service or agency that maintains a rating on
obligations of the City payable from any of the Sinking Fund accounts; and
      (6)   Investments in the pooled investment program established in the
custody of the Treasurer of the State pursuant to RC 135.45 for investment of
money by political subdivisions of the State.
   (b)   With respect to moneys credited to any Sinking Fund account, the
Sinking Fund Commission shall authorize and the Escrow Agent shall effect the
investment of such moneys only in obligations which shall mature (or be
redeemable at the option of the holder) at such times and in such amounts as to
allow the Escrow Agent to make all required payments of debt charges from such
account in a timely manner.
   (c)   In order to fulfill the Escrow Agent’s duty under Section
179.10 to make disbursements from the various Sinking Fund accounts in the
amounts and at the times required for the payment of debt charges from such
accounts, the Escrow Agent shall, if and to the extent necessary for that
purpose, sell or redeem any investment held to the credit of any such account
from which such a disbursement is to be made, and the Escrow Agent may do so
without any further authorization by the Sinking Fund Commission, the City, or
any officer of the City.
   (d)   The income from any investment made pursuant to this section
(including interest, proceeds from sale or redemption, and other income) shall
be credited to the Sinking Fund account for which such investment was made.
   (e)   To prevent bonds or notes issued by the City from becoming “arbitrage
bonds” under Section
103(c) of the Internal Revenue Code and regulations promulgated thereunder, the
Sinking Fund Commission shall, from time to time as necessary for that purpose,
authorize and instruct the Escrow Agent in writing to (1) restrict the yield
received on the investment of moneys held in any Sinking Fund account or
earnings thereon, and (2) take other actions consistent with the provisions of
this chapter with respect to the application of such moneys or earnings
thereon.
(Ord. No. 944-96. Passed 6-10-96, eff. 6-19-96)
§ 179.13 Reports of Escrow Agent
   The Escrow Agent shall promptly notify the Sinking Fund Commission in
writing of all deposits to the credit of any Sinking Fund account, all
disbursements and transfers from any Sinking Fund account, all investments of
moneys in any Sinking Fund account, and all sales or redemptions of such
investments. In addition the Escrow Agent upon request of the Sinking Fund
Commission, shall furnish the Sinking Fund Commission with a statement of the
current balances in each of the Sinking Fund accounts. Such notices and
statements shall be furnished to other parties as may be required by any
ordinance authorizing the issuance of bonds or notes.
(Ord. No. 1748-80. Passed 10-8-80, eff. 10-8-80)
§ 179.14 Statements and Reports of Sinking Fund Commission
   (a)   The Sinking Fund Commission shall keep a full and detailed statement
of the City’s outstanding obligations and shall furnish such a statement to the
Council at least once a year, which statement, together with information
regarding annual receipts and disbursements, investments, and investment income
of the various Sinking Fund accounts, shall be published in any annual report
published by the City.
   (b)   On or before the first Monday in May in each year, the Sinking Fund
Commission shall submit to Council a budget, setting forth in itemized form the
amount of money needed in the following year for the required payments of debt
charges in that year from the various Sinking Fund accounts and for the
operating expenses of the Sinking Fund Commission, including the cost of the
Escrow Agent and of any trustee for bonds or notes payable from the Sinking
Fund. Council shall include such amount in the annual City budget which the
City must submit to the County Auditor pursuant to RC Chapter 5705.
   (c)   On or before November 15th of each year, the Sinking Fund Commission
shall submit an estimate of the amount of money needed in the following year
for the required payments of debt charges in that year from the various Sinking
Fund accounts and for the operating expenses of the Sinking Fund Commission,
including the cost of the Escrow Agent and of any trustee for bonds or notes
payable from the Sinking Fund. Such amount shall be included in the Mayor’s
annual appropriation request and the City’s appropriation measures.
(Ord. No. 1748-80. Passed 10-8-80, eff. 10-8-80)
§ 179.15 Compliance by City Officials
   With respect to any transfer or deposit of moneys, investments, or revenues
which this chapter requires the Sinking Fund Commission to make or cause to be
made for the credit of any account of the Sinking Fund, the Director of
Finance, the Treasurer, the Commissioner of Accounts, the Administrator of the
Division of Taxation, and all other appropriate officials and employees of the
City shall take all actions necessary and appropriate to effect such transfer
or deposit.
(Ord. No. 1748-80. Passed 10-8-80, eff. 10-8-80)
§ 179.16 Sinking Fund Commission: Officers and Employees
   (a)   The Sinking Fund Commission shall consist of the Mayor, the Director
of Finance, and the President of Council. The Mayor shall be the President, and
the Director of Finance shall be the Secretary of the Sinking Fund Commission.
The members of the Sinking Fund Commission shall serve as such without
compensation.
   (b)   The Sinking Fund Commission shall appoint an Assistant Secretary and
may also appoint such other employees as may from time to time be necessary for
the conduct of the business of the Sinking Fund Commission.
(Ord. No. 1748-80. Passed 10-8-80, eff. 10-8-80)
§ 179.17 Sinking Fund Commission: Meetings and Procedures
   (a)   The Sinking Fund Commission shall hold meetings on such dates and at
such times as the Sinking Fund Commission may from time to time determine and
may, at each such meeting, perform all such duties and functions and take all
such actions which this chapter and any ordinance authorizing the issuance of
bonds or notes authorizes the Sinking Fund Commission to perform and take. All
meetings of the Sinking Fund Commission shall be open to the public. The
Sinking Fund Commission may adopt rules consistent with this chapter for the
calling of and conduct of business at such meetings.
   (b)   The Secretary (or, in his or her absence, the Assistant Secretary) of
the Sinking Fund Commission shall act as Secretary of all meetings of the
Sinking Fund Commission and shall make a written record of the proceedings
thereat. The Secretary shall maintain and be the custodian of such records and
shall cause such records to be open to the public for inspection at all
reasonable times.
(Ord. No. 1748-80. Passed 10-8-80, eff. 10-8-80)
§ 179.18 Authority of Secretary
   The Secretary of the Sinking Fund Commission may, on behalf of and pursuant
to authorization by the Sinking Fund Commission, take all actions which the
Sinking Fund Commission is required or authorized to take under this chapter
other than designation of the Escrow Agent or a successor Escrow Agent pursuant
to Section
179.02 (including, without limitation, causing deposits to be made with the
Escrow Agent for the Credit of Sinking Fund accounts, establishing sub-
accounts in the Sinking Fund, authorizing transfers from Sinking Fund accounts,
and authorizing and instructing the Escrow Agent as to investments of moneys in
Sinking Fund accounts), and the Secretary may do so without the prior
authorization of specific actions by the Sinking Fund Commission; provided that
the Secretary shall make a written record of all such actions and shall
maintain such records with the records of the Sinking Fund Commission in
accordance with Section
179.17(b), and provided further that the Secretary shall take no action
pursuant to this section which is contrary to or inconsistent with any
resolution, instruction, or other action of the Sinking Fund Commission.
(Ord. No. 1748-80. Passed 10-8-80, eff. 10-8-80)
TITLE XV: PURCHASES AND CONTRACTS
   Chapter
181   Purchases and Supplies
   Chapter
183   Real Estate Transactions
   Chapter
185   Construction and Improvement Contracts
   Chapter
186   Public Art
   Chapter
187   Cleveland Area Business Code
   Chapter
187A   Local Producer, Local-Food Purchaser, and Sustainable Business
Preference Code
   Chapter
188   Fannie M. Lewis Cleveland Resident Employment Law
   Chapter
189   Cleveland Fair Employment Law
   Chapter
190   Wage Theft and Payroll Fraud Prevention
   Chapter
190A   Community Benefits Agreements
CHAPTER 181: PURCHASES AND SUPPLIES
181.01   Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies
181.02   Authority over Storerooms
181.03   Estimates and Summary of Requirements
181.04   Standard Specifications
181.05   Requisitions to Conform to Standard Specifications
181.06   Procedures for Requisitions
181.07   Supplies or Services from Other Departments
181.08   Purchases Not Exceeding $50,000
181.09   Purchases Not Exceeding $1,000
181.10   Purchases Exceeding $50,000 to be Authorized by Ordinance; Bids;
Contracts
181.101   Purchase or Rental of Commodities, Goods, and Services
181.102   Authorization to Purchase Software or Other Licenses, Modules,
Updates, Upgrades, Enhancements, Training, Technical Support, Maintenance, and
Repairs
181.103   Recognition of Electronic Records and Signatures
181.11   Noncompetitive Purchases; Purchase of Coal
181.12   Emergency Purchases and Contracts
181.13   Purchases of Surplus Federal Commodities
181.14   Purchase of Materials Produced by State- Owned Institutions
181.15   Trade-In Allowance
181.16   Purchases of Perishable Supplies and Foodstuffs
181.17   Analysis of Coal
181.18   Sale of Products Resulting from Operation of Municipal Departments;
Sale of Recyclable Materials
181.181   Purchase of Collection Services for Recyclable Materials
181.19   Excess Personal Property; Use by Other Departments; Sale
181.20   Specifications for Purchases
181.201   Use of Recycled Material
181.21   Advertisement of Bids
181.22   Form of Bid
181.23   Bidder’s Affidavits
181.24   Bid Bond; Certified or Cashier’s Check
181.25   Insufficiency of Certified or Cashier’s Check
181.26   Disposition of Bid Bond, Certified or Cashier’s Check
181.27   Unacceptable Bids
181.28   Withdrawal of Bids
181.29   Endorsement, Tabulation and Summary of Bids
181.30   Rejection or Acceptance of Bids
181.31   Time of Award
181.32   Bonds to Secure Performance of Purchase Contracts
181.33   Release of Bond
181.34   Requirements for Contract Execution
181.35   Filing of Original Contract
181.36   Compliance with Fair Employment Practice in Northern Ireland
181.37   Subcontractors and Suppliers
Charter reference:
   Authorization of contracts, Charter §
108
   Conditions when contracts are void, Charter §
109
   Contract interest, Charter §
195
   Contracts certified, Charter §
106
   Division of Purchases and Supplies, Charter §
101
Cross-reference:
   Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies to advertise for bids for
rehabilitation, CO
321.13 et seq.
Statutory reference:
   Board of Control approval of contracts, RC 733.22 et seq.
   Restrictions on contracts, RC 715.68, 731.48
§ 181.01 Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies
   The Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies shall make all purchases, and by
direction of the Board of Control, sell all property, real and personal, as
provided in Charter Section
101, in the manner and with opportunity for competition under the rules and
regulations established by this chapter and Chapter
183.
(Ord. No. 1119-61. Passed 6-12-61, eff. 6-14-61)
§ 181.02 Authority over Storerooms
   (a)   The Directors of the various departments, under to the authority of
Charter Sections
77 and 78, except to the extent provided in Section
181.01, shall respectively supervise, control, and have charge of all
storerooms and warehouses established in the department under their
supervision, and all storekeepers, stock-keepers and other persons employed in
such storerooms and warehouses shall work under the supervision and control of
the Director of the respective department.
   (b)   The Directors of the various departments shall have authority to
increase or diminish the number of storerooms and warehouses in their
respective departments, with the approval in each case of the Director of
Finance. The Directors of the various City departments shall cause to be kept
adequate stock records, which shall at all times show the number or amount and
the value of all items carried in the storerooms and warehouses established in
their respective department; the receipt of all items by their respective
storerooms and warehouses, and the cost of all such items, the issuance of all
items by their respective storerooms and warehouses to City departments,
divisions and offices upon requisition therefore and the charges made
thereupon. On October 31 of each year the Directors of the various departments
shall cause an inventory to be taken of all items in the storerooms and
warehouses established in their respective department, compare such inventory
with the stock records of the same date and furnish copies thereof to the
Director of Finance.
(Ord. No. 2-08. Passed 1-28-08, eff. 1-30-08)
§ 181.03 Estimates and Summary of Requirements
   On or before December 1 of each year, and at such other times as contracts
for supplies are to be let, the director of each administrative department or
the responsible head of each office other than an administrative department,
shall submit to the Director of Finance an estimate upon forms to be furnished
by the Director, of all articles, commodities, supplies, equipment and
materials anticipated to be needed by such department or office for its regular
operation during the ensuing year. Such estimate shall specify the quantity and
character of each item needed, in accordance with standard specifications of
the City. All such estimates shall be transmitted to the Commissioner of
Purchases and Supplies, who shall prepare a summary statement which shall show
the total quantities estimated to be required by all departments and offices,
of each item of such articles, commodities, supplies, equipment and materials.
The estimates and the summary shall show also the amount of all such articles,
commodities, supplies or equipment and materials, estimated to be on hand or in
stock in such departments and offices, and the net quantities which it will be
necessary or advisable to purchase during the ensuing year. The estimates and
the summary shall also show the quantity, character and estimated value of all
articles, commodities, supplies, equipment and materials or other property on
hand in the several departments, which is no longer usable or needed and which
may be condemned and sold by the City.
(Ord. No. 2-08. Passed 1-28-08, eff. 1-30-08)
§ 181.04 Standard Specifications
   The Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies shall prepare or cause to be
prepared and shall adopt and may alter, change and amend standard
specifications for each class, grade or description of the various articles,
commodities, supplies, equipment and materials ordinarily required by the City,
in every case where it is practicable to do so. Standard specifications shall
be such as will procure for the City articles, commodities, supplies, materials
and equipment of the best quality and character and design of the goods
required for the purposes to be served, and shall be so drawn as to facilitate
the making of bids therefrom, and as to encourage bidding from as many persons,
corporations and concerns as may be prepared to furnish the articles,
commodities, supplies, materials or equipment, as the same may be needed by the
City.
(Ord. No. 1119-61. Passed 6-12-61, eff. 6-14-61)
§ 181.05 Requisitions to Conform to Standard Specifications
   When standard specifications have been adopted covering any article,
commodity, supply, material or equipment, officers or employees thereafter
making requisitions for items to be used for purposes covered by standard
specifications shall make such requisitions in accordance with such standard
specifications, unless by reason of special circumstances any change therein is
necessary or economical in such special case. No exception shall be made unless
the requisition requesting it is accompanied by a written statement explaining
the necessity therefor and unless such statement and requisition are approved
by the Director of Finance.
(Ord. No. 1119-61. Passed 6-12-61, eff. 6-14-61)
§ 181.06 Procedures for Requisitions
   Requisitions for articles, commodities, supplies, materials or equipment by
any department or office shall be addressed to the Commissioner of Purchases
and Supplies, approved by the director of such department or the head of such
office and shall cite the City’s standard specifications for the items desired,
or shall be accompanied by samples or by adequate specifications, or by both,
in cases where the standard specifications are not applicable. If the
department or office has available a sufficient appropriation balance, the
Commissioner shall procure them by purchase under a purchase contract
previously made or shall procure them by purchase in the market.
(Ord. No. 2-08. Passed 1-28-08, eff. 1-30-08)
§ 181.07 Supplies or Services from Other Departments
   Whenever any office or division of the City requires services, supplies or
equipment which another office or division of the City is able to furnish,
suitable requisition may be made and such services, supplies or equipment may
be furnished. In such cases bids need not be obtained. Appropriate charges and
credits shall be made to accounts affected by such transactions.
(Ord. No. 1119-61. Passed 6-12-61, eff. 6-14-61)
§ 181.08 Purchases Not Exceeding $50,000
   All purchase or contracts involving an expenditure of not more than fifty
thousand dollars ($50,000.00) shall, whenever possible, be based on at least
three (3) bids and shall be awarded to the lowest and best bidder giving full
consideration to the goals fixed under Chapter
187 of these Codified Ordinances. The Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies
shall post a list of the requisitions requesting the purchases on a bulletin
board open to public inspection for a period of not less than forty-eight (48)
hours prior to the time fixed for the taking of bids, and if no satisfactory
bid is received under the posting, he or she shall solicit bids by direct mail
or by telephone to prospective vendors. Anything in the foregoing
notwithstanding, the Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies is authorized under
Section
108(b) of the Charter to purchase supplies, services, materials and equipment
through cooperative agreements involving an expenditure of not more than fifty
thousand dollars ($50,000.00) using state procedures and may sign all documents
with the State of Ohio or any of its political subdivisions that are necessary
to make the purchases, and may enter into one (1) or more contracts with the
vendors selected though that cooperative process.
(Ord. No. 1737-08. Passed 12-8-08, eff. 12-10-08)
§ 181.09 Purchases Not Exceeding $1,000
   Notwithstanding, and as an exception to the requirements set forth in
Section
181.08, whenever any office or department requisitions articles, commodities,
supplies, material or equipment which is seldom needed and which costs a total
of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or less, the Commissioner of Purchases and
Supplies is authorized to procure such articles, commodities, supplies,
material or equipment by noncompetitive purchase in the market for the best
price obtainable, provided the approval of the Director of Finance is first
obtained.
(Ord. No. 2-08. Passed 1-28-08, eff. 1-30-08)
§ 181.10 Purchases Exceeding $50,000 to be Authorized by Ordinance; Bids;
Contracts
   No purchase amounting to more than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00),
except as provided in Section
181.08, shall be made until authorized by ordinance of Council. After being so
authorized by ordinance of Council the Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies,
in addition to the posting required in Section
181.08 shall cause advertisements for bids to be made in the City Record once a
week for two (2) consecutive weeks and the Commissioner shall immediately
report the bids received to the director of the department involved, who in
turn shall transmit the bids with his or her recommendations to the Board of
Control, for consideration at its next regular meeting. Any or all bids may be
rejected. No purchase contract shall be awarded without the approval of the
Board, and only to the lowest and best bidder. Purchase contracts so approved
shall be reduced to writing and signed on behalf of the City by the director of
the department involved, and no purchase contract shall be made unless it is
reduced to writing and entered into under the ordinances of the City.
(Ord. No. 1737-08. Passed 12-8-08, eff. 12-10-08)
§ 181.101 Purchase or Rental of Commodities, Goods, and Services
   (a)   The Director of Finance, or other appropriate director, is authorized
to enter into one (1) or more standard or requirement contracts for purchase or
rental agreements or leases with or without an option to purchase, when the
Director of Finance determines they are financially advantageous, duly let to
the lowest and best bidder following the procedures stated in Section
181.10, for the following commodities, goods, or services that are required for
the usual daily operation of the various departments of the City, provided that
the estimated amount per contract year on any individual contract shall not
exceed two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00):
      (1)   Except when a public improvement, building construction materials
including, but not limited to, bricks, ready-mix concrete, dry wall, lumber,
paint, and roofing;
      (2)   Except when a public improvement, building maintenance and repair
including, but not limited to, parts and services for doors, elevators, HVAC,
mechanical systems, roofs, and windows;
      (3)   Except when a public improvement, road, sidewalk, and sewer repair
and replacement materials, supplies, and services, including but not limited
to, tack coat, manhole risers, crack sealing material, emulsion, cold mix,
guard rail supplies, liquid de-icer, salt inserts, traffic control devices,
quicklime, and disposal of materials;
      (4)   Construction equipment, without operators, including, but not
limited to, earth, snow, and debris moving and removal, and materials,
supplies, parts, and repair and maintenance services for them;
      (5)   Cleaning and janitorial maintenance equipment, services, and
supplies including, but not limited to, chemicals including pool chemicals,
odor control, paper products, and pest control;
      (6)   Educational and photographic equipment, supplies, parts, and
maintenance and repair services for them;
      (7)   Electrical supplies including, but not limited to, batteries,
fixtures, lighting, and wiring;
      (8)   Fuels and lubricants including, but not limited to, diesel,
gasoline, natural gas, grease, and oil, and delivery of them;
      (9)   Food and beverages for facility-user consumption at Camp Forbes,
and for resale at Highland and Seneca Golf Courses;
      (10)   Hardware including, but not limited to, handheld tools and
fasteners;
      (11)   Industrial gases including, but not limited to, acetylene, argon,
nitrogen, and oxygen;
      (12)   Laboratory and testing equipment and lab supplies and services;
      (13)   Except when a public improvement, landscaping equipment,
materials, supplies, parts, and repair and maintenance services, and supplies
including, but not limited to, indoor and outdoor plants, grounds, and trees
materials and maintenance and repair of any of them, and plant rentals;
      (14)   Medical equipment, materials, and supplies including, but not
limited to, first- responder/first-aid supplies, and pharmaceuticals;
      (15)   Mail, messenger, and moving services;
      (16)   Office supplies, furniture, and equipment including, but not
limited to, computers, computer peripherals and appurtenances, office machines,
copiers, printers, and printing and mailing equipment, and materials, supplies,
parts, and repair and maintenance services for any of them;
      (17)   Paper products including, but not limited to, fine papers,
printing media, envelopes, and printed forms;
      (18)   Plumbing equipment, materials, supplies, and parts including, but
not limited to, pipe, fittings, and fixtures;
      (19)   Power tools, portable powered machines, electric motors, pumps,
powered appliances, and milling and tapping machines, including materials,
supplies, parts, and maintenance and repair services for any of them;
      (20)   Program promotional items including, but not limited to,
advertising specialties, caps, and printed T-shirts;
      (21)   Property protection equipment, materials, supplies, parts, and
repair and maintenance services, including, but not limited to, fire
extinguisher and fire suppression equipment and testing, locksmith services and
supplies, property and casualty insurance covering City property and buildings,
and security services;
      (22)   Records management systems and services including, but not limited
to, microfilm, microfiche, and compact disc (CD) copying, file storage, data
entry, and shredding;
      (23)   Recreation and sports equipment;
      (24)   Snow and ice removal services;
      (25)   Uniforms, work clothing, laundry, towel, and linen service, and
supplies; and
      (26)   Vehicle maintenance and repair equipment, materials, supplies,
parts, and services.
   Any purchase under this section shall be made by the Commissioner of
Purchases and Supplies and paid from the annual appropriations made for such
purpose.
   (b)   That under Section
108(b) of the Charter, the purchases authorized by this section may be made
through cooperative agreements with other governmental agencies. The Director
of Finance may sign all documents that are necessary to make the purchases, and
may enter into one (1) or more contracts with the vendors selected through that
cooperative process.
(Ord. No. 1115-18. Passed 10-15-18, eff. 10-17-18)
§ 181.102 Authorization to Purchase Software or Other Licenses, Modules,
Updates, Upgrades, Enhancements, Training, Technical Support, Maintenance, and
Repairs
   (a)   When a director has been authorized by ordinance to acquire software,
the director of the department for which the software was acquired or the
Director of Finance is authorized to enter into one (1) or more standard
purchase or requirement contracts duly let to the lowest and best bidder as
provided in Section
181.10, for software or other licenses, modules, updates, upgrades,
enhancements, training, technical support, maintenance, and repair necessary to
expand, enhance, implement or maintain the authorized software.
   (b)   When a director has been authorized by ordinance to acquire software,
the director of the department for which the software was acquired or the
Director of Finance is authorized to acquire by contract or contracts with one
(1) or more software developers or vendors or one (1) or more firms of software
developers or vendors, software or other licenses, modules, updates, upgrades,
enhancements, training, technical support, maintenance, and repair necessary to
expand, enhance, implement or maintain the authorized software. The selection
of the software developers or vendors shall be made by the Board of Control on
the nomination of the director of the department for which the software was
acquired or the Director of Finance from lists of qualified software developers
or vendors available for employment as may be determined after a full and
complete canvass by the director of the department for which the software was
acquired or the Director of Finance for the purpose of compiling the lists.
   (c)   When a director has been authorized by ordinance to acquire a software
system, the director of the department for which the system was acquired or the
Director of Finance is authorized to execute one (1) or more license agreements
for software or other licenses needed to expand, enhance, implement or maintain
the system.
   (d)   When a director has been authorized to contract with a software
developer or vendor, whether specified in an authorizing ordinance or by Board
of Control resolution, to acquire software, the director of the department for
which the software is acquired or the Director of Finance is authorized to
enter into one (1) or more contracts with the software developer or vendor for
professional services necessary to perform as-needed services to expand,
enhance, implement or maintain the software, including but not limited to,
integration, implementation, migration, installation, design, interfacing,
maintenance, repair, upgrades, enhancements, training, training registration,
testing, and technical support.
   (e)   The Board of Control shall fix the compensation to be paid for the
software or other license, software systems or services authorized under this
ordinance which shall be paid from the annual appropriation made for such
purpose. The contract or contracts shall be prepared by the Director of Law,
approved by the director of the department for which the purchase is made or
the Director of Finance, and certified by the Director of Finance.
   (f)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize the
acquisition of new software or any professional services that, in the judgment
of the Director of Finance, would significantly expand or modify the
performance characteristics of the originally authorized software beyond the
function or purpose capabilities identified in the ordinance authorizing the
initial acquisition.
   (g)   That under Section
108(b) of the Charter, the purchases authorized by this ordinance may be made
through cooperative arrangements with other governmental agencies. The Director
of Finance may sign all documents that are necessary to make the purchases, and
may enter into one or more contracts with the vendors selected through that
cooperative process.
(Ord. No. 1183-18. Passed 10-1-18, eff. 10-2-18)
§ 181.103 Recognition of Electronic Records and Signatures
   (a)   For purposes of this section:
      (1)   “Contract” means the total legal obligation that results from the
parties’ agreement.
      (2)   “Electronic” means relating to technology having electrical,
digital, magnetic, wireless, optical, electromagnetic, or similar capabilities.
      (3)   “Electronic record” means a record created, generated, sent,
communicated, received, or stored by electronic means.
      (4)   “Electronic signature” means an electronic sound, symbol, or
process attached to or logically associated with a record and executed or
adopted by a person with the intent to sign the record.
      (5)   “Reverse auction” means a purchasing process in which offerors
submit bids or proposals in competing to sell services or supplies though a
internet software system in accordance with the rules and regulations adopted
by the Director of Finance under division (m) of this section.
      (6)   “Record” means information that is inscribed on a tangible medium
or that is stored in an electronic or other medium and is retrievable in
perceivable form.
   (b)   This section applies only to transactions where the party agrees to
conduct transactions by electronic means. Whether the party agrees to conduct a
transaction by electronic means is determined from the context and surrounding
circumstances, including the party’s conduct.
   (c)   A party that agrees to conduct a transaction by electronic means with
the City of Cleveland may refuse to conduct other transactions with the City of
Cleveland by electronic means. The right granted by this division may not be
waived by agreement.
   (d)   The director of the department involved may use electronic records and
electronic signatures to form any contract for the sale or purchase of goods.
   (e)   A record or signature may not be denied legal effect or enforceability
solely because it is in electronic form.
   (f)   A contract may not be denied legal effect or enforceability solely
because an electronic record was used in its formation.
   (g)   If a law or ordinance requires a record to be in writing, an
electronic record satisfies the requirement.
   (h)   If a law or ordinance requires a signature, an electronic signature
satisfies the requirement.
   (i)   If a law or ordinance requires a record to be acknowledged, certified,
or approved, the requirement is satisfied if the electronic signature of the
person authorized to perform those acts, together with all other information
required to be included by other applicable law or ordinance, is attached to or
logically associated with the record.
   (j)   An electronic record or electronic signature is attributable to a
person if it was the act of the person. The act of the person may be shown in
any manner, including a showing of the efficacy of any security procedure
applied to determine the person to which the electronic record or electronic
signature is attributable.
   (k)   Whenever the Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies determines that
the use of a reverse auction is an advantageous method to purchase services or
supplies, the Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies may purchase services or
supplies by reverse auction.
   (l)   If a law or ordinance requires a purchase of services or supplies by a
competitive sealed bid or sealed request for proposal, a contract to purchase
services or supplies made though a reverse auction or an electronic record
received through an internet software system in accordance with the rules and
regulations adopted by the Director of Finance pursuant to division (m) of this
section satisfies the requirement.
   (m)   The Director of Finance may adopt rules and regulations to carry out
the provisions of this section, including but not limited to setting forth all
of the following, which shall be effective thirty (30) days after publication
in the City Record:
      (1)   The requirements for the method of creation, maintenance, and
security of electronic records and electronic signatures.
      (2)   If electronic records is signed by electronic means, all of the
following:
         A.   The type of electronic signature required;
         B.   The manner and format in which the electronic signature must be
affixed to the electronic record.
      (3)   The security procedure that evidences the person to which the
electronic record, electronic signature, or bid or proposal submitted though a
reverse auction is attributable.
      (4)   Control processes and procedures as appropriate to ensure adequate
preservation, integrity, security, confidentiality, and auditability of
electronic records and bids and proposals offerors submit in a reverse auction.
      (5)   The procedural and substantive requirements for the Commissioner of
Purchases and Supplies to purchase services or supplies by reverse auction.
      (6)   Any other required attributes for electronic records, electronic
signatures, or reverse auctions that are specified for corresponding non-
electronic records, non-electronic signatures, or non- electronic procurement
practices that are reasonably, commercially, or legally necessary under the
circumstances.
(Ord. No. 1032-07. Passed 8-8-07, eff. 8-16-07)
§ 181.11 Noncompetitive Purchases; Purchase of Coal
   The Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies is authorized to make
noncompetitive purchases for the best price obtainable in the following
circumstances:
   (a)   When the purchase is for the purpose of determining the fitness or
suitability of any product to meet the special requirements of the City and is
limited to the smallest amount sufficient for test purposes, in no event more
than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
   (b)   Where emergency repairs or necessary replacement parts are required
immediately for the continued operation of any automotive or other equipment
involving an expenditure of not more than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00).
   (c)   When the director of the department involved requisitions the purchase
of any commodity or article by brand name setting forth the reasons why no
other commodity or article except the one specified is suitable for the
intended use, when the amount involved is less than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) and the Director of Finance has approved the purchase, and with the
additional approval of the Mayor when the amount is more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) but not more than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00).
   (d)   The purchase of coal for the various divisions of the City shall be
based on the certified copy of the analysis of the coal made by a recognized
independent testing laboratory which shall be filed with the bid and made a
part thereof, and the specified satisfactory burning quality of the coal in the
equipment for which purchased. Conformity of the coal to the certified analysis
shall be determined by chemical tests conducted by the City and the
satisfactory burning quality of the coal shall be determined by test in use in
the equipment for which the coal is purchased. Failure of the coal to meet the
chemical test and the burning test shall be cause for rejection of the bid. The
delivery of coal not meeting the chemical test and the satisfactory burning
quality shall be cause for cancellation of the contract if a contract is
awarded. The costs incurred by the City in making all chemical tests shall be
charged to the bidder or contractor in the event that the coal tendered does
not meet the tests. For the purpose of determining conformity to the chemical
analysis and satisfactory burning quality of any coal proposed to be sold to
the City, the bidder may be required to supply from one (1) to ten (10) car
loads of the coal.
(Ord. No. 1737-08. Passed 12-8-08, eff. 12-10-08)
§ 181.12 Emergency Purchases and Contracts
   (a)   When an emergency occurs requiring an immediate purchase to prevent an
interruption of public service that would endanger public health, safety or
welfare, as declared and determined by the department director or designee, the
Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies, affording as much competition as is
practical under the circumstances, may make the purchase notwithstanding that
the expenditure exceeds fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) when the Mayor and
the President of Council determine the immediate purchase is necessary to
prevent an interruption of public service that would endanger public health,
safety or welfare, provided that the purchase and the nature of the emergency
shall be reported to Council at the next regular meeting following the
authorization of the purchase.
   (b)   Nothing contained in this section shall authorize any contract for
service to be performed beyond the period of the second meeting of Council
following the authorization of the contract by the empowered officials.
(Ord. No. 1737-08. Passed 12-8-08, eff. 12-10-08)
§ 181.13 Purchases of Surplus Federal Commodities
   The Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies is authorized to purchase from
the United States or any instrumentality or agency charged with the disposal of
surplus commodities, any materials, supplies or equipment which may be
determined by the Board of Control to be necessary or desirable for any of the
several departments of the City at the price fixed by the United States or
instrumentality or agency thereof. When any department receives a Federal
grant, the Commissioner may utilize procurement sources available throughout
the General Services Administration Agency of the United States prior to
private source procurement in the expenditure of Federal grant money. All
purchases under this section of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) or less
shall first be authorized by the Board of Control and a written report of every
purchase shall be filed with Council forthwith.
(Ord. No. 1737-08. Passed 12-8-08, eff. 12-10-08)
§ 181.14 Purchase of Materials Produced by State-Owned Institutions
   The Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies is authorized to purchase from
the State any materials, supplies or equipment as may be manufactured or
produced in any of the State-owned institutions as the Board of Control shall
determine necessary or desirable for any of the several departments of the City
at the prices fixed by the proper authority of the State. However, all
purchases in addition to the authorization by the Board shall, if more than
fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), be authorized by the Council.
(Ord. No. 1737-08. Passed 12-8-08, eff. 12-10-08)
§ 181.15 Trade-In Allowance
   Wherever personal property, which has been used by the City, can in the
opinion of the Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies, be more advantageously
exchanged as part payment of the purchase price of a new article of a similar
nature, the Commissioner shall advertise for bids for prices at which a new
article will be furnished the City. Such bid shall recite, in addition to such
price and the other recitations required by the ordinances of the City, the
amount which will be allowed to the City for the used article which is proposed
to be given in exchange as part payment for the new article to be purchased by
the City.
(Ord. No. 1119-61. Passed 6-12-61, eff. 6-14-61)
§ 181.16 Purchases of Perishable Supplies and Foodstuffs
   The purchase of foodstuffs and perishable supplies required for use in the
hospitals and similar institutions and the purchase of beer for sale at the
golf courses of the City, which the Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies has
determined to be impracticable to obtain through a requirement contract basis,
may be made on orders given in the open market without posting. The purchases
authorized under this section shall not be considered to be splitting of
requisitions as prohibited under Charter Sections
108 and 109.
(Ord. No. 9-03. Passed 3-3-03, eff. 3-5-03)
§ 181.17 Analysis of Coal
   Whenever any coal is purchased by the City under specifications which
require a formal analysis of the coal, such analysis shall be made either by
regular employees of the City or by an outside firm of analysis. The Mayor
shall determine from time to time by which method analysis shall be made.
(Ord. No. 1119-61. Passed 6-12-61, eff. 6-14-61)
§ 181.18 Sale of Products Resulting from Operation of Municipal Departments;
Sale of Recyclable Materials
   (a)   Subject to division (b) of this section, all products, byproducts, and
materials resulting from the operation of municipal departments, including
without limitation grease and tankage manufactured by the Division of Waste
Collection and Disposal, and rags, waste paper, bottles and scrap metal
accumulated by the Division of Streets, shall be sold by the Commissioner of
Purchases and Supplies at such times and in such manner as may be directed by
the Board of Control.
   (b)   All materials collected by the City or its contractor pursuant to the
City’s curbside recycling program may be sold by the Commissioner of Purchases
and Supplies to the highest bidder after a full and complete canvass performed
by the Director of Public Service. The Director of Public Service shall provide
to the Board of Control on a monthly basis a complete listing of all sales
agreements entered into pursuant to this division (b).
   (c)   All contracts for and sales of the products, byproducts, and materials
described in division (a) of this section shall be advertised and awarded in
the same manner as are purchases of like amount. However, if no satisfactory
bids are received following advertisement as herein provided, the director of
the department having charge of the products, byproducts or materials is hereby
empowered, when so directed by the Board of Control to employ the customarily
commercial methods used in private enterprise of a like nature to secure for
the City the benefit of a satisfactory contract.
(Ord. No. 934-91. Passed 5-20-91, eff. 5-28-91)
§ 181.181 Purchase of Collection Services for Recyclable Materials
   In the event that market conditions cause the City to be unable to sell
materials which the City or its contractor has collected as part of the City’s
curbside recycling program, the Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies is
authorized to enter into a purchase contract or contracts for the collection of
such materials from the City with the lowest bidder after a full and complete
canvass performed by the Director of Public Service, provided that the amount
of any contract for the purchase of collection services shall not exceed fifty
thousand dollars ($50,000.00). The Director of Public Service shall provide the
Board of Control on a monthly basis with a complete listing of all purchase
agreements entered into under this section.
(Ord. No. 1737-08. Passed 12-8-08, eff. 12-10-08)
§ 181.19 Excess Personal Property; Use by Other Departments; Sale
   (a)   Except as provided in Section
181.15, all personal property of the City not needed by the department or
office in whose charge such property is, shall be turned over to the
Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies. If any such property is suitable to be
used by any other department or office of the City, the Commissioner shall,
when so directed, sell such property at its current value to such other
department or office, or shall place it in the City storerooms or warehouses
until such time as it may be needed by some department or office of the City.
If such property is not needed or is not suitable for the use of any department
or office of the City, when so directed by the Board of Control it shall be
sold by the Commissioner and the proceeds of such sale shall be turned in to
the fund of the City from which such property was paid for. Such sale shall be
posted and advertised in every case in like manner as are purchases in amounts
equal to the anticipated receipts from such sales. However, in the event the
Board so directs, the Commissioner may sell such property at public auction, to
be held at a place to be designated by the Commissioner, and named in the
advertisement of sale to be posted and advertised for two (2) consecutive weeks
prior to the date of such sale.
   (b)   When the Director of Public Safety makes a determination in accordance
with Section
101 of the Charter with respect to the service weapon of a police officer with
more than twenty-three (23) years of service in the Division of Police or with
respect to the helmet of a fire fighter with more than twenty-three (23) years
of service in the Division of Fire, or with respect to the badge of an EMT/
Paramedic with more than twenty-three (23) years of service, such weapon,
helmet and/or badge shall be turned over to the Commissioner of Purchases and
Supplies. Military service time purchased by an officer, fire fighter or EMT/
Paramedic following twenty (20) years of service shall be applied to the
service time necessary for this provision. This provision shall apply to any
officer, fire fighter, or EMT/Paramedic under disability retirement. The
Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies shall, when so directed by the Board of
Control, offer to sell such service weapon, helmet and/or badge to such police
officer, fire fighter or EMT/Paramedic for its fair market value. In lieu of
paying cash for the weapon, helmet and/or badge, such police officer, fire
fighter or EMT/Paramedic may elect to forego all or any portion of any uniform
or uniform maintenance allowance to which he or she is entitled at the time of
the purchase; provided, however, that the sum of any cash payment and the
allowances devoted to the purchase shall equal the fair market value of the
item or items.
   (c)   When the Director of Public Safety makes a determination in accordance
with Section
101 of the Charter with respect to any apparatus, equipment and/or personal
property of the Division of Fire, upon resolution of the Board of Control, the
Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies may loan such apparatus, equipment and/
or personal property to a local museum, or a like entity existing to preserve
the history of the Division of Fire, for use in a fire fighter museum.
   (d)   When the Director of Public Safety makes a determination in accordance
with Section
101 of the Charter with respect to any apparatus, equipment and/or personal
property of the Division of Police, upon resolution of the Board of Control,
the Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies may loan such apparatus, equipment
and/or personal property to a local museum, or a like entity, existing to
preserve the history of the Division of Police, for use in a museum.
   (e)   When the Director of Public Safety makes a determination in accordance
with Section
101 of the Charter with respect to any apparatus, equipment and/or personal
property of the Division of Emergency Medical Service, upon resolution of the
Board of Control, the Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies may loan such
apparatus, equipment and/or personal property to a local museum, or a like
entity, existing to preserve the history of the Division of Emergency Medical
Service, for use in a museum.
(Ord. No. 1532-02. Passed 6-11-07, eff. 6-15-07)
§ 181.20 Specifications for Purchases
   Specifications for the purchase of supplies, materials or equipment shall be
prepared by the Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies with such technical
assistance as he or she may require from the proper officers of the department
requesting such purchase. In conformity with the requirements of Charter
Section
102 he or she shall see that such specifications do not unduly restrict
competition and are so prepared as to secure the supplies, materials or
equipment required for the operation of the department requesting the same at
the best available price.
(Ord. No. 1119-61. Passed 6-12-61, eff. 6-14-61)
§ 181.201 Use of Recycled Material
   (a)   For purposes of this section:
      (1)   “Recycled paper” shall mean paper which is at least fifty percent
(50%) by weight composed of material which otherwise would have been destined
for the waste stream, including without limitation newspapers, magazines,
paperboard, boxes, tabulating cards, used fibrous material such as rags, and
overstock or obsolete inventories from distributors, wholesalers, printers, and
others.
      (2)   “Recycled material” shall mean material other than paper, the
components of which, in whole or in part, would otherwise have been destined
for the waste stream.
   (b)   Whenever the City seeks bids on paper products, the Commissioner of
Purchases and Supplies shall take all reasonable steps to ensure that vendors
of recycled paper products are notified and given the opportunity to submit
bids.
   (c)   In evaluating bids for paper products, the Commissioner of Purchases
and Supplies shall give preference to recycled paper products, provided that
said Commissioner, in consultation with the director of the user department,
determines that the quality of such products is equal or superior to those non-
recycled paper products which are bid, and provided further that the price bid
for recycled paper products does not exceed the lowest price bid for non-
recycled paper products by more than five percent (5%).
   (d)   All bid specifications for manufactured products other than paper
shall request the bidder to determine whether he or she is able to submit a bid
using recycled material. If both of the following apply, the bidder shall
submit an alternate bid using the maximum amount of recycled material possible
in light of the technology in existence at the time the bid is submitted:
      (1)   The product which is made of recycled material is of equal or
superior quality to that of a like product which is made from non-recycled
material; and
      (2)   The product may be made at a cost which is not more than five
percent (5%) greater than the cost of a like product which is made from non-
recycled material.
   Even if divisions (d)(1) and (d)(2) of this section do not apply, the bidder
may, at his or her option, submit an alternate bid using recycled material.
   (e)   In evaluating bids for a manufactured product other than paper, the
Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies shall give preference to a product made
from recycled material, provided that said Commissioner, in consultation with
the director of the user department, determines that the quality of such
product is equal or superior to that of a like product which is bid using only
non-recycled material, and provided further that the price bid for the
manufactured product made from recycled material does not exceed by more than
five percent (5%) the lowest price bid for the manufactured product using non-
recycled material. The Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies shall promulgate
regulations for the application of the preference. Said regulations shall be
published in the City Record and shall include a requirement that the
Commissioner shall take into consideration the total percentage of recycled
material used in the product.
(Ord. No. 781-A-91. Passed 9-30-91, eff. 10-8-91)
   Note: Pursuant to Section 4 of Ord. No. 781-A-91, Section
181.201 shall take effect October 8, 1992.
§ 181.21 Advertisement of Bids
   Every advertisement for bids shall specify the place where bids will be
received and the day and place where the same will be opened, and shall state
that at 12:00 noon on the last day for filing bids made pursuant to
advertisement, the Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies will open and read
all such bids.
(Ord. No. 2929-76. Passed 12-20-76, eff. 12-27-76)
§ 181.22 Form of Bid
   Every bid must be made upon the blank form of bid attached to the invitation
to bid, must give the price of each and every item bid on, in figures, must
contain the full name of every person, firm or corporation interested in the
bid and the address of the person, firm or the president and secretary of the
corporation bidding and the name and address of every subcontractor and
materialman which the bidder intends to utilize in accomplishment of the
contract work. If a corporation, the bidder must give the name of the State in
which it is incorporated and the bid must be clearly signed with the full name
and address of each person, firm or corporation interested in the bid.
(Ord. No. 792-03. Passed 6-10-03, eff. 6-12-03)
§ 181.23 Bidder’s Affidavits
   Each bidder shall be required to submit with his or her bid, an affidavit
stating that neither he or she nor his or her agents nor any other party for
him or her has paid to or agreed to pay, directly or indirectly, any person,
firm or corporation any money or valuable consideration for assistance in
procuring or attempting to procure the contract bid upon, and further agreeing
that no such money or reward will be hereafter paid. This affidavit must be on
a form provided by the City.
(Ord. No. 2160-84. Passed 10-8-84, eff. 10-15-84)
§ 181.24 Bid Bond; Certified or Cashier’s Check
   Each bid for purchase contracts in excess of fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00) shall be accompanied by a bid bond signed by a surety company
authorized to do business in Ohio, or by a cashier’s check or certified check
on a solvent bank, which bond or check shall be five percent (5%) of the amount
of the bid. The bond or check shall be given as security that if the bid is
accepted a contract will be entered into and the performance of it properly
secured.
(Ord. No. 1737-08. Passed 12-8-08, eff. 12-10-08)
§ 181.25 Insufficiency of Certified or Cashier’s Check
   (a)   Where a check has been deposited with a bid which through inadvertence
of the bidder has not been certified, or the amount is insufficient by an
amount less than ten percent (10%) of the required amount under the provisions
of Section
181.24, the Board of Control, when satisfied that it is in the public interest
to do so, may waive such informality or irregularity and approve the contract
to the lowest and best bidder notwithstanding such informality or irregularity.
   (b)   In the event of any waiver by the Board, the Mayor shall transmit to
Council, at the next regular meeting thereafter, a report of the waiver
containing the name of each bidder, the amount of each bid, the purpose and
amount of the contract awarded and the nature and reason for the waiver.
(Ord. No. 1819-08. Passed 12-8-08, eff. 12-10-08)
§ 181.26 Disposition of Bid Bond, Certified or Cashier’s Check
   (a)   The bid bond, certified or cashier’s check shall be forfeited and the
principal amount of the bid bond shall be paid to the City, or the check shall
be surrendered to the City as the agreed amount of liquidated damages in case
of failure to enter into contract for the work bid on. The bid bond or check
shall be released or returned to the bidder in case his or her bid is rejected.
   (b)   In case his or her bid is accepted, the bid bond or certified or
cashier’s check shall be returned after the contract has been signed and the
performance bond has been furnished to and approved by the City. The bid bond
or certified or cashier’s check of the next lowest and best bidder shall be
retained until the lowest and best bidder has signed and secured the
performance of his or her contract, or if he or she fails to do so, the bid
bond or check shall be further retained until the second lowest and best bidder
has signed and properly secured the contract awarded to him or her. In default
thereof, the bid bond or certified or cashier’s check shall be forfeited to the
City as liquidated damages.
(Ord. No. 1819-08. Passed 12-8-08, eff. 12-10-08)
§ 181.27 Unacceptable Bids
   No bid will be accepted from, or contract awarded to, any person, firm or
corporation that is in arrears or is in default to the City upon any debt or
contract, or that is a defaulter as surety or otherwise, upon any obligation to
the City, or has failed to perform faithfully any previous contract with the
City.
(Ord. No. 1119-61. Passed 6-12-61, eff. 6-14-61)
§ 181.28 Withdrawal of Bids
   No bid will be allowed to be withdrawn after it has been deposited with the
Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies.
(Ord. No. 1119-61. Passed 6-12-61, eff. 6-14-61)
§ 181.29 Endorsement, Tabulation and Summary of Bids
   All bids shall be endorsed with the title or number of the proposed
contract, or of the advertisement therefor, and with the name and residence of
the bidder, and shall be properly tabulated and summarized immediately after
being read. The tabulation and summary shall become a public record in the
office of the Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies.
(Ord. No. 1119-61. Passed 6-12-61, eff. 6-14-61)
§ 181.30 Rejection or Acceptance of Bids
   The City, through the Board of Control, shall reserve the right to reject
any or all bids, and any part of any bid, and also the right to waive any
informalities in the bid. In awarding a contract, the City shall reserve the
right to consider all elements entering into the question of determining the
responsibility of the bidder. Any bid which is incomplete, conditional, obscure
or which contains additions not called for or irregularities of any kind, may
be cause for rejection of bid.
(Ord. No. 1119-61. Passed 6-12-61, eff. 6-14-61)
§ 181.31 Time of Award
   Unless further time is required for analysis of the bids or investigation of
the responsibility of any bidder and in the absence of a limitation upon the
time of acceptance set forth in the bid, the Board of Control shall make an
award or reject all bids not later than the second regular meeting of the Board
following the opening of bids. Any extension of time beyond the date fixed by
the successful bidder or the fourth regular meeting of the Board, whichever
event shall first occur, shall be subject to agreement between the bidder and
the Board.
(Ord. No. 1119-61. Passed 6-12-61, eff. 6-14-61)
§ 181.32 Bonds to Secure Performance of Purchase Contracts
   Except for a purchase contract awarded in the amount of fifty thousand
dollars ($50,000.00) or less, or where by reason of the nature of the purchase
the Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies, with the approval of the Director
of Finance, has determined that it is impracticable or unnecessary to require a
bond, or for contracts anticipated to be under five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00) and of a type where MBEs or FBEs are determined to be
underutilized at a statistically significant level, when the Commissioner of
Purchases and Supplies, with the prior approval of both the Director of Finance
and the Director of the Office of Equal Opportunity, based on standards
promulgated by the directors to protect the City’s interests, has determined
that to reduce or waive a bond requirement will enhance contract competition by
making City contract awards equitably available to all qualified contractors
and will benefit the City’s interests, the performance of contracts for the
purchase of articles, commodities, supplies, materials or equipment, or
services shall be secured by a bond with good and sufficient sureties, approved
by the Director of Law, and in an amount equal to at least twenty-five percent
(25%) of the contract price. Said bond shall be substantially in the following
form:
   FORM B
   BOND
   Know All Men by These Presents, That we, the undersigned _______________ as
principal, and _______________ as surety, are hereby held and firmly bound unto
the City of Cleveland in the penal sum of _______________ Dollars
($__________), for the payment of which well and truly to be made, we hereby
jointly and severally bind ourselves, our heirs, executors, administrators,
successors and assigns by these presents.
   The conditions of this obligation are such that whereas the above named
principal did, on the __________ day of __________, 20___, enter into the
contract hereto attached with the City of Cleveland, to furnish and deliver to
the City of Cleveland the goods, wares, merchandise or services mentioned
therein, which said contract is made a part of this bond the same as if fully
set forth herein:
   Now, if the principal shall well and truly execute all and singular the
stipulations by it to be executed in the aforesaid contract, and shall fully
perform all and singular the terms, conditions, and requirements of the
specifications and contract, and shall indemnify and save harmless the City of
Cleveland from any and all suits and expense over and above the expense
included in the contract price for royalties or infringements on patents that
may be involved in the construction of the goods, wares and merchandise
contracted for, or of any part thereof, and further shall indemnify and save
harmless said City of Cleveland from all liens, charges, claims, demands, loss,
costs and damages of every kind and nature whatsoever in the performing or
completing of said contract, then this obligation shall be void, otherwise
shall be and remain in full force and virtue of law, it being expressly
understood and agreed that the liability of the surety for any and all claims
hereunder shall in no event exceed the penal amount of this obligation as
herein stated.
   Provided that any forbearance on the part of the City of Cleveland toward
the above named principal in respect to its neglect or failure to perform any
or all of said agreements or obligations on its part to be performed under said
contract, shall not in any manner operate to release or discharge the surety
from its liability under this bond.
Witness our signatures this __________ day of __________, A.D. 20___
   __________________________________________
   __________________________________________
   __________________________________________
   Principal.
   __________________________________________
   __________________________________________
   __________________________________________
   Surety.
(Ord. No. 793-03. Passed 6-10-03, eff. 7-20-03)
§ 181.33 Release of Bond
   The contractor’s bond will not be released until all of the provisions of
the contract or of any contract phase for which the contractor has furnished a
separate bond have been fulfilled.
(Ord. No. 794-03. Passed 6-10-03, eff. 6-12-03)
§ 181.34 Requirements for Contract Execution
   A contract shall be deemed executed when signed by the parties thereto,
certified by the Director of Finance as required by Charter Section
106, secured by the required performance bond and approved by the Director of
Law as required by Charter Section
83.
(Ord. No. 1119-61. Passed 6-12-61, eff. 6-14-61)
§ 181.35 Filing of Original Contract
   The original contract entered into and executed in accordance with these
Codified Ordinances shall be filed in the office of the Commissioner of
Accounts. One (1) certified copy shall be filed in the office or department
affected by the contract and one (1) copy shall be filed with the contractor.
(Ord. No. 1119-61. Passed 6-12-61, eff. 6-14-61)
§ 181.36 Compliance with Fair Employment Practice in Northern Ireland
   (a)   All contractors and any subcontractors having more than a fifty
percent (50%) interest in a contract, prior to any contract being awarded by
the City, shall disclose on a form to be prescribed by the Commissioner of
Purchases and Supplies, if said contractor or subcontractor or any controlling
shareholder, subsidiary, or parent corporation of said contractor or
subcontractor is engaged in any business or trading for profit in Northern
Ireland. As used in division (a) of this section, “controlling shareholder”
means any shareholder owning more than fifty percent (50%) of the stock in the
corporation or more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the stock in the
corporation if no other shareholder owns a larger share of the stock in the
corporation.
   (b)   Any contractor or subcontractor making the disclosure prescribed in
division (a) of this section shall stipulate to the Commissioner of Purchases
and Supplies, that the said contractor or subcontractor, and all enterprises
included in the disclosure are taking lawful and good faith steps to engage in
fair employment practices which are relevant to the standards embodied in the
“MacBride Principles for Fair Employment in Northern Ireland.” Any contractor
or subcontractor required to make the stipulation pursuant to this division (b)
shall have supplied such information concerning their operations in Northern
Ireland to Investor Responsibility Research Center, Inc. (“IRRC”), an
independent research agency, as is necessary for the IRRC to evaluate their
compliance with fair employment practices in Northern Ireland. The Commissioner
of Purchases and Supplies shall consider the information supplied to the IRRC
in determining whether a contractor or subcontractor has accurately supplied
the stipulation prescribed in this division (b).
   (c)   Any contractor or subcontractor failing to make the disclosure
prescribed in division (a) of this section, or failing to accurately make the
stipulation prescribed in division (b) of this section, or failing to supply
the information to the IRRC prescribed in division (b) of this section, shall
not be eligible to provide any goods or services whatsoever for use by the
City, in return for payments, fees, or commissions from City funds.
   (d)   Any contractor or subcontractor which is awarded a contract to supply
goods or services whatsoever for use by the City, in return for payments, fees,
or commissions with City funds, and which is subsequently deemed to have failed
to make the disclosure prescribed by division (a) of this section, falsely made
the stipulation prescribed by division (b) of this section or falsely supplied
information to the IRRC as prescribed in division (b) of this section shall be
declared to have acted in default of its contract and be subject to the
remedies for default contained in the contract.
   (e)   Any contractor or subcontractor which has failed to cure any default
of its contract which has been declared in accordance with division (d) of this
section shall be automatically excluded without reserve, from tendering or
bidding for the supply of any goods or services whatsoever for use by the City,
for a period of two (2) calendar years.
   (f)   Any contractor or subcontractor which enters into contract with the
City to supply any goods or services whatsoever, having made the stipulation
prescribed in division (b) of this section, and which fails, or refuses to
comply with said stipulation, shall be deemed to have acted in breach of
contract and shall be deemed to have acted in default of its contract and shall
be subject to the provisions of divisions (d) and (e) of this section.
   (g)   The Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies shall provide a list of the
persons, firms or corporations who have (1) refused to make the disclosure
called for in division (a) of this section; and/or (2) those that have made a
stipulation pursuant to division (b) of this section; and/or (3) those who are
in default of their contract under this section to the Clerk of City Council by
April 1st of each year. Said list shall be made available for public
inspection.
   (h)   This section shall, by way of limitation, apply to all contracts let
by the Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies or that lawfully should be let by
the Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies, except any contract entered into
pursuant to the emergency procurement procedure set forth in Section
181.12 of the Codified Ordinances or any contract to a contractor or
subcontractor where there is no other contractor or subcontractor who will
contract to supply goods or services at comparable quality at a comparable
price. The Director of Finance shall report to the Council any contract entered
into pursuant to the exception specified in this division (h).
   (i)   The Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies shall not enforce the
provisions of this section prior to March 16, 1992.
(Ord. No. 58-97. Passed 1-13-97, eff. 1-22-97 without the signature of the
Mayor)
§ 181.37 Subcontractors and Suppliers
   (a)   The contractor shall not sublet nor shall any subcontractor commence
performance of any part of the work included, or any subcontractor or supplier
fabricate or deliver materials or supplies to or for the contractor under the
contract, without the previous written consent of the Board of Control.
Subcontracting, if permitted, shall not relieve the contractor or his or her
surety of any of his, her or its obligations under the contract.
   (b)   Failure by the contractor to obtain consent of the Board of Control
for any subcontractor or supplier shall be a breach of the contract for which
the contractor may incur a penalty.
   (c)   The contractor shall be and remain solely responsible to City for the
acts or faults of his or her subcontractor and of such subcontractor’s
officers, agents and employees, each of whom shall, for this purpose, be deemed
to be the agent or employee of the contractor to the extent of his or her
subcontract. The contractor shall promptly, on request of the City file a
conformed copy of the subcontract with prices deleted, as a condition precedent
to the approval of a subcontractor. The contractor and subcontractor shall
jointly and severally agree that subcontracting does not obligate the City to
pay, or to see to the payment of any sums to any subcontractor.
(Ord. No. 792-03. Passed 6-10-03, eff. 6-12-03)
CHAPTER 183 – REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS
183.01   Purchase or Lease of Real Estate
183.02   Sale or Lease of City-Owned Real Estate
183.021   Land Reutilization Programs
183.022   Gifts of Real Property
183.023   Lease of Real Property Acquired at Cleveland Hopkins International
Airport
183.024   Acquiring properties from the Department of Housing and Urban
Development and Fannie Mae for the Land Reutilization Program
183.03   Lease by Way of Concession
183.04   Concession Agreement and Contract for Use of City-Owned Facilities
183.041   Concession Agreements at Cleveland Hopkins International Airport
183.042   Permit Agreements for Sale of Alcoholic Beverages at Airline Clubs
183.043   Permit Agreements with Advisory Committees of City Recreation Centers
183.044   Concession Agreements with Airlines for Promotions at Cleveland
Hopkins International Airport and Burke Lakefront Airport
183.05   Leases of City-Owned Facilities for Towers and Antennas
183.06   Advertisement for Bids
183.07   Appraisals
183.071   Environmental Assessments
183.08   Purchase of Land Sold at Auctions or by Court Order
183.09   Demolition of Buildings on Lands Acquired for Public Improvements
183.10   Sale and Removal of Structures on Real Estate Acquired by City
183.11   Relocation of Dwellings Purchased for Freeways Prohibited
183.12   Backfilling of Holes Left from Demolition
183.13   Bond or Letter of Credit for Concession Agreements and Leases by Way
of Concession
183.14   Interdepartmental Transfer of Real Estate
183.15   Disposition of Escheated Lands
183.16   Licenses for use of City Property
183.99   Penalty
Charter reference:
   City authorized to sell, lease, or hold property, Charter §
1
Statutory reference:
   Annexation authority and regulations, RC 709.01 et seq.
§ 183.01 Purchase or Lease of Real Estate
   No real estate shall be purchased or leased by or for the City, except in
pursuance of an ordinance passed by a majority vote of all members of Council.
The ordinance shall contain the following:
   (a)   The purpose for which the real estate to be purchased or leased is to
be used;
   (b)   A description of the real estate to be purchased or leased;
   (c)   The price or rental to be paid for the real estate;
   (d)   The fund from which the purchase price or rental is to be paid;
   (e)   The kind of conveyance or lease to be accepted by the City.
(Ord. No. 2069-58. Passed 12-15-58, eff. 12-17-58)
§ 183.02 Sale or Lease of City-Owned Real Estate
   No real estate belonging to the City shall be sold or leased unless so
directed by the Board of Control and except pursuant to an ordinance setting
forth the following:
   (a)   A description of the real estate to be sold or leased;
   (b)   A finding that the real estate is not needed for public use;
   (c)   The reason for selling or leasing the real estate;
   (d)   In case of lakefront lands, a finding that the sale or lease of the
real estate is in conformity with the provisions of Charter Section
45;
   (e)   The kind of conveyance or lease to be given by the City.
(Ord. No. 2069-58. Passed 12-15-58, eff. 12-17-58)
§ 183.021 Land Reutilization Programs
   (a)   Residential Land Bank.
      (1)   The Director of Development shall administer a Land Reutilization
Program for residential property established under RC Chapter 5722 and adopted
and implemented by Ordinance 2076-76, passed October 25, 1976, and shall
perform the duties specified in RC 5722.06. Land acquired as part of the Land
Reutilization Program for residential property may be referred to as
Residential Land Bank property.
      (2)   If Residential Land Bank property is sold, it shall be sold
according to the terms of RC Chapter 5722, without competitive bidding, for not
less than fair market value, with reference to such terms and conditions,
restrictions and covenants to assure the effective reutilization of the land,
as the Board of Control shall determine and authorize, and the land shall be
conveyed notwithstanding any other provisions of the Codified Ordinances to the
contrary.
      (3)   If a member of Council does not disapprove or request a hold in
writing to the Director of Development within forty-five (45) days of
notification of a proposed sale, easement conveyance, or lease of a property in
the Residential Land Bank in his or her ward then that process described in
this section shall be used for the sale, easement conveyance, or lease of the
property in his or her ward. Within forty-five (45) days of notification, a
member of Council may submit a written request for one (1) additional thirty
(30) day extension.
      (4)   The Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies when directed by the
Director of Development is authorized to sell or lease any land in the
Residential Land Bank if the purchaser of the land is neither tax delinquent
nor has any existing Building or Housing Code violations on property owned in
the City. Each instrument of conveyance shall contain provisions and use
restrictions as Council deems necessary or appropriate to protect the interests
of the neighborhood and the City.
      (5)   The Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies when directed by the
Director of Development is authorized to convey easement interests in any land
in the Residential Land Bank at a price determined to be fair market value by
the Board of Control taking into account the nature of the easement and the
easement shall be conveyed notwithstanding any other provision of the Codified
Ordinances to the contrary.
      (6)   That the conveyance of easement interests shall be made by official
deed of easement prepared by the Director of Law and executed by the Director
of Development on behalf of the City of Cleveland. The deed of easement shall
contain such other terms and conditions that the Director of Law determines to
be necessary to protect and benefit the City.
      (7)   Before the acquisition of any residential property with multiple
parcels into the Residential Land Bank, the Director of Development shall
conduct all appropriate inquiries in accordance with rules adopted by the
United States Environmental Protection Agency under the requirements of the
Small Business Liability Relief and Brownfields Revitalization Act (Pub. L. No.
107-118, 115 stat. 2356).
      (8)   The Director of Development is authorized to deposit the proceeds
from the sale of any property from the Residential Land Bank property into
Special Revenue Fund No. 17 SF 964. This fund shall be used for costs
associated with acquisition, maintenance, remediation, and disposition of
Residential Land Bank property including costs for insurance and for activities
related to the recovery of costs incurred on these properties. Further, funds
received by the City of Cleveland from direct insurance claim settlements, cost
recovery efforts initiated by the Land Reutilization Program for residential
property, demolition or remediation actions as a result of the Program, and
grants, donations or any other sources pledged to the Program shall be
deposited in Special Revenue Fund No. 17 SF 964.
   (b)   Industrial-Commercial Land Bank.
      (1)   The Director of Development shall administer a Land Reutilization
Program for industrial and commercial property established under RC Chapter
5722 and adopted and implemented by Ordinance 2076-76, passed October 25, 1976,
and shall perform the duties specified in RC 5722.06. Land, including
residential properties, acquired as part of the Land Reutilization Program for
industrial and commercial property may be referred to as Industrial-Commercial
Land Bank property.
      (2)   If Industrial-Commercial Land Bank property is sold, it shall be
sold according to the terms of RC Chapter 5722, without competitive bidding,
for not less than fair market value, with reference to such terms and
conditions, restrictions and covenants to assure the effective reutilization of
the land, as the Board of Control shall determine and authorize, and the land
shall be conveyed notwithstanding any other provisions of the Codified
Ordinances to the contrary.
      (3)   If a member of Council does not disapprove or request a hold in
writing to the Director of Development within forty-five (45) days of
notification of a proposed sale, easement conveyance, or lease of a property in
the Industrial-Commercial Land Bank in his or her ward then that process
described in this section shall be used for the sale, easement conveyance, or
lease of the property in his or her ward. Within forty-five (45) days of
notification, a member of Council may submit a written request for one (1)
additional thirty (30) day extension.
      (4)   The Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies when directed by the
Director of Development is authorized to sell or lease any land in the
Industrial-Commercial Land Bank if the purchaser of the land is neither tax
delinquent nor has any existing Building or Housing Code violations on property
owned in the City. Each instrument of conveyance shall contain provisions and
use restrictions as Council deems necessary or appropriate to protect the
interests of the neighborhood and the City.
      (5)   The Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies when directed by the
Director of Development is authorized to convey easement interests in any land
in the Industrial-Commercial Land Bank at a price determined to be fair market
value by the Board of Control taking into account the nature of the easement
and the easement shall be conveyed notwithstanding any other provision of the
Codified Ordinances to the contrary.
      (6)   That the conveyance of easement interests shall be made by official
deed of easement prepared by the Director of Law and executed by the Director
of Development on behalf of the City of Cleveland. The deed of easement shall
contain such other terms and conditions that the Director of Law determines to
be necessary to protect and benefit the City.
      (7)   Before the acquisition of any industrial or commercial property
into the Industrial-Commercial Land Bank, the Director of Development shall
conduct all appropriate inquiries in accordance with rules adopted by the
United States Environmental Protection Agency under the requirements of the
Small Business Liability Relief and Brownfields Revitalization Act (Pub. L. No.
107-118, 115 stat. 2356).
      (8)   The Director of Development is authorized to deposit the proceeds
from the sale of any industrial or commercial property from the Industrial-
Commercial Land Bank into Special Revenue Fund No. 17 SF 965. This fund shall
be used for costs associated with acquisition, maintenance, remediation, and
disposition of Industrial-Commercial Land Bank property including costs for
insurance and for activities related to the recovery of costs incurred on these
properties. Further, funds received by the City of Cleveland as a result of
direct insurance claim settlements, cost recovery efforts initiated by the Land
Reutilization Program for industrial and commercial property, demolition or
remediation actions as a result of the Program, and grants, donations or any
other sources pledged to the Program shall be deposited in Special Revenue Fund
No. 17 SF 965.
      (9)   The Director of Development is authorized to execute on behalf of
the City of Cleveland all necessary documents to employ and pay all fees for
services necessary, including agents to conduct acquisition activities for the
acquisition, maintenance, remediation and disposition of the property and to
comply with any applicable federal or state regulatory requirements, as well as
to execute documents for the purchase of insurance on the property. The costs
of these contracts shall be paid from Special Revenue Fund No. 17 SF 965 and
any other funds or subfunds which are appropriated for this use.
      (10)   The Director of Development is authorized to execute on behalf of
the City of Cleveland all necessary documents to secure a No Further Action
Letter for property from Ohio EPA, including such covenants, declarations, or
restrictions upon the property are required.
      (11)   The Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies when directed by the
Director of Development is authorized to acquire property from third parties,
either through a donation or a purchase at a price determined to be fair market
value by the Board of Control, to hold in the Industrial-Commercial Land Bank.
The Director of Development is authorized to enter into agreements with agents
necessary to assist with acquisition activities under this division.
(Ord. No. 1226-2025. Passed 12-1-25, eff. 1-1-26)
   Note: Pursuant to Section 11 of Ord. No. 1226-2025, any references to the
Department of Economic Development (and, by extension, the Director of Economic
Development) shall be amended to read the Department of Development (and, by
extension, the Director of Development).
§ 183.022 Gifts of Real Property
   To enhance the effectiveness of the Land Reutilization Program, the
Directors of Development and Community Development are authorized to accept, as
gifts, real property which shall be held, administered and disposed of in the
same manner as are lands acquired under RC Chapter 5722.
(Ord. No. 717-05. Passed 7-13-05, eff. 7-20-05)
   Note: Pursuant to Section 11 of Ord. No. 1226-2025, any references to the
Department of Economic Development (and, by extension, the Director of Economic
Development) shall be amended to read the Department of Development (and, by
extension, the Director of Development).
§ 183.023 Lease of Real Property Acquired at Cleveland Hopkins International
Airport
   (a)   When the City acquires real property in the vicinity of Cleveland
Hopkins International Airport for runway expansion, clear or approach zone, or
other similar airport purposes and, containing habitable residential structures
which there is no requirement, reason or authority to demolish, the Director of
Port Control may lease such land and structures, subject to all applicable laws
and regulations of the United States of America, the State of Ohio, and the
City, for such term as the Director may determine and terminable at will by the
Director upon sixty (60) days’ written notice to the lessee.
   (b)   A lease authorized hereby shall require the lessee to pay a monthly
rent no less than four-tenths of one percent (0.4%) of the property acquisition
cost, to maintain tenant liability insurance coverage including the City as an
additional insured, with limits and insurer satisfactory to the Director, and
to perform all repairs and maintenance on the structure which the Director
previously approves in writing as necessary and appropriate. This shall entitle
lessee, upon approval of documentation satisfactory to the Director, to
reimbursement of major repair costs by a deduction from the monthly rent.
(Ord. No. 599-11. Passed 6-6-11, eff. 6-13-11)
§ 183.024 Acquiring properties from the Department of Housing and Urban
Development and Fannie Mae for the Land Reutilization Program
   (a)   That notwithstanding and as an exception to the provisions of Chapters
181 and 183 of the Codified Ordinances of Cleveland, Ohio, 1976, the
Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies is authorized to acquire certain
properties owned by the Department of Housing and Urban Development (“HUD”) and
Fannie Mae, each for a price determined as Fair Market Value, as part of the
Land Reutilization Program.
   (b)   That HUD and Fannie Mae properties with a fair market value of less
than twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) shall be acquired by the City at a
cost of one hundred dollars ($100.00) each; properties with a fair market value
higher than twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) shall be acquired by the City
at fifty percent (50%) below HUD or Fannie Mae-established valuation.
   (c)   That the Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies, when directed by the
Director of Community Development, and with the prior written consent of the
member or members of Council in whose ward or ward the property to be sold is
located, is authorized to convey these properties or to assign the City of
Cleveland’s rights under purchase agreements for these properties with HUD or
Fannie Mae to purchasers for the public purpose of rehabilitation and/or
redevelopment.
   (d)   That the Director of Community Development is authorized to enter into
and execute project agreements on behalf of the City of Cleveland with
purchasers for the redevelopment and/or rehabilitation of said properties.
   (e)   That the consideration for the properties to be sold shall be
established by the Board of Control and shall not be sold for less than Fair
Market Value taking into account such terms and conditions, restrictions and
covenants as are deemed necessary or appropriate.
   (f)   That the Director of Community Development is authorized to execute on
behalf of the City of Cleveland all necessary documents to acquire and to
convey the properties and to employ and pay all fees for title companies,
surveys, escrows, appraisers, environmental audits, and all other costs
necessary for the acquisition and sale of the properties.
   (g)   That all costs of acquisition of properties shall be paid from funds
appropriated for this purpose.
   (h)   That the conveyances shall be made by official deeds prepared by the
Director of Law and executed by the Mayor on behalf of the City of Cleveland.
The deeds shall contain such provisions as may be necessary to protect and
benefit the public interest including such restrictive covenants and
reversionary interests as may be specified by the Board of Control, the
Director of Community Development or the Director of Law.
(Ord. No. 52-09. Passed 2-2-09, eff. 2-5-09)
§ 183.03 Lease by Way of Concession
   When real estate of the City is to be leased for the purpose of carrying
forward any project or undertaking which the City is authorized to engage in,
the real estate shall be leased by way of concession. The lease by way of
concession shall recite the obligations of the lessee relating to the carrying
forward of the public purpose for which the real estate is so leased, including
the terms, conditions and requirements set forth in the proposed lease by way
of concession as authorized and approved by ordinance of Council. No lease by
way of concession shall be made for a period in excess of twenty-five (25)
years subject to an option in the lease for one (1) renewal for a like period
of twenty-five (25) years.
(Ord. No. 2069-58. Passed 12-15-58, eff. 12-17-58)
§ 183.04 Concession Agreement and Contract for Use of City-Owned Facilities
   An agreement granting the privilege of vending commodities or rendering
services to the public upon or within parks, public grounds, recreational and
other publicly owned facilities of the City tending to enhance the enjoyment of
such facilities and to promote the convenience and comfort of the public
thereon may be made for a period not exceeding sixty (60) days by the director
of the department involved when so authorized by the Board of Control. In no
event shall the agreement be permitted to be extended or held over beyond sixty
(60) days.
   A concession agreement shall not be construed as the conveyance of any
right, title or interest in public property but merely as the grant of the
privilege, permit and license to purvey the enumerated concession commodities
or service therein and thereon.
(Ord. No. 935-2000. Passed 7-17-00, eff. 7-25-00)
§ 183.041 Concession Agreements at Cleveland Hopkins International Airport
   Notwithstanding and as an exception to Section
183.04, the Director of Port Control shall not make an agreement for the
operation of any concession at Cleveland Hopkins International Airport unless
such concession agreement is first authorized by ordinance of Council.
(Ord. No. 3049-78. Passed 12-22-78 over Mayor’s veto, eff. 12-23-78)
§ 183.042 Permit Agreements for Sale of Alcoholic Beverages at Airline Clubs
   Notwithstanding and as an exception to Sections
183.04 and
183.041, the Director of Port Control may enter into a permit agreement with
any scheduled airline which has leased space at Cleveland Hopkins International
Airport for operation of a private hospitality club, granting to such airline
permission to sell alcoholic beverages within the permit premises to club
members and their guests, provided such airline has otherwise obtained all
authority necessary to sell such beverages under the laws of Ohio. No permit
agreement shall be made for a term expiring later than January 1, 2005.
   A permittee shall pay a fee equal to nineteen percent (19%) of the gross
revenues derived from the sale of alcoholic beverages within the permit
premises and shall have no right to assign, subcontract or otherwise transfer
the permit agreement or any rights or interest thereunder.
(Ord. No. 2098-98. Passed 12-14-98, eff. 12-24-98)
§ 183.043 Permit Agreements with Advisory Committees of City Recreation Centers
   Notwithstanding and as an exception to Section
183.04, the Director of Parks and Recreation may enter into a permit agreement
with an advisory committee of a City recreation center for the installation of
food and beverage vending machines and for the preparation of food or beverages
for sale at the City recreation center, provided all gross receipts derived
from such sale of food or beverages shall be used solely for defraying the
operating expenses of the City recreation center. The sale of food and
beverages and their preparation by a permittee under this section shall be at
no cost to the City.
   The permittee shall pay all taxes and license fees applicable to any period
during the term of the permit agreement which are imposed as a result of the
permittee’s operations at the City recreation center. The permittee shall have
no right to assign, subcontract or otherwise transfer the permit agreement or
any rights or interest thereunder. No permit agreement shall be made for a term
of more than three (3) years.
(Ord. No. 1350-91. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 6-26-91)
§ 183.044 Concession Agreements with Airlines for Promotions at Cleveland
Hopkins International Airport and Burke Lakefront Airport
   Notwithstanding and as an exception to Section
183.04 and Section
183.041, the Director of Port Control may enter into concession agreements with
any airline that has leased space at Cleveland Hopkins International Airport or
Burke Lakefront Airport for promotions from within the airline’s exclusive
leased space. The airline shall pay to the Department of Port Control a fee of
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per month for the privilege of using the
airport for any promotional activity. In the conduct of any such promotional
activity, the airline shall adhere to all terms and conditions of its lease for
use of space at the airport and shall abide by all rules and regulations as may
be promulgated by the Director regarding promotional activities.
(Ord. No. 1073-99. Passed 6-14-99, eff. 6-17-99)
§ 183.05 Leases of City-Owned Facilities for Towers and Antennas
   (a)   Any City department may enter into a lease granting the privilege of
placing a tower, antenna, or other similar structure, including but not limited
to commercial broadcasting towers, two (2) way radio towers, fixed point
microwave dishes, commercial satellites and receiving dishes, cellular or
personal communication service towers, and their ancillary structures, and
fencing and landscaping, as applicable, on City-owned buildings, structures,
land, or other property that is under the jurisdiction of the leasing
department.
   (b)   The lease payments and lease term shall be as determined by the
Department of Public Utilities, Office of Radio Communications. The lease
agreement shall contain such provisions as the Director of Law deems necessary
to protect the public interest and shall be executed by the Department of
Public Utilities, Office of Radio Communications and the director of the
leasing department.
   (c)   Payments received under a lease agreement authorized pursuant to this
section shall be earmarked to go toward the Cleveland Municipal Schools.
   (d)   A lease shall not be construed as the conveyance of any right, title,
or interest in public property but merely as the grant of the privilege to use
the property for the purposes described in the lease. This right shall not be
construed as exclusionary.
   (e)   A lessee’s tower, antenna, or other similar structure located within
the limits of the City of Cleveland shall also comply with all provisions of
the Codified Ordinances, including, but not limited to, the requirements
contained in Chapter
354.
   (f)   Prior to placement of a tower in a ward, the Councilperson shall be
notified in writing.
(Ord. No. 2307-2000. Passed 5-21-01, eff. 5-31-01)
§ 183.06 Advertisement for Bids
   When real estate is to be leased or sold by or for the City the Commissioner
of Purchases and Supplies shall advertise such sale or lease in the same manner
as in the case of other purchases and sales. The advertisement in case of lease
by way of concession shall set forth the terms, conditions and requirements
contained in the ordinance authorizing such lease by way of concession. In case
of sale or lease of lakefront lands, the authorizing ordinance shall be set
forth in the advertisement.
(Ord. No. 2069-58. Passed 12-15-58, eff. 12-17-58)
§ 183.07 Appraisals
   No legislation authorizing the purchase or sale of real estate involving ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or more shall be adopted until an independent
appraisal of the value of such real estate has been made and reported to
Council. The Director of Law shall have the authority to secure such
independent appraisals as may from time to time be required hereunder, without
competitive bidding, and shall charge the cost thereof to the department for
which such real estate is acquired or sold.
(Ord. No. 2069-58. Passed 12-15-58, eff. 12-17-58)
§ 183.071 Environmental Assessments
   The Director of Law is hereby authorized to secure such environmental
assessments as may from time to time be required in connection with real estate
transactions in which the City is involved. The Director may secure the
services authorized herein without competitive bidding and shall charge the
cost thereof to the department under the jurisdiction of which the real estate
transaction occurs.
(Ord. No. 1355-91. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 6-26-91)
§ 183.08 Purchase of Land Sold at Auctions or by Court Order
   When lands within the City or outside the City which are suitable for use by
the City, and which have been certified as delinquent, are offered for sale at
public auction pursuant to provisions of law relating thereto, or land offered
for sale by Court order, the Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies, when
authorized and directed by the following officials of the City: the President
of Council, Chairman of the Finance Committee of Council, Director of Finance,
Director of Public Properties and the City Planner, is hereby empowered to
acquire for playground purposes, or other Municipal purposes, any parcel of
land so offered for sale, by bidding at such public auction or as may otherwise
be provided by law relating to such sale. The Director of Finance is authorized
and directed to pay the purchase price therefor from any funds available for
such purpose. All purchases made pursuant to the authority of this section
shall be reported forthwith to Council. Nothing herein contained shall
authorize the purchase of any lands outside the corporate limits of the City
after December 31, 1945.
(Ord. No. 1213-60. Passed 5-23-60, eff. 5-25-60)
§ 183.09 Demolition of Buildings on Lands Acquired for Public Improvements
   It is hereby determined that the public improvement of the site clearance by
the demolition of existing buildings and structures upon lands acquired by the
City in the making of any public improvement shall be made by contract duly let
to the lowest responsible bidder after competitive bidding for a gross price.
More than one (1) building, structure or premises may be included in the
invitation to bid, and in such event the bidders shall be asked to submit a bid
on each, all or any combination thereof. The specifications for such work shall
provide that no building or structure shall be removed from the premises in
whole or substantially whole condition but shall be demolished on the premises,
the bidder shall furnish evidence of sufficient equipment and personnel for the
prompt performance of the work, the time completion of the work shall be fixed
by the City and the contract shall contain a provision for liquidated damages
in case of failure to complete the work within the time so fixed and the City
reserves the right to limit the number of contracts awarded to any one (1)
bidder in order to insure the speedy completion of any public improvement. The
Director of Parks and Public Property is hereby authorized to enter into such
contracts as are awarded by the Board of Control in conformity herewith.
(Ord. No. 2069-58. Passed 12-15-58, eff. 12-17-58)
§ 183.10 Sale and Removal of Structures on Real Estate Acquired by City
   (a)   No dwelling or other structure upon land acquired by the City shall be
removed therefrom, except in the form of salvaged materials, unless the
Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies is otherwise directed by the Board of
Control to sell the dwelling or other structure.
   (b)   When so directed, the Commissioner shall sell the dwelling or other
structure in the same manner as the sale of other personal property of like
value, except as herein provided.
   (c)   The Commissioner shall require the bidder to state the specific site
or alternates therefor upon which he or she proposes to relocate the dwelling
or other structure. The Board in approving any award shall give due
consideration to character of the neighborhood of the site, the conformity of
the proposed relocation thereto and the means to be taken by the bidder to
insure that the neighborhood will not be adversely affected by such relocation.
   (d)   Before approving any award of sale for removal and relocation the
Board shall obtain the report of the Commissioner of Building that such
dwelling or other structure may be relocated upon the specified site in the
City in compliance with the applicable ordinances and the conditions upon which
relocation may lawfully be made. Any award shall be conditioned upon such
compliance, secured by such means as the Board shall determine.
   (e)   The successful bidder shall obligate himself or herself to indemnify
and save the City harmless from any loss occasioned by injury to person or
property, in form and amount satisfactory to the Director of Law, and shall
give security that the premises will be restored to the condition required by
the applicable ordinances of the City.
   (f)   If the cost of the dwelling or other structure as included in the
purchase price of the real estate is more than ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00), the Board shall not approve the award of sale at a price less
than the appraisal at the time of acquisition except pursuant to a new
appraisal giving due consideration to the necessity of sale and removal.
(Ord. No. 2005-60. Passed 10-10-60, eff. 10-13-60)
§ 183.11 Relocation of Dwellings Purchased for Freeways Prohibited
   No dwelling or other structure purchased for the construction of any freeway
within the limits of the City shall be removed from the premises for relocation
on any other property if the relocation would necessitate the use of City
streets or other public property.
(Ord. No. 1200-63. Passed 9-23-63, eff. 9-24-63)
§ 183.12 Backfilling of Holes Left from Demolition
   (a)   Whenever a dwelling is removed or demolished leaving a hole more than
three (3) feet deep, the contractor removing or demolishing the dwelling, or
the owner of the property, if he or she is doing the work himself or herself
shall, within a period of two (2) working days fill or cause to be filled the
hole to the existing grade of the surrounding property.
   (b)   If it becomes necessary to leave the hole in existence for a period
longer than two (2) working days then the perimeter of the hole or the area of
demolition shall be encircled by a fence at least five (5) feet in height, or
the hole may be graded to a two (2) to one (1) ratio. However, in no event
shall the graded hole remain without any barricade or without having been
backfilled for a period longer than three (3) working days, and further, proper
warning devices shall be maintained at all times to warn of the existence of
the hole.
   (c)   For the purpose of this section, “working day” means any day other
than Saturday, Sunday or a holiday, when weather conditions do not prohibit the
continuance of work.
(Ord. No. 271-64. Passed 6-15-64, eff. 6-17-64)
§ 183.13 Bond or Letter of Credit for Concession Agreements and Leases by Way
of Concession
   (a)   The performance of the terms and conditions in any concession
agreement or lease by way of concession, having a term in excess of one (1)
year, shall be at all times secured by a performance bond or irrevocable letter
of credit. Any bond or letter of credit shall be renewable no more often than
annually, shall be in form and content and with such surety or issuer as
approved by the Director of Law and shall be in an amount not less than the
largest fixed annual fee or rental payment required for such concession or
lease by way of concession during the term of such bond or letter of credit. If
the concession agreement or lease by way of concession does not provide for a
fixed fee or rental payment, the amount of the bond or letter of credit shall
be determined by the Director of Law. Each bond shall provide for thirty (30)
days’ notice to the Director of Law if said bond will not be renewed or
otherwise extended, in which event, lessee or concessionaire shall furnish a
replacement bond or letter of credit prior to the expiration of the bond.
Lessee or concessionaire shall submit a bond or a replacement letter of credit
at least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of a letter of credit.
   (b)   In the event that improvements are required to be made by the
concessionaire or lessee under a concession agreement or lease by way of
concession, the construction of such improvements shall be secured by a
separate performance bond or bonds or irrevocable letter of credit. Said bonds
or letter of credit shall be in form, content and amount and with such surety
or issuer as approved by the Director of Law.
(Ord. No. 1419-89. Passed 6-12-89, eff. 6-19-89)
§ 183.14 Interdepartmental Transfer of Real Estate
   No real estate owned by or under the possession and control of the City at
the time of the passage of this section (Ordinance No. 2648-80, passed May 4,
1981), and no real estate acquired or possessed after the passage of this
section shall be transferred from its present or original control, possession
and use by one (1) City department or division or for the control, possession
and use of any other City department or division, without the approval of
Council, by ordinance.
   A transfer or intended transfer made in violation of this section shall be
null or void.
   The Director of Public Properties shall strictly enforce this section and
shall promptly notify Council of such violation and such enforcement action.
(Ord. No. 2648-80. Passed 5-4-81, eff. 5-7-81)
§ 183.15 Disposition of Escheated Lands
   Pursuant to division (c) of RC 2105.09, when lands located within the City
are determined by a Probate Court of this state to escheat to the City of
Cleveland, the Director of Law is hereby authorized and directed to request the
Probate Court to direct the administrator or executor of the estate that
contains the escheated property to commence an action in the Probate Court for
authority to sell the real property in the manner provided in RC Chapter 2127.
(Ord. No. 190-95. Passed 5-22-95, eff. 5-31-95)
§ 183.16 Licenses for use of City Property
   The director of a department having charge of City real estate, facilities,
equipment or other City property may, upon satisfaction of the conditions
stated below, issue to any person or entity a license to enter upon, inspect,
test, or perform limited construction or maintenance upon, any City property
under the jurisdiction of said director:
   (a)   The license may not exceed one (1) year in duration or the length of
the project for which it is issued, whichever first occurs;
   (b)   The license shall specify the licensee’s permitted activities and
require the licensee to be qualified to perform such activities, shall provide
appropriate indemnification of the City, and shall require restoration of any
damaged property;
   (c)   The licensee shall be charged a licensing fee determined by the
director.
(Ord. No. 1356-92. Passed 11-23-92, eff. 11-30-92)
§ 183.99 Penalty
   Whoever violates Section
183.12 shall be fined one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense, and
not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for each subsequent offense.
(Ord. No. 271-64. Passed 6-15-64, eff. 6-17-64)
CHAPTER 185 – CONSTRUCTION AND IMPROVEMENT CONTRACTS
185.01   Authorization of Contracts
185.011   Advertisement for Bids and Making of Contracts
185.012   Contracts Combining Design, Construction, and Management Services
185.02   Form and Execution of Contracts
185.021   Use of Recycled Material
185.022   Use of Domestic Steel
185.03   Form of Bid
185.04   Bidder’s Affidavits
185.05   Bid Bond, Certified or Cashier’s Check
185.06   Insufficiency of Certified or Cashier’s Check
185.07   Disposition of Bid Bond, Certified or Cashier’s Check
185.08   Unacceptable Bids; Proposals
185.09   Withdrawal of Bids
185.10   Examination of Site of Work
185.11   Endorsement, Tabulation and Summary of Bids
185.12   Rejection or Acceptance of Bids
185.13   Time of Award
185.14   Performance Bond
185.15   Release of Bond
185.16   Requirements for Contract Execution
185.17   Filing of Original Contract
185.18   General Conditions of Public Improvement Contracts
185.19   Contract Documents for Public Improvements
185.20   Definitions
185.21   Liquidated Damages for Delay
185.22   Permissible Conditions of Delay
185.23   Responsibility of Contractor
185.24   Duty and Responsibility of Contractor for Plant and Methods
185.25   Protection of Work, Life and Property
185.26   Public Liability, Property Damage and Automobile Insurance
185.27   Authority of City Inspector
185.28   Laws, Permits and Regulations
185.29   City’s Involvement with Other Contracts
185.30   Patents
185.31   State Industrial Compensation
185.32   Social Securities Act
185.33   Prevailing Rates of Wages
185.34   Labor and Materialmen
185.341   Prompt Payment
185.35   Assignment of Contracts
185.36   Subcontractors
185.37   Failure to Meet Performance Requirements
185.38   Annulment of Contract
185.39   Acceptance of Performance
185.40   Guarantee
185.41   Terms of Payment
185.42   No Waiver of Legal Rights
185.43   Employment of Professional Services for Asbestos Consulting Work
185.44   Notice to Council of Subsidiary Agreements
185.45   Alterations or Modifications in Contracts
Charter reference:
   Authorization of contracts, Charter §
108
   City contracts and easements, Charter §
88
   Conditions when contracts are void, Charter §
109
   Contract interest, Charter §
195
   Contracts certified, Charter §
106
   Levy for special purposes of improvements and equipment, Charter §
37-2
Cross-reference:
   Advertisement for bids for purchases, CO
181.21
   Demolition of buildings on lands acquired for public improvements, CO
183.09
   Mandatory provision in labor contracts, CO
661.04
Statutory reference:
   Board of Control approval of contracts, RC 733.22 et seq.
   Contracts for utility services without advertising for bids, RC 9.30
   Contracts for work on buildings and improvements, RC 153.50 et seq.
   Restrictions on contracts, RC 715.68, 731.48
§ 185.01 Authorization of Contracts
   Whenever any work or construction is to be done, or any improvement is to be
made for the City which the department, division, or office concerned is not
equipped or prepared to do or make, the performance of which involves an
expenditure of more than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), a contract for
the work or construction, including contracts for planning, design,
construction management, or other professional services or any public
improvement, shall first be authorized by ordinance of Council.
(Ord. No. 1256-2023. Passed 12-4-23, eff. 12-7-23)
§ 185.011 Advertisement for Bids and Making of Contracts
   When so authorized, the Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies shall
advertise for bids once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks in the City Record
for the doing of the work. Every advertisement for bids shall specify the place
where bids will be received and the day and place when the same will be opened,
and shall state that at 12:00 noon on the last day for filing bids in response
to the advertisement, the Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies will open and
read all bids. After opening and reading, the Commissioner of Purchases and
Supplies shall immediately report the bids received, with his or her
recommendations to the director of the department involved, who, in turn, shall
transmit the bids to the Board of Control for consideration at its next regular
meeting. Any or all bids may be rejected. No contract shall be awarded without
the approval of the Board, and then only to the lowest responsible bidder.
(Ord. No. 1256-2023. Passed 12-4-23, eff. 12-7-23)
§ 185.012 Contracts Combining Design, Construction, and Management Services
   In addition and as an alternative to the construction contracting method
authorized in Section
185.011, a public improvement may be made by one or more contracts combining
professional design services and construction services in one or more design-
build, including but not limited to bridging design-build and variants, or
engineer-procure-construct contracts, or by combining construction management
services, professional design services, and construction services in one or
more construction-management contracts or one or more construction-manager-at-
risk contracts or other similar contracts, which may utilize open-book pricing
and/or guaranteed maximum price, duly let to the person, firm, or corporation
or combination of them submitting the best proposal, after a competitive
qualifications-based selection process, also taking into consideration the
engineering and design, the proposed design and construction costs, the
construction method, the schedule, the total life-cycle costs, the
qualifications of the proposed design professional(s), construction firm(s) and
construction management firm(s), the community benefits offered, and the risks
and the objectives of the Improvement.
   The selection of the person, firm, or corporation to design, construct and/
or manage the Improvement shall be made by the Board of Control on the
nomination of the appropriate department director(s) from a list of qualified
and available persons, firms, or corporations, as may be determined by the
director(s) after making a full and complete canvass for the purpose of
compiling the list. The Board of Control shall fix the total compensation to be
paid for all design and construction and/or construction management, or any
combination of them, necessary for the Improvement. The contract or contracts
shall be prepared by the Director of Law, approved by the appropriate
department director(s) and certified by the Director of Finance.
(Ord. No. 1256-2023. Passed 12-4-23, eff. 12-7-23)
§ 185.02 Form and Execution of Contracts
   Contracts approved or authorized under Sections
185.01,
185.011 and
185.012 shall be reduced to writing and signed on behalf of the City by the
director of the department involved. No contract shall be made unless it is
reduced to writing and entered into under these Codified Ordinances. Any work,
construction or improvement which involves an expenditure of less than fifty
thousand dollars ($50,000.00) may be made on open order, given in the same
manner as purchase orders of like amount.
(Ord. No. 1256-2023. Passed 12-4-23, eff. 12-7-23)
§ 185.021 Use of Recycled Material
   (a)   For purposes of this section, “recycled material” shall mean material
other than paper, the components of which, in whole or in part, would otherwise
have been destined for the waste stream.
   (b)   All bid specifications for public improvements shall request the
bidder to determine whether he or she is able to submit a bid using recycled
material. If both of the following apply, the bidder shall submit an alternate
bid using the maximum amount of recycled material possible in light of the
technology in existence at the time the bid is submitted:
      (1)   The public improvement which incorporates recycled material is of
equal or superior quality to that of a like public improvement which
incorporates no recycled material; and
      (2)   The public improvement may be constructed at a cost which is not
more than five percent (5%) greater than the cost of an improvement which is
constructed only of non-recycled material. Even if divisions (b)(1) and (b)(2)
of this section do not apply, the bidder may, at his or her option, submit an
alternate bid using recycled material.
   (c)   In evaluating bids for a public improvement, the Commissioner of
Purchases and Supplies shall give preference to a public improvement which
incorporates recycled material, provided that the City official who oversees
construction of the improvement determines that the quality of such improvement
is equal or superior to that of a like improvement which is bid using only non-
recycled material, and provided further that the price bid for the public
improvement which incorporates recycled material does not exceed by more than
five percent (5%) the lowest price bid for the improvement which is constructed
only of non-recycled material. The Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies shall
promulgate regulations for the application of the preference. Said regulations
shall be published in the City Record and shall include a requirement that the
Commissioner take into consideration the total percentage of recycled material
used in the improvement.
(Ord. No. 781-A-91. Passed 9-30-91, eff. 10-8-91)
   Note: Pursuant to Section
4 of Ord. No. 781-A-91, Section
185.021 shall take effect October 8, 1992.
§ 185.022 Use of Domestic Steel
   (a)   For purposes of this section “domestic steel” shall mean steel (i)
made from materials found in the United States and (ii) fabricated in the
United States.
   (b)   All bid specifications for public improvements shall request the
bidder to determine whether he or she is able to submit a bid using domestic
steel. If both of the following apply, the bidder shall submit an alternate bid
using the maximum amount of domestic steel possible in light of the technology
in existence at the time the bid is submitted:
      (1)   The public improvement which incorporates domestic steel is of
equal or superior quality to that of a like public improvement which
incorporates imported or foreign-made steel; and
      (2)   The public improvement may be constructed at a cost which is not
more than five percent (5%) greater than the cost of an improvement which is
constructed of only imported or foreign-made steel. Even if divisions (b)(1)
and (b)(2) of this section do not apply, the bidder may, at his or her option,
submit an alternate bid using domestic steel.
   (c)   In evaluating bids for a public improvement, the Commissioner of
Purchases and Supplies shall give preference to a public improvement bid which
incorporates domestic steel, provided that the City official who oversees
construction of the improvement determines that the quality of such improvement
is equal or superior to that of a like improvement which is bid using only
imported or foreign-made steel, and provided further that the price bid for the
public improvement which incorporates domestic steel does not exceed by more
than five percent (5%) the lowest price bid for the improvement which is
constructed only of imported or foreign-made steel. The Commissioner of
Purchases and Supplies shall promulgate regulations for the application of the
preference. Said regulations shall be published in the City Record and shall
include a requirement that the Commissioner take into consideration the total
percentage of domestic steel used in the improvement.
(Ord. No. 24-01. Passed 3-19-01, eff. 3-26-01)
§ 185.03 Form of Bid
   Every bid must be made on the blank form of bid attached to the invitation
to bid, must give the price of each and every item of the work bid on, in
figures, must contain the full name of every person, firm or corporation
interested in the bid and the address of the person, firm or the president and
secretary of the corporation bidding and the name and address of every
subcontractor and materialman which the bidder intends to utilize in
accomplishment of the contract work. If a corporation, the bidder must give the
name of the State in which it is incorporated and the bid must be clearly
signed with the full name and address of each person, firm or corporation
interested in the bid.
(Ord. No. 792-03. Passed 6-10-03, eff. 6-12-03)
§ 185.04 Bidder’s Affidavits
   Each bidder shall be required to submit with his or her bid, an affidavit
stating that neither he or she nor his or her agents, nor any other party for
him or her has paid to or agreed to pay, directly or indirectly, any person,
firm or corporation any money or valuable consideration for assistance in
procuring or attempting to procure the contract bid upon, and further agreeing
that no such money or reward will be hereafter paid. This affidavit must be on
a form provided by the City.
(Ord. No. 2160-84. Passed 10-8-84, eff. 10-15-84)
§ 185.05 Bid Bond, Certified or Cashier’s Check
   Each bid shall be accompanied by a bid bond signed by a surety company
authorized to do business in Ohio, or by a cashier’s check or certified check
on a solvent bank, which bond or check shall be in the sum of five percent (5%)
of the amount of the bid. The bond or check shall be given as security that if
the bid is accepted a contract will be entered into and the performance of it
properly secured.
(Ord. No. 1236-60. Passed 6-20-60, eff. 6-22-60)
§ 185.06 Insufficiency of Certified or Cashier’s Check
   (a)   Where a check has been deposited with a bid which through inadvertence
of the bidder has not been certified, or the amount thereof is insufficient by
an amount less than ten percent (10%) of the required amount under the
provisions of Section
185.05, the Board of Control, when satisfied that it is in the public interest
to do so, may waive such informality or irregularity and award the contract
pursuant to such bidding to the lowest responsible bidder notwithstanding such
informality or irregularity.
   (b)   In the event of any such waiver by the Board, the Mayor shall transmit
to Council, at the next regular meeting thereafter, a report of such waiver
containing the name of each bidder, the amount of each bid, the purpose and
amount of the contract awarded and the nature and reason for such waiver.
(Ord. No. 1236-60. Passed 6-20-60, eff. 6-22-60)
§ 185.07 Disposition of Bid Bond, Certified or Cashier’s Check
   (a)   The bid bond, certified or cashier’s check shall be forfeited and the
principal amount of the bid bond shall be paid to the City, or the check shall
be surrendered to the City as the agreed amount of liquidated damages in case
of failure to enter into contract for the work bid upon. The bid bond or check
shall be released or returned to the bidder in case his or her bid is rejected.
   (b)   In case his or her bid is accepted, the bid bond or certified or
cashier’s check shall be returned after the contract has been signed and the
performance bond has been furnished to and approved by the City. The bid bond
or certified or cashier’s check of the next lowest responsible bidder shall be
retained until the lowest responsible bidder has signed and secured the
performance of his or her contract, or if he or she fails to do so, the bid
bond or check shall be further retained until the second lowest responsible
bidder has signed and properly secured the contract awarded to him or her. In
default thereof, the bid bond or certified or cashier’s check shall be
forfeited to the City as liquidated damages.
(Ord. No. 1236-60. Passed 6-20-60, eff. 6-22-60)
§ 185.08 Unacceptable Bids; Proposals
   No bid or proposal will be accepted from, or contract awarded to, any
person, firm or corporation that is in arrears or is in default to the City
upon any debt or contract, or that is a defaulter as surety or otherwise, upon
any obligation to the City, or has failed to perform faithfully any previous
contract with the City.
(Ord. No. 1256-2023. Passed 12-4-23, eff. 12-7-23)
§ 185.09 Withdrawal of Bids
   No bid will be allowed to be withdrawn after it has been deposited with the
Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies.
(Ord. No. 1236-60. Passed 6-20-60, eff. 6-22-60)
§ 185.10 Examination of Site of Work
   Bidders shall be required to satisfy themselves as to the existing
conditions of the premises where the work is to be done and of the nature of
the ground at the site of the proposed work and to pay particular attention to
any soil condition that may affect the progress of the work. The City shall
make no guarantee, either express or implied, as to ground conditions.
(Ord. No. 1236-60. Passed 6-20-60, eff. 6-22-60)
§ 185.11 Endorsement, Tabulation and Summary of Bids
   All bids shall be endorsed with the title or number of the proposed
contract, or of the advertisement therefor, and with the name and residence of
the bidder, and shall be properly tabulated and summarized immediately after
being read. The tabulation and summary shall become a public record in the
office of the Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies.
(Ord. No. 1236-60. Passed 6-20-60, eff. 6-22-60)
§ 185.12 Rejection or Acceptance of Bids
   The City, through the Board of Control, shall reserve the right to reject
any or all bids, and any part of any bid, and also the right to waive any
informalities in the bid. In awarding a contract, the City shall reserve the
right to consider all elements entering into the question of determining the
responsibility of the bidder. Any bid which is incomplete, conditional, obscure
or which contains additions not called for or irregularities of any kind, may
be cause for rejection of such bid.
(Ord. No. 1236-60. Passed 6-20-60, eff. 6-22-60)
§ 185.13 Time of Award
   Unless further time is required for analysis of the bids or investigation of
the responsibility of any bidder and in the absence of a limitation upon the
time of acceptance set forth in the bid, the Board of Control shall make an
award or reject all bids not later than the second regular meeting of the Board
following the opening of bids. Any extension of time beyond the date fixed by
the successful bidder or the fourth regular meeting of the Board, whichever
event shall first occur, shall be subject to agreement between the bidder and
the Board.
(Ord. No. 1236-60. Passed 6-20-60, eff. 6-22-60)
§ 185.14 Performance Bond
   Except for contracts awarded under the Small Business Rotation Program
established under Section 187.032, or for contracts anticipated to be under
five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) and of a type where MBEs or FBEs
are determined to be underutilized at a statistically significant level, when
the Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies, with the prior approval of both the
Director of Finance and the Director of the Office of Equal Opportunity, based
on standards promulgated by the directors to protect the City’s interests, has
determined that to reduce or waive a bond requirement will enhance contract
competition by making City contract awards equitably available to all qualified
contractors and will benefit the City’s interests, the contractor shall be
required to furnish a bond with good and sufficient sureties approved by the
Director of Law, in an amount equal to at least fifty percent (50%) of the
contract price, which bond shall be substantially in the following form:
   FORM A
   BOND
   Know all men by these presents, that we, the undersigned _______________ as
principal, and _______________ as surety, are hereby held and firmly bound unto
the City of Cleveland in the penal sum of _______________ dollars
($__________), for the payment of which well and truly to be made, we hereby
jointly and severally bind ourselves, our heirs, executors, administrators,
successors and assigns by these presents.
   The conditions of this obligation are such that whereas the above-named
principal did on the __________ day of __________ A.D. 20___, enter into the
contract hereto attached with the City of Cleveland, which said contract is
made a part of this bond the same as if fully set forth herein:
   Now, if the principal shall well and truly execute all and singular the
stipulations by it to be executed and shall fully perform the work therein
specified and do and perform all and singular the terms, conditions and
requirements of the plans, specifications and contract, and shall indemnify and
save harmless the City of Cleveland from all suits and actions of every name
and description brought against the City, its directors or any officer of the
City, for, or on account of any injury or damage to person or property arising
from or growing out of the construction of the work in said contract specified
to be done, or the doing of any of the work therein described, and shall
indemnify and save harmless the City of Cleveland from any and all suits and
expense over and above the expense included in the contract price, for
royalties or infringements on patents that may be involved in the construction
of the appliances contracted for or any of the parts thereof or in the use of
said appliances or any of the parts thereof hereafter and if the principal
shall defend, at its proper cost and expense, any and all suits and actions of
every kind whatsoever that may be brought against the City of Cleveland by
reason of the use of said appliances or any of the parts thereof, and further
shall indemnify and save harmless the City of Cleveland from all liens,
charges, claims, demands, loss, costs and damages of every kind and nature
whatsoever and shall pay all lawful claims of subcontractors, materialmen and
laborers for labor performed and for materials furnished in the carrying
forward, performing or completing of said contract, then this obligation shall
be void, otherwise shall be and remain in full force and virtue in law; we
hereby agreeing and consenting that this undertaking shall be for the benefit
of any laborer or materialman having a just claim as aforesaid as well as for
the City of Cleveland; and further, that the parties to the foregoing contract
may, from time to time and as often as they see fit, make any additions to,
omissions from, or modifications of the work, plans or specifications and the
surety herein stipulates and agrees that no modifications, omissions, or
additions, in or to the terms of the contract or in or to the plans or
specifications therefor shall in any wise affect the obligations of said surety
on its bond; it being expressly understood and agreed that the liability of the
surety for any and all claims hereunder shall in no event exceed the penal
amount of this obligation as herein stated.
Witness our signature this _____________ day of __________ A.D. 20___.
___________________________________________
___________________________________________
___________________________________________
   Principal.
___________________________________________
___________________________________________
___________________________________________
   Surety.
(Ord. No. 793-03. Passed 6-10-03, eff. 7-20-03)
§ 185.15 Release of Bond
   The contractor’s bond will not be released until all of the provisions of
the contract or of any contract phase for which the contractor has furnished a
separate bond have been fulfilled.
(Ord. No. 794-03. Passed 6-10-03, eff. 6-12-03)
§ 185.16 Requirements for Contract Execution
   A contract shall be deemed executed when signed by the parties thereto,
certified by the Director of Finance as required by Charter Section
106, secured by the required performance bond, and when approved by the
Director of Law as required by Charter Section
83.
(Ord. No. 1236-60. Passed 6-20-60, eff. 6-22-60)
§ 185.17 Filing of Original Contract
   The original contract entered into and executed in accordance with these
Codified Ordinances shall be filed in the office of the Commissioner of
Accounts. One (1) certified copy shall be filed in the office or department
affected by the contract, and one (1) certified copy shall be filed with the
contractor. A brief notice of the execution of each contract shall be published
in the next issue of the City Record thereafter, citing the pages of the City
Record on which request for bids and the award of such contract were published
and indicating the nature of the contract, the name of the contractor and the
amount involved.
(Ord. No. 1236-60. Passed 6-20-60, eff. 6-22-60)
§ 185.18 General Conditions of Public Improvement Contracts
   Every contract for a public improvement shall contain the conditions set
forth in this chapter, all provisions required by the Charter to be set forth
therein and such other provisions, terms and conditions as the Director of Law,
the director of the department concerned or the Commissioner of Purchases and
Supplies shall deem necessary or appropriate.
(Ord. No. 1236-60. Passed 6-20-60, eff. 6-22-60)
§ 185.19 Contract Documents for Public Improvements
   The following shall constitute the contract documents and shall be deemed
the contract for the public improvement:
   (a)   The ordinance or ordinances authorizing the making of the public
improvement;
   (b)   The invitation to bid, general conditions, supplemental general
conditions and detail specifications;
   (c)   The contract drawings;
   (d)   All addenda issued by the City prior to receipt of bids;
   (e)   The affidavit of noncollusion;
   (f)   The bid;
   (g)   The resolution of the Board of Control awarding the contract;
   (h)   The agreement;
   (i)   All required bonds and policies of insurance;
   (j)   All provisions required by law, Charter or ordinance to be inserted in
the contract, whether actually inserted or not.
(Ord. No. 1236-60. Passed 6-20-60, eff. 6-22-60)
§ 185.20 Definitions
   As used in this chapter, the following words and expressions or pronouns
used in their stead, unless a different meaning is clear from the context,
shall have the following meanings:
   (a)   “Addendum” or “addenda” means the additional contract requirements
prepared by the director and issued in writing, by means of drawings, or both,
by the Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies prior to the receipt of bids.
   (b)   “City” means the City of Cleveland, Ohio.
   (c)   “Contract” or “contract documents” means each of the various parts of
the contract referred to in Section
185.19, both as a whole and severally, and includes subsidiary agreements, if
any.
   (d)   “Contractor” means the corporation, firm or individual, or any
combination thereof, and its, their or his or her successors, personal
representatives, executors, administrators and assigns, and any person, firm or
corporation who or which shall at any time be substituted therefor under this
contract, and includes in their respective capacities, the president, manager
or other officer or agent for the time being, representing or locally managing
the work of any corporation contracting herein.
   (e)   “Contract drawings” means those identified as such in the contract
documents, and includes those issued in connection with any addendum, or issued
in connection with any proper subsidiary agreement, and also includes any other
detail or explanatory drawings issued during the progress of the work which are
consistent with the contract documents, true developments thereof or reasonably
inferrable therefrom.
   (f)   “Specifications” means all of the directions, requirements and
standards of performance applying to the work as hereinafter detailed and
designated under specifications.
   (g)   “Contract work” or “work” means the furnishing of all labor,
materials, tools, equipment, incidentals and any other thing necessary or
required for the full performance of the contract by the contractor, including
all such required or necessary as called for in any proper subsidiary
agreement.
   (h)   “Director” means the director of the department for which the
improvement is being made.
   (i)   “Final acceptance” means final acceptance of the work by the director,
as evidenced by his or her signature upon his or her certificate of completion
and acceptance filed in the office of the Commissioner of Accounts, a copy of
which shall be sent to the contractor. Such acceptance shall be deemed to have
taken place as of the date so stated in such certificate.
   (j)   “Law” or “laws” means the Constitution of the State, the Charter, a
statute of the United States or of the State, the Codified Ordinances and any
Municipal ordinance, rule or regulation having the force of law which is
applicable to this contract.
   (k)   “Materialman” means any person, firm or corporation other than
employees of the contractor, who or which contracts with the contractor or any
subcontractor to fabricate or deliver, or who actually fabricates or delivers,
materials, plant or equipment to be incorporated in the work.
   (l)   “Subcontractor” means anyone, other than the contractor and his or her
employees, who performs work, other than or in addition to the furnishing of
materials, plant or equipment, at or about the construction site, directly or
indirectly for or on behalf of the contractor, and whether or not in privity of
contract with the contractor, but shall not include any person who furnished
merely his or her own personal labor or his or her own personal services.
   (m)   “Workman”, “laborer” or “workingman” means any employee of the
contractor or of a subcontractor, who performs personal labor or personal
services at the construction site.
   (n)   “Directed,” “required,” “approved” and words of like import whenever
they refer to the work or its performance, and “directed,” “required,”
“permitted,” “ordered,” “designated,” “established,” “prescribed,” and words of
like import used in the specifications, the contract or upon the drawings,
imply the direction, requirement, permission, order, designation or
prescription of the director. “Approved,” “acceptable,” “satisfactory” and
words of like import mean approved by or acceptable or satisfactory to the
director.
   (o)   “Site” means the area upon or in which the contractor’s operations are
carried on, and such other areas adjacent thereto as may be designated as such
by the director.
(Ord. No. 1236-60. Passed 6-20-60, eff. 6-22-60)
§ 185.21 Liquidated Damages for Delay
   The contractor shall be required to guarantee that he or she can and will
complete the work on or before the time fixed in his or her bid, or any
extension thereof granted by the City. For the reason that the damage and loss
to the City which will result from the failure of the contractor to complete
the work at the time fixed will be most difficult or impossible of accurate
assessment, the damages to the City for such delay and failure on the part of
the contractor shall be liquidated in the amount fixed by the City, for each
calendar day by which the contractor shall fail to complete the work or any
part thereof, in accordance with the provisions of the contract. Such
liquidated damages shall not be considered as a penalty. The City will deduct
and retain out of any money due or to become due under the contract the amount
of the liquidated damages and, in case those amounts are less than the amount
of the liquidated damages, the contractor shall be liable for the payment of
the difference upon demand of the City.
(Ord. No. 1236-60. Passed 6-20-60, eff. 6-22-60)
§ 185.22 Permissible Conditions of Delay
   (a)   If the contractor is delayed in the completion of the work by any act
or neglect of the City, or by any other contractor employed by the City, or by
changes ordered in the work, or by strikes, lockouts, fire, unusual delay by
common carriers, unavoidable casualties or any cause beyond the contractor’s
control, including orders, limitations or restrictions of any governmental
agency having jurisdiction over the subject matter of the contract, or by delay
authorized by the City, or by any cause which the director shall decide to
justify the delay, then, for all such delays and suspensions, the contractor
shall be allowed one (1) calendar day extension beyond the time fixed for
completion of the work for each and every calendar day of such delay so caused
in the completion of the work, the same to be ascertained by the director.
   (b)   No such extension shall be made for any one (1) or more of such delays
unless within ten (10) days after the beginning of such delay a written request
for additional time shall be filed with the director. In case of a continuing
cause of delay, only one (1) request will be necessary.
   (c)   No claims for damages or any claim other than for an extension of time
as herein provided shall be made or asserted against the City by reason of
delays hereinbefore mentioned.
   (d)   When by reason of any of the causes stated herein an extension of time
has been allowed the contractor for the completion of his or her work, he or
she shall not be entitled to a bonus for completion prior to the date so
extended, anything in the contract documents to the contrary notwithstanding.
(Ord. No. 1236-60. Passed 6-20-60, eff. 6-22-60)
§ 185.23 Responsibility of Contractor
   (a)   The City will not insure the work under construction, nor against
claims for injury to person or property arising during the prosecution of such
work.
   (b)   The contractor will be held responsible for all damage to the work
under construction, whether from fire, water, high winds or other causes until
final completion and acceptance, even though partial payments have been made
under the contract. He or she will be held answerable for all damages that may
occur to persons, property, animals or vehicles from want of proper shoring,
bracing, lighting, watching, boarding or enclosing and for any accident arising
from defective scaffolding or apparatus, or from any negligence on the part of
himself or herself or his or her employees.
(Ord. No. 1236-60. Passed 6-20-60, eff. 6-22-60)
§ 185.24 Duty and Responsibility of Contractor for Plant and Methods
   The contractor shall be required to provide and install such construction
plants and use such methods and appliances for the performance of all the
operations connected with the work to be done under the contract as will secure
the safety of the work and those working on it a satisfactory quality of the
work and a rate of progress which will insure the completion of the work within
the time specified. If at any time before the commencement or during the
progress of the work, or any part of its, such methods and appliances appear to
be unsafe, inefficient or inadequate for securing the safety of the workmen,
the quality of the work or the rate of progress required, the City may order
the contractor to increase safety measures or to improve their character, and
the contractor shall comply with such orders. The failure of the City to make
such a demand shall not release the contractor from his or her obligation to
secure the safe conduct and the quality of the work, and the rate of progress
required and the contractor alone shall be responsible for the safety,
efficiency and adequacy of his or her plant, appliances and methods.
(Ord. No. 1236-60. Passed 6-20-60, eff. 6-22-60)
§ 185.25 Protection of Work, Life and Property
   The contractor shall be required to provide proper facilities, take all
necessary precautions and assume the entire cost for protecting the work
against adverse weather conditions and for handling all storm and flood water,
sewage, seepage, ice or snow that may be encountered during the performance of
the contract. The manner of providing for such contingencies and for carrying
on the work in freezing weather shall meet with the approval of the City. The
contractor shall be required to provide the necessary watchmen and sufficient
warning lights and barricades at his or her own expense and to take such other
precautions as are necessary to protect life and property.
(Ord. No. 1236-60. Passed 6-20-60, eff. 6-22-60)
§ 185.26 Public Liability, Property Damage and Automobile Insurance
   (a)   The contractor shall take out and maintain during the life of the
contract such public liability and property damage insurance, wherein the City
is included as an additional insured, as shall protect himself or herself, the
City and any subcontractor performing work covered by this contract from claims
for damages for personal injury, including accidental death, as well as from
claims for property damages which may arise from operations under this
contract, whether such operations be by himself or herself or by any
subcontractor or by anyone directly or indirectly employed by either of them.
The amounts of such insurance shall be as follows:
   Public liability insurance in an amount not less than one hundred thousand
dollars ($100,000.00) for injuries, including accidental death to any one (1)
person, and, subject to the same limit for each person, not less than three
hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) on account of one (1) accident involving
injury to more than one (1) person, and property damage insurance in an amount
not less than twenty- five thousand dollars ($25,000.00).
   (b)   The following special hazards shall be covered during the life of the
contract by riders to the policy above required, or by separate policies of
insurance in amounts as follows:
      (1)   Public liability insurance to cover each automobile, truck or other
vehicle used in the performance of the contract in an amount not less than one
hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) on account of injury or death of one (1)
person and not less than three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) on
account of injury or death of two (2) or more persons;
      (2)   Property damage liability insurance to cover each automobile, truck
or other vehicle used in the performance of the contract in an amount not less
than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) in any accident;
      (3)   Public liability and property damage insurance to cover the use of
explosives used in the performance of the contract, in the same limits as set
forth in the preceding subsections.
(Ord. No. 599-11. Passed 6-6-11, eff. 6-13-11)
§ 185.27 Authority of City Inspector
   (a)   Inspectors as designated by the City shall be authorized to inspect
all work done and materials furnished. Such inspection may extend to all or any
part of the work, and to the preparation or manufacture of the materials to be
used. In case of any dispute arising between the contractor and the inspector
as to materials furnished or the manner of performing the work, the inspector
shall have the authority to reject materials or suspend the work until the
question at issue can be referred to and decided by the City. The inspector
shall not be authorized to stop the use of, alter, enlarge, relax or release
any requirements of these specifications, nor to approve or accept any portion
of the work or to issue instructions contrary to the plans and specifications.
The inspector shall in no case act as foreman or perform other duties for the
contractor or interfere with the management of the work by the latter. Any
advice which the inspector may give the contractor shall in nowise be construed
as binding the City in any way or releasing the contractor from the fulfillment
of the terms of the contract.
   (b)   The contractor shall not be entitled to any claim for loss of time,
damages or anticipated profit due to any time lost from suspension of work and
from referral of the questions at issue to the director or his or her
representative.
(Ord. No. 1236-60. Passed 6-20-60, eff. 6-22-60)
§ 185.28 Laws, Permits and Regulations
   The contractor shall be required to comply with all applicable laws of the
Federal government, State, ordinances of the City or other municipality in
which the work is being done and all applicable regulations and any authorized
regulations, and shall be responsible for securing at his or her own expense
any and all licenses, permits and certificates of inspection required by law or
by the contract documents.
(Ord. No. 1236-60. Passed 6-20-60, eff. 6-22-60)
§ 185.29 City’s Involvement with Other Contracts
   It shall be understood and agreed that the contractor shall execute his or
her work in such a manner and in such order as will not interfere with work in
progress and will permit the City to perform other work or to enter into other
contracts for work and materials to be constructed or placed in, on or about
the work, with the least interference possible and with complete cooperation
whenever it is desirable to prosecute such other work, either simultaneously
with the work under his or her contract or otherwise, and that the director
shall decide all questions of priority of contracts.
(Ord. No. 1236-60. Passed 6-20-60, eff. 6-22-60)
§ 185.30 Patents
   The contractor shall be required to pay all royalties and license fees and
shall hold and save the City and its officers, agents, servants and employees
harmless from liability of any nature or kind, including cost and expenses, for
or on account of any patented or unpatented invention, process, article or
appliance manufactured or used in the performance of the contract, including
its use by the City, unless otherwise specifically stipulated in the contract
documents. In this respect the contractor shall defend all suits or claims for
infringement of any patent or license rights.
(Ord. No. 1236-60. Passed 6-20-60, eff. 6-22-60)
§ 185.31 State Industrial Compensation
   The contractor shall be required at all times during the term of the
contract to subscribe to and comply with the workmen’s compensation laws of the
State and pay such premiums as may be required thereunder and to save the City
harmless from any and all liability arising from or under the act. He or she
shall also furnish at the time of delivery of the contract and at such other
times as may be requested, a copy of the official certificate or receipts
showing the payments hereinbefore referred to.
(Ord. No. 1236-60. Passed 6-20-60, eff. 6-22-60)
§ 185.32 Social Securities Act
   The contractor shall be and remain an independent contractor with respect to
all services performed hereunder and shall agree to and hereby accept full and
exclusive liability for the payment of any and all contributions or taxes for
social security, unemployment insurance or old age retirement benefits,
pensions or annuities now or hereafter imposed under any State or Federal law
which are measured by the wages, salaries, or other remuneration paid to
persons employed by the contractor on work performed under the terms of the
contract. The contractor shall further agree to obey all lawful rules and
regulations and to meet all lawful requirements which are now or hereafter may
be issued or promulgated under respective laws by any duly authorized State or
Federal officials. The Contractor shall also agree to indemnify and save
harmless the City from any such contributions, taxes or liability therefor.
(Ord. No. 1236-60. Passed 6-20-60, eff. 6-22-60)
§ 185.33 Prevailing Rates of Wages
   Each laborer, workman or mechanic employed by the contractor for the work
specified, or by the subcontractor, or by other persons upon such work, shall
be paid the prevailing rates of wages as determined by the Department of
Industrial Relations, Division of Building and Factory Inspection of the State.
(Ord. No. 1236-60. Passed 6-20-60, eff. 6-22-60)
§ 185.34 Labor and Materialmen
   The contractor shall well, truly and promptly pay or satisfy the just and
equitable claims of all persons who have performed labor or furnished material
for the contractor in the execution of the contract, including those who have
previously filed attested account of such claims with the Director of Finance,
and all bills, costs or claims of whatever kind which might in law or equity
become a lien upon the work or against the fund from which the same is to be
paid or a charge against the City. In case the attested accounts, claims, bills
or costs are not paid or adjusted to the satisfaction of the Director, then the
City may proceed as follows:
   The City may retain out of any moneys at any time due the contractor a sum
sufficient to pay all persons who have done work or furnished labor or
materials for the work contracted for, and who have filed an attested account
of such claim with the Director within four (4) months from the performance of
labor or the delivery of materials, stating that any balance for work or
materials is still due and unpaid, which amount may be retained by the City
until satisfactory evidence is furnished to the Director that the balance has
been fully paid. If the evidence is not furnished before the next estimate
becoming due to the contractor under the contract, the Director may pay the
balance to the person claiming it and charge such payment to the contractor as
payment on the contract, unless the contractor has previously filed with the
Director written notice that such claim is in dispute. In the event of such
dispute, the City will retain the amount until the claim has been adjusted or
the money paid into court on proceedings in the nature of an interpleader.
(Ord. No. 1236-60. Passed 6-20-60, eff. 6-22-60)
§ 185.341 Prompt Payment
   (a)   If a subcontractor or materialman submits an application or request
for payment or an invoice for materials to the contractor in sufficient time to
allow the contractor to include the application, request, or invoice in its own
pay request submitted to the City, the contractor, in compliance with and
subject to all provisions of RC 4113.61, within ten (10) calendar days after
receipt of payment from the City under a public improvement contract, shall pay
to the:
      (1)   Subcontractor, an amount that is equal to the percentage of
completion of the subcontractor’s contract allowed by the City for the amount
of labor or work performed;
      (2)   Materialman, an amount that is equal to all or that portion of the
invoice for materials which represents the materials furnished by the
materialman.
   (b)   The contractor may reduce the amount paid by any retainage provision
contained in the contract, invoice, or purchase order between the contractor
and the subcontractor or materialman, and may withhold amounts that may be
necessary to resolve disputed liens or claims involving the work or labor
performed or material furnished by the subcontractor or materialman.
   (c)   The contractor shall require each subcontractor and materialman to pay
each of its lower tier subcontractors or lower tier materialmen within ten (10)
calendar days after receipt of payment from the contractor, under the same
terms and conditions and in the same manner as this section requires the
contractor to pay a subcontractor or materialman.
   (d)   The contractor shall include a prompt payment requirement notification
in each subcontract or contract for materials under the contract and shall
require each subcontractor and materialman to comply with the applicable
provisions of this section and RC 4113.61.
(Ord. No. 792-03. Passed 6-10-03, eff. 6-12-03)
§ 185.35 Assignment of Contracts
   The contractor shall not assign, transfer, convey or otherwise dispose of
the contract, or his or her right to execute it, or his or her right, title or
interest in it or to it or any part thereof, or assign, by power of attorney or
otherwise, any of the moneys due or to become due under the contract, except by
consent of the Board of Control. The giving of any such consent to a particular
assignment shall not dispense with the necessity of such consent to any further
or other assignments. Such an assignment, transfer or conveyance shall not be
valid until filed in the office of the Commissioner of Accounts.
(Ord. No. 1236-60. Passed 6-20-60, eff. 6-22-60)
§ 185.36 Subcontractors
   (a)   The contractor shall not sublet nor shall any subcontractor commence
performance of any part of the work included or any materialman deliver or
fabricate materials, plant or equipment to be incorporated in the contract
without the previous written consent of the Board of Control. Subletting, if
permitted, shall not relieve the contractor or his or her surety of any of his,
her or its obligations under the contract.
   (b)   Failure by the contractor to obtain consent of the Board of Control
for any subcontractor or materialman shall be a breach of the contract for
which the contractor may incur a penalty.
   (c)   The contractor shall be and remain solely responsible to the City for
the acts or faults of his or her subcontractor and of such subcontractor’s
officers, agents and employees, each of whom shall, for this purpose, be deemed
to be the agent or employee of the contractor to the extent of his or her
subcontract. The contractor shall promptly, on request of the City file a
confirmed copy of the subcontract with prices deleted, as a condition precedent
to the approval of a subcontractor. The contractor and subcontractor shall
jointly and severally agree that subcontracting does not obligate the City to
pay, or to see to the payment of any sums to any subcontractor.
   (d)   The contractor shall report immediately to the City Tax Administrator
any and all complaints of improper or irregular payment by subcontractor to
subcontractor's employees. The City Tax Administrator or designee shall
immediately investigate such reports, and shall take such action as may be
deemed necessary under these Codified Ordinances or relevant state or federal
laws.
(Ord. No. 1122-18. Passed 10-1-18, eff. 10-2-18)
§ 185.37 Failure to Meet Performance Requirements
   The delivery of any material, equipment or the performance of any labor
which does not in all respects conform to contract requirements, will be
rejected and the contractor shall be notified promptly by the director of such
rejection and the reason therefor, which notice shall be confirmed in writing.
If the contractor fails to effect immediate replacement of such rejected
materials, equipment and labor with material, equipment and labor meeting the
requirements of the order and of the contract, the City will purchase in the
open market, material, equipment and hire labor of the character required under
the order up to the amount rejected and the contractor and his or her surety
shall be liable to the City for any excess cost and expense occasioned the City
thereby. The director shall have the right to suspend the whole or any part of
the work to be done, hereunder, when the contractor is not doing the work in
accordance with the provisions of the contract. No extension of time for
completion of the contract work or claim for or damages will be allowed by
reason of such suspension.
(Ord. No. 1236-60. Passed 6-20-60, eff. 6-22-60)
§ 185.38 Annulment of Contract
   The director shall have the right to annul the contract upon the failure of
the contractor to comply within three (3) days after receipt of written notice
to proceed with the performance of any work unreasonably delayed as to indicate
failure of completion within the time specified or to replace any work material
or equipment not meeting the contract.
(Ord. No. 1236-60. Passed 6-20-60, eff. 6-22-60)
§ 185.39 Acceptance of Performance
   The director of the department for which the improvement is made shall
determine finally, the satisfactory quality of the work, material and equipment
furnished under the contract or any separately-bonded contract phase.
(Ord. No. 794-03. Passed 6-10-03, eff. 6-12-03)
§ 185.40 Guarantee
   The contractor for the work called for in the contract documents in
consideration of the price bid and the payments received or to be received,
shall be required to guarantee that all work done and all material used in the
project under contract are in all respects first-class, of the proper kind and
quality and that the work has been done and is being done in accordance with
the requirements of the contract documents and that the improvement will remain
in good condition for and during the entire period of guarantee, which shall
begin upon the date of final acceptance by the director in writing, of the
construction work, and continue for a period of twelve (12) months thereafter
or as otherwise provided in the supplemental general conditions.
(Ord. No. 1236-60. Passed 6-20-60, eff. 6-22-60)
§ 185.41 Terms of Payment
   (a)   The contractor shall be required to make current requests for payment
in writing, not more than one (1) each month, and submit them to the director
who executed the contract on behalf of the City (“director”) for approval. The
request shall be dated the last working day of the month and be submitted to
the director by the fifth day of the following month. The request for payment
shall cover the materials in place complete, and the amount of work performed
in accordance with the contract during the preceding payment period and the
value thereof. At the discretion of the director, allowances may be made for
nonperishable materials which are to be incorporated into the work, when
delivered and properly stored upon the site. Upon approval of the contractor’s
request for payment, the director will make estimates in writing, one (1) each
payment period of the materials in place complete and the amount of work
performed, all in accordance with the contract. Upon approval by the director,
the contractor shall be paid as follows, except as otherwise provided in
divisions (b) and (c) of this section:
      (1)   the amount of each such estimate less three percent (3%) which the
City shall retain until satisfactory completion of fifty percent (50%) of the
work of any separate phase of the contract or of all contract work, or of the
estimated total contract amount of a public improvement by requirement
contract, as applicable, as determined by the director, and less all prior
payments;
      (2)   upon the director’s written certification of satisfactory
completion as subdivision (a)(1) of this section provides, the amount of each
such estimate less one and a half percent (1.5%) which the City shall retain
until final acceptance of any separate phase of the contract or of all contract
work, or of the estimated total contract amount of a public improvement
contract, as applicable, as determined by the director, and less all prior
payments; and
      (3)   upon the director’s written certification of final acceptance as
subdivision (a)(2) of this section provides, the whole amount of money then due
to the contractor, except such sums which have already been paid and except
such sums as may have been expended by the City or may be due the City or
properly deductible under the contract terms and less all prior payments.
   (b)   The director may, at any time, increase the retainage percentages set
forth in division (a) of this section by not more than ten percent (10%) of the
contract price or each separate phase’s price or the estimated contract amount
of a public improvement by requirement contract, as applicable, to protect the
City’s interests for incomplete, defective, delayed, or unsatisfactory work, or
for costs or damages incurred by the City that are the contractor’s obligations
under the contract; or charges the City may assess against the contractor under
the contract including, but not limited to, liquidated damages.
   (c)   Contracts below five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) are exempt
from retainage requirements.
   (d)   The City will neither deposit retainage in an escrow account nor pay
interest on such retainage.
   (e)   The payment of the moneys as provided in this section shall constitute
a full and complete discharge of all the duties and obligations of the City
under the contract.
Ord. No. 599-2025. Passed 5-19-25, eff. 5-22-25)
§ 185.42 No Waiver of Legal Rights
   Neither acceptance of nor payments for the work, or any part of the work,
nor any extension of time, nor any possession taken by the City shall operate
as a waiver of any portion of the contract, nor shall a waiver of any breach of
the contract be held to be a waiver of any other or subsequent breach.
(Ord. No. 1236-60. Passed 6-20-60, eff. 6-22-60)
§ 185.43 Employment of Professional Services for Asbestos Consulting Work
   (a)   The Mayor or any director of a department is hereby authorized to
employ by written contract such professional or expert services as the Board of
Control determines are necessary to supplement the regularly employed staff of
the City in order to facilitate the abatement of asbestos or similar hazardous
materials found in City-owned properties. Such expert services include
surveying, testing, consulting, preparation of specifications or guidelines for
abatement, and supervision of the abatement. Each such contract shall be
prepared by the Director of Law and certified by the Director of Finance.
   The selection of the persons or firms to furnish such expert services shall
be made by the Board of Control upon the nomination of the Mayor or the
director of the affected department from a list of qualified, available
persons, compiled by the Mayor or the director after a full and complete
canvass.
   (b)   The cost of the professional services authorized herein may be paid
from general obligation or revenue bonds, provided that such services are
included within the purpose for which such bonds are sold. The cost of such
services shall not exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00).
(Ord. No. 79-87. Passed 5-11-87, eff. 5-13-87)
§ 185.44 Notice to Council of Subsidiary Agreements
   The director of a department shall notify the Council whenever it shall be
necessary to increase the certified contract amount of a public improvement
contract by more than five percent (5%). Such notice shall be made within three
(3) business days of a determination by the director to request authorization
to increase the amount of such contract.
(Ord. No. 2258-94. Passed 6-12-95, eff. 6-21-95)
§ 185.45 Alterations or Modifications in Contracts
   That notwithstanding any Codified Ordinance to the contrary, when in the
prosecution of any work or improvement under contract it becomes necessary, in
the opinion of the director of the appropriate department, to make alterations
or modifications in such contracts wherein the alteration or modification
requires the payment of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or more by the City
of Cleveland and/or wherein the alteration or modification affects a right of
the City to receive funds or property having a value of ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) or more, such alterations or modifications shall be made only when
authorized by the Council upon the written recommendations of such director,
countersigned by the Mayor. No such alterations shall be valid unless both the
price to be paid for the work or material, or both, under the altered or
modified contract, shall have been agreed upon in writing and signed by the
contractor and such director prior to such authorization by Council. For
purposes of this section, “work or improvement under contract” means all
purchase, professional service, grant and loan agreements executed by the City
of Cleveland, excluding public improvement agreements.
(Ord. No. 2068-99. Passed 4-17-00, eff. 4-26-00 without the signature of the
Mayor)
CHAPTER 186 – PUBLIC ART
186.01   Purpose
186.02   Applicable Projects
186.03   Public Art Requirement
186.04   Program Administration
186.05   Selection of Art
186.06   Maintenance and Removal
§ 186.01 Purpose
   The City of Cleveland establishes a Public Art Program to promote the
welfare and prosperity of the community through the experience of art in public
places. The Public Art Program also will accomplish the following purposes:
   (a)   To give residents of all ages, incomes, backgrounds, and ability
levels access to high-quality art as part of daily life in the city;
   (b)   To give expression to the history, values, identity and diversity of
the City, its neighborhoods, its districts, its buildings and places;
   (c)   To promote the revitalization of the City and its neighborhoods;
   (d)   To provide opportunities for artists to share their work with the
public;
   (e)   To involve residents in the process of providing public art; and
   (f)   To integrate public art into the design of buildings and public
spaces.
(Ord. No. 1356-03. Passed 11-17-03, eff. 11-19-03)
§ 186.02 Applicable Projects
   (a)   Project Cost. Public art shall be required as a part of any of the
activities specified in this section when those activities are undertaken by
the City of Cleveland on property owned by the City and the project cost, as
defined in section
186.03, is three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) or more. If an
ordinance authorizes the City to engage in an activity specified in division
(c) where the total project cost is less than three hundred thousand dollars
($300,000.00) and requires public art, the applicable provisions of this
chapter shall apply.
   (b)   Project Type. The public art requirement shall apply to the following
projects:
      (1)   Construction of a new building, bridge, parking garage, or other
above-ground structure;
      (2)   Renovation and/or expansion of a building, bridge, parking garage,
or other above-ground structure if the cost of the work represents more than
one-half (1/2) the value of the building, bridge, parking garage, or structure,
excluding the cost of renovating interior areas not accessible to the public;
      (3)   Development or redevelopment of a park or plaza, excluding projects
limited to maintenance, repair and/or landscaping; or
      (4)   Development of underground facilities, such as parking garages,
accessible or visible to the public.
   (c)   Streetscape Projects. The public art requirement shall apply to
streetscape projects, including the streetscape component of any street
reconstruction project. For purposes of calculating project cost for
streetscape projects only, the project cost shall include costs covered by
funds from which public art is excluded as an object of expenditure.
(Ord. No. 166-13. Passed 5-13-13, eff. 5-16-13)
§ 186.03 Public Art Requirement
   (a)   Required Funding. One and one-half percent (1.5%) of the cost of an
applicable project shall be devoted to provision of public art. The calculation
of project cost shall include construction costs, including construction
management costs, but shall exclude costs for land, interior fixtures and
furnishings, architectural fees, engineering fees, and costs covered by funds
from which public art is excluded as an object of expenditure. The cost of an
applicable project shall be calculated based on the amounts of the executed
applicable construction and construction management contracts.
   (b)   Qualifying Public Art Projects. Public art required by the regulations
of this chapter may take the form of a discrete object of visual art, such as a
sculpture or mural, permanent or temporary in nature, or may take the form of
artist-designed functional elements of a project. An artist shall collaborate
on the public art required by the regulations of this chapter.
   (c)   Location of Public Art. Public art required by the regulations of this
chapter shall be placed on the site of the applicable project. If the City
Planning Commission, in consultation with the Public Art Committee, determines
that placement of public art on the applicable project site would be
inappropriate due to inadequate public visibility or public access, the
Commission shall consult with applicable City departments and thereafter may
select an alternate site to locate the public art.
   (d)   Aggregation of Funds. If the City Planning Commission, in consultation
with the Public Art Committee, determines that the purposes of this chapter
will best be met by combining the public art funds from two (2) or more
applicable projects, the Commission may authorize the execution of a single
public art project using the funding from multiple projects.
   (e)   Ownership of Public Art. All art located on City property and acquired
under the requirements of this chapter shall be owned by the City of Cleveland,
unless other ownership is specified in an ordinance pertaining to a particular
public art project.
(Ord. No. 166-13. Passed 5-13-13, eff. 5-16-13)
§ 186.04 Program Administration
   (a)   Responsibilities. The Cleveland City Planning Commission shall
administer the Public Art Program, with the assistance of its staff and
advisory committee, and in conjunction with the Mayor's Office of Capital
Projects. Responsibilities shall include, among others, the following:
      (1)   Preparing and adopting guidelines, rules and procedures necessary
to implement the regulations of this chapter, which guidelines shall include a
mechanism for neighborhood resident and stakeholder involvement in the public
art selection process;
      (2)   Developing and updating a citywide public art plan that identifies
public art opportunities in the City of Cleveland;
      (3)   Establishing and maintaining a registry of materials submitted by
artists for consideration by the Public Art Committee;
      (4)   Issuing requests for proposals and conducting the process of
selecting artists and artwork for each project;
      (5)   Developing and maintaining an inventory of public art in the City
of Cleveland, and producing and disseminating educational and promotional
materials regarding these works of art;
      (6)   Ensuring widespread public participation in the Public Art Program;
      (7)   Coordinating public art projects with participating City
departments and other participating agencies and organizations;
      (8)   Establishing a schedule and standards for maintenance of public art
in consultation with the artist, if feasible; and
      (9)   Providing periodic written reports to the Mayor and to City
Council, no less frequently than once per calendar year, documenting
activities, accomplishments and expenditures and demonstrating compliance with
the regulations of this chapter.
   (b)   Public Art Committee. The City Planning Commission shall establish an
advisory committee, to be known as the Public Art Committee, to advise and
assist the Commission in conducting the Public Art Program.
   (c)   Public Art Committee Membership. The Public Art Committee shall be
composed of the following members, each appointed by the Chairman of the City
Planning Commission on nomination by the Mayor, unless otherwise stated:
      (1)   A visual artist;
      (2)   An administrator of an arts organization;
      (3)   A recognized expert in the field of public art;
      (4)   A City resident active in community affairs;
      (5)   A staff member of a City department that engages in projects
subject to the provisions of this chapter, who shall be chairperson of the
Committee;
      (6)   A professional architect or landscape architect;
      (7)   A member of Cleveland City Council or its staff, appointed by the
President of City Council; and
      (8)   Two (2) community representatives appointed on a project-specific
basis by the City Council member in whose ward a public art project has been
proposed. In addition, the Council member, at his or her discretion, may
appoint a member of a local design review commission to the Public Art
Committee, also on a project-specific basis.
   (d)   Committee Members Terms of Appointment. The term for members of the
Public Art Committee shall be two (2) years, except that the initial Committee
members described in (2), (4) and (6) of division (c) of this section shall
have a one (1) year term. After that one (1) year term, the term for the
Committee members described in (2), (4) and (6) of division (c) of this section
shall be two (2) years. The appointments made pursuant to (8) of division (c)
of this section shall not have a term but shall serve on the Committee only for
the duration of deliberations on the particular public art project for which
they were appointed.
   (e)   Committee Meetings. The Public Art Committee shall meet at least
quarterly, except when there is no business to conduct, and may meet more
frequently to consider specific projects or other matters as may be necessary.
The meetings shall be conducted under rules and procedures adopted by the
Committee and approved by the City Planning Commission.
   (f)   Committee Member Compensation. Members of the Public Art Committee
shall not receive monetary compensation for their services to the Committee.
(Ord. No. 166-13. Passed 5-13-13, eff. 5-16-13)
§ 186.05 Selection of Art
   (a)   Selection Process. The City Planning Commission, through its Public
Art Committee, shall solicit, review and select artwork according to the
following provisions:
      (1)   Community Participation. The Public Art Committee shall engage
local residents, other local stakeholders, and the local City Council member in
the process of selecting public art for a particular location. As required in
Section
186.04, two (2) community representatives appointed by the local Council member
shall be added to the Committee as voting members for the purpose of project
selection.
      (2)   Project Concept. The Committee shall work with the applicable
department and the project design team to establish the goals for each public
art project, including suitable locations and appropriate formats.
      (3)   Selection Method. The Committee shall recommend to the City
Planning Commission the most appropriate method of selecting each public art
project. Possible selection methods include open competition and invitational
competition.
      (4)   Submission Options. The Committee shall recommend to the City
Planning Commission submission requirements for each public art project.
      (5)   Approval. The Public Art Committee shall make its recommendation
for a public art project to the City Planning Commission or Landmarks
Commission, as applicable, which shall make the final determination.
Alternatively, the Committee or the Commission may choose to make no selection
and to re-open the competition. The Public Art Committee's recommendation to
the City Planning Commission or Landmarks Commission shall substitute for the
otherwise applicable design review advisory committee recommendation to the
Commission.
   (b)   Selection Criteria. In selecting artwork, the Public Art Committee and
the City Planning Commission shall consider, among others, the following
factors: artistic quality, appropriateness of the artwork to its context,
durability and resistance to the environment and vandalism, safety, feasibility
of implementation, and the contribution the art makes to a citywide public art
collection that reflects the diversity of the community and a diversity of
forms of artistic expression.
   (c)   Representation of Local Artists. It is the intent of the City that at
least fifty percent (50%) of the art installed under this chapter be created by
artists living or working in the City of Cleveland. Achievement of this goal
shall be measured in five (5) year increments.
(Ord. No. 166-13. Passed 5-13-13, eff. 5-16-13)
§ 186.06 Maintenance and Removal
   (a)   Maintenance. The City department having jurisdiction over the site on
which the art has been placed shall maintain public art installed under the
regulations of this chapter, unless other maintenance responsibilities are
established by City ordinance. All maintenance shall be conducted pursuant to
the schedule and standards established by the City Planning Commission.
   (b)   Removal. In the event that a work of art needs to be removed due to
its condition, changes to its site, or other factors, the Public Art Committee
shall recommend to the City Planning Commission the most appropriate means of
removal and disposition, making a reasonable effort to consult with the artist
responsible for the artwork.
(Ord. No. 1356-03. Passed 11-17-03, eff. 11-19-03)
CHAPTER 187 – CLEVELAND AREA BUSINESS CODE
187.01   Definitions of Terms
187.02   Duties of Director of Office of Equal Opportunity
187.03   Certification of Cleveland Area Small Businesses; Application of Bid
Discounts for Bid Comparison
187.04   CSB Goals of Contracting Departments
187.05   Certification of Minority Business Enterprises and Female Business
Enterprises
187.06   MBE/FBE Goals of Contracting Departments
187.07   Certification as a Contract Prerequisite; Certification Process
187.08   Good-Faith Effort of Bidders and Contract Provisions
187.09   Contracts with Other Governmental Entities as Contractors
187.10   CSB Joint Ventures
187.11   MBE/FBE Joint Ventures
187.12   Responsibilities of Contracting Departments
187.13   Exceptions, Substitutions and Waivers
187.14   Small Contract Rotation Program
187.15   Employment; Nondiscrimination; Goals of Contractors
187.16   Compliance with Employment Goals
187.17   Compliance Monitoring
187.18   Hearing Procedure
187.19   Subpoena Power
187.20   Decision and Available Sanctions for Noncompliance
187.21   Notices Required in Advertisement for Bids
187.22   Equal Opportunity Clause; Terms in Contracts
187.23   Review and Evaluation Committee
187.24   Reports
187.25   Violations; Disqualification; Penalty
187.26   Training Courses and Development Activities
187.27   Severability
187.28   Applicability of this Code to MBEs and FBEs
187.29   Professional Consultants
Cross-reference:
   Office of Equal Opportunity, CO
123.08
Statutory reference:
   Civil Rights Commission, RC Ch. 4112
§ 187.01 Definitions of Terms
   As used in this chapter, the following words, phrases, and terms shall be
defined as set forth below:
   (a)   “Administrator” means the employee or employees in the OEO designated
by the Director to act as an administrator of the Cleveland Area Business
Program.
   (b)   “Bidder” means a Person offering to contract with the City in response
to an invitation to bid, and for purposes of this Code, includes a proposer in
response to a request for proposals or other similar solicitation.
   (c)   “Bid Discount” means the application of a percentage discount to the
total amount of a bid submitted by a Bidder for a Contract solely for the
purpose of bid comparisons when evaluating the lowest and best bid, or lowest
responsible bid. The use of a Bid Discount for Bid Comparison does not alter
the total amount of the bid submitted by a Bidder or the Contract executed
based on a bid.
   (d)   “Business Enterprise” means a firm, sole proprietorship, partnership,
association, corporation, company, or other business entity of any kind
including, but not limited to, a limited liability corporation, incorporated
professional association, joint venture, estate, or trust.
   (e)   “City” means the City of Cleveland, Ohio.
   (f)   “City of Cleveland Small Business” or “CCSB” means a CSB that has its
principal office located physically within the municipal boundaries of the
City.
   (g)   “Cleveland Area Business Code”, “Cleveland Area Business Program”,
“Code” or “Chapter” means all of the provisions of this Chapter
187 of the Codified Ordinances of Cleveland, Ohio, 1976.
   (h)   “Cleveland Area Small Business” or “CSB” means a Business Enterprise
certified under division (a) of Section
187.03.
   (i)   “Cleveland Contracting Market” or “Contracting Market” means the
geographic market area consisting of Cuyahoga County, Ohio, or the geographic
market area identified in a disparity study or otherwise as provided in Section
187.28.
   (j)   “Commercially Useful Function” means execution by a CSB, MBE, or FBE
of a distinct element of the work in carrying out its responsibilities by
actually performing, managing, and supervising the work involved by its
personnel, materials, and assets. To determine whether a Business Enterprise is
performing a Commercially Useful Function, the City will evaluate the amount of
the Contractor’s work which is appropriate to be subcontracted and actually
subcontracted, industry practices, and other relevant factors tending to
demonstrate actual performance.
   (k)   “Construction” means the erection, rehabilitation, alteration,
conversion, extension, demolition or repair of improvements to real property,
including facilities providing utility service and includes the supervision,
inspection, and other on-site functions incidental to construction.
   (l)   “Contract” means a binding agreement executed on or after the
effective date of this Cleveland Area Business Code by which the City either
grants a privilege or is committed to expend or does expend its funds or other
resources, or confers a benefit having monetary value including, but not
limited to, a grant, loan, interest in real or personal property, or tax
incentive in any form for or in connection with any work, project, or public
purpose including, but not limited to, a contract for the:
      (1)   Construction of any public improvement, including change orders or
subsidiary agreements approved by the City during the performance of such
Construction;
      (2)   Purchase of personal property;
      (3)   Purchase of any supplies, equipment or services;
      (4)   Lease by way of concession under Section
183.03;
      (5)   Lease of any personal property; or
      (6)   Grant by concession agreement of a specific permission, privilege,
or license under sections
183.04,
183.041, and
183.044 of the Codified Ordinances.
   “Contract” shall include a binding agreement, funded or benefitted by the
City, between a party to a Contract and a third party, but shall exclude
contracts with other public entities, except as provided in Section
187.09. For purposes of MBE and FBE utilization, “Contract” shall only include
the specific types and categories of Contracts and Contractors identified in a
disparity study or otherwise as the subject of past or present discrimination
as provided in Section
187.28. “Contract” shall exclude loans and grants under fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00) for storefront renovation. The exclusion of loans and grants under
fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for storefront renovation shall expire and
have no further force and effect on March 1, 2012, unless changed by further
legislation of this Council.
   (m)   “Contracting Department” includes any administrative department under
charge of the Mayor or any office, board, or commission treated or construed as
a department of City government for any purpose under the Charter or ordinances
of the City for the benefit or program of which the City enters into a
particular Contract.
   (n)   “Contractor” means a separate or distinguishable Business Enterprise
employing one (1) or more persons and participating in the performance of a
Contract, including but not limited to CSBs, MBEs and FBEs where applicable,
and shall include a party in privity with a Contractor for implementation of a
Contract.
   (o)   “Control” means the unencumbered ability to direct operations and
management.
   (p)   “Director” means the Director of the Office of Equal Opportunity.
   (q)   “Disability” means any physical or mental impairment that
substantially limits one (1) or more of an individual’s major life activities.
   (r)   “Discriminate” means to exclude an individual or group solely on the
basis of race, religion, color, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity or
expression, national origin, age, Disability, ethnic group or Vietnam-era or
disabled-veteran status.
   (s)   “Discriminate on the basis of age” means to Discriminate as determined
by appropriate Federal law against individuals over the age of forty (40).
   (t)   “Evaluation Credit” means a predetermined number of points in the
evaluation of proposals submitted by a Bidder for a Contract to be added solely
for the purpose of proposal comparison when evaluating competing proposals. The
use of Evaluation Credits does not alter the amount of the proposal submitted
by a Bidder or the Contract executed based on the proposal.
   (u)   “Female” includes only a United States citizen or lawful, permanent
resident who is a member of the female gender.
   (v)   “Female Business Enterprise” or “FBE” means a Business Enterprise
owned, operated, and controlled by one (1) or more Females who have fifty- one
percent (51%) ownership. The one (1) or more Females must have operational and
managerial Control, interest in capital, and earnings commensurate with the
percentage of Female ownership. To qualify as a Female Business Enterprise, the
Business Enterprise shall be located and doing business in the Cleveland
Contracting Market.
   (w)   “Front Organization” means any FBE, MBE, or CSB that serves as a
Contractor, or as a subcontractor to any Contractor under Contract, who
obtained and/or retained certification through false statements or who
committed to performance of a distinct element of the work under the Contract
but did not carry out its responsibilities by actually performing, managing or
supervising the work involved, or who did not provide products, services, goods
or supplies in a manner, in the Director’s determination, consistent with its
certification.
   (x)   “Gender identity or expression” means the gender-related identity,
external presentation of gender identity through appearance, or mannerism or
other gender-related characteristics of an individual, regardless of the
individual’s designated sex at birth.
   (y)   “Joint venture” means an association of two (2) or more persons or
businesses to carry out a single business enterprise for profit for which
purpose they combine their property, capital, efforts, skills and knowledge.
   (z)   “Minority Person” means a United States citizen or lawful, permanent
resident who is a member of a racial or ethnic group, such as African American,
Hispanic American, Asian American or Native American, against whom past or
present discrimination has been demonstrated as provided in Section
187.28.
   (aa)   “Minority Business Enterprise” or “MBE” means a Business Enterprise
owned, operated and controlled by one (1) or more Minority Persons who have at
least fifty-one percent (51%) ownership. The Minority Person(s) must have
operational and managerial Control, interest in capital, and earnings
commensurate with the percentage of ownership. To qualify as a Minority
Business Enterprise, the enterprise shall be located and doing business in the
Cleveland Contracting Market.
   (bb)   “OEO” means the Office of Equal Opportunity of the City of Cleveland.
   (cc)   “Person” means and includes a natural person, a Business Enterprise
or other entity, unless the context or usage requires otherwise.
   (dd)   “Public Improvement” means a project determined by the City Council
to be a public improvement under Section
167 of the Cleveland City Charter.
   (ee)   “Regional Cleveland Area Small Business” or “RCSB” means a CSB that
has its principal office located physically within the territorial boundaries
of Cuyahoga County but outside the municipal boundaries of the City.
   (ff)   “Regulation” or “Regulations” means and includes the regulations
implementing this Code and promulgated by the Director of Equal Opportunity
under division (b)(6) of Section
123.08 of these Codified Ordinances.
   (gg)   “Sexual Orientation” means a person’s actual or perceived
homosexuality, bisexuality, or heterosexuality, by orientation or practice.
   (hh)   “Small Business Enterprise” or “SBE” means a Business Enterprise that
meets the established economic criteria for a SBE and is owned, operated and
controlled by one (1) or more persons who meet the economic criteria for SBE
ownership established by the Director in the Regulations.
   (ii)   “Supplier” means a Business Enterprise performing a Commercially
Useful Function in the supply process when it:
      (1)   Assumes the actual and contractual responsibility for furnishing
the supplies or materials;
      (2)   Is recognized as a distributor of the contracted supplies and
materials by the industry involved;
      (3)   Owns or leases a warehouse, yard, building or other facilities for
stocking inventory or otherwise conducts business in a manner which is usual
and customary in the industry and market for the supplies or materials; and
      (4)   Distributes, delivers, and services products primarily with its own
staff and/or equipment.
(Ord. No. 1710-11. Passed 12-5-11, eff. 12-9-11)
§ 187.02 Duties of Director of Office of Equal Opportunity
   In addition to those duties specified in Section
123.08, the Director, through the Administrator and other employees as
necessary, shall implement and enforce this Code under its provisions. The
Director’s duties shall include, but not be limited to:
   (a)   Reviewing all submittals and other information required under this
Code to determine whether a particular Contractor has been certified or
approved:
      (1)   With respect to the affirmative action programs established under
divisions (b) and (c) of Section
187.15;
      (2)   As a CSB, CCSB or RCSB;
      (3)   As a bona fide CSB, MBE, or FBE Joint Venture;
      (4)   As a Minority Business Enterprise;
      (5)   As a Female Business Enterprise;
      (6)   As having submitted a responsive bid with respect to OEO required
submittals; or
      (7)   As being in compliance with this Code and its regulations.
   (b)   Notifying an affected Contracting Department that the certificates or
statements pertaining to particular Contractors are or are not currently
effective with respect to the matters for which the same were issued;
   (c)   Monitoring the general performance, workforce, and subcontracting
practices of Contractors to ensure continued compliance with this Code;
   (d)   Initiating and receiving complaints of non-compliance with this Code;
   (e)   Investigating complaints pertaining to non-compliance with this Code
and recommending appropriate sanctions; and
   (f)   Implementing the hearing procedures provided in Sections
187.18 and
187.20.
(Ord. No. 77-08. Passed 2-4-08, eff. 3-15-08)
§ 187.03 Certification of Cleveland Area Small Businesses; Application of Bid
Discounts for Bid Comparison
   (a)   A Business Enterprise is eligible for certification as a Cleveland
Area Small Business if:
      (1)   It is a Small Business Enterprise;
      (2)   It has its principal office located physically in the Cleveland
Contracting Market; and
      (3)   Its chief executive officer and highest level managers maintain
their offices and perform their managerial functions in the Cleveland
Contracting Market.
   (b)   Subject to the limitation contained in division (g) of Section
187.05, Contracting Departments may apply a Bid Discount in the following
amounts for bids received from CSB prime contractors:
      (1)   A Bid Discount of five percent (5%) for bids received from CCSBs.
      (2)   A Bid Discount of five percent (5%) for bids received from RCSBs,
provided no bids are received from CCSB’s.
   (c)   Subject to the limitation contained in division (g) of Section
187.05, Contracting Departments may apply Evaluation Credits as follows for
proposals received from CSB prime contractors:
      (1)   An Evaluation Credit of five percent (5%) of the total points
awarded for proposals received from CCSBs;
      (2)   An Evaluation Credit of five percent (5%) of the total points
awarded for proposals received from RCSBs, provided no proposals are received
from CCSBs.
   (d)   Subject to the limitation contained in division (g) of Section
187.05, Contracting Departments may apply a Bid Discount to bids received for a
Public Improvement Contract from a Business Enterprise in the amount of five
percent (5%) of the portion of the total amount of labor and materials that the
Bidder represents it will subcontract to one (1) or more CSBs.
      (1)   If a Contracting Department applies the Bid Discount under division
(d) of this section to the bid of a Bidder that would not have otherwise been
the lowest and the Bidder is awarded the Public Improvement Contract, the City
shall retain as Additional Retainage an amount equal to the total dollar amount
by which the bid was adjusted for bid comparison in addition to the retainage
required under Section
185.41 of the Codified Ordinances.
      (2)   If a Contractor uses CSB subcontractors in the performance of the
Public Improvement Contract in an amount equal to or greater than offered in
the Contractor’s bid, the City shall pay the Contractor any Additional
Retainage retained under division (d)(1) of this section upon the Contracting
Department director’s acceptance of the contract work under division (d) of
Section
185.41. If a Contractor uses CSB subcontractors in the performance of a Public
Improvement Contract in an amount less than represented in its bid, the
Contractor shall forfeit the amount of the Additional Retainage equal to the
amount of shortfall in its CSB usage, in addition to any other sanctions or
penalties applicable under this chapter or the Contract.
      (3)   If a Contracting Department applies the Bid Discount under division
(d) of this section to the bid of a Bidder that would not have otherwise been
the lowest and the Bidder is awarded the Public Improvement Contract, the
Contract terms shall prohibit the Contractor from deducting the amount of the
Additional Retainage from progress payments to the CSB subcontractors.
   (e)   The maximum cumulative dollar amount of all Bid Discounts to a Bidder
for a bid under divisions (b) and (d) of this section shall not exceed fifty
thousand dollars ($50,000.00).
   (f)   Certificates issued under this section shall be valid for the period
specified by the Director in the Regulations. Certification as a CSB is
independent from certification as a MBE or FBE.
   (g)   By fifteen (15) days after the close of each calendar quarter, the
Director shall publish a list of all CSBs certified during the preceding
quarter, including the type(s) of work that each is certified to perform, and a
list of all Business Enterprises that have lost their certification as a CSB
during the preceding quarter, including whether an appeal of the denial of
certification is pending. Concurrently, the Director shall furnish to the
Council the name of any Business Enterprise to which OEO has denied
certification as a CSB during the preceding quarter, including whether an
appeal of the denial is pending. Publication of the CSB’s name shall not be a
prerequisite for eligibility for the award of a Contract.
(Ord. No. 77-08. Passed 2-4-08, eff. 3-15-08)
§ 187.04 CSB Goals of Contracting Departments
   (a)   Consistent with the City's goal of increasing the level of CSB
participation in Contracts, each Contracting Department shall use its best
efforts to utilize CSBs as Contractors and subcontractors for all contracts in
excess of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). The annual City-wide goal for
CSB participation in Public Improvement Contracts shall be thirty percent
(30%), in Professional Services Contracts shall be ten percent (10%), and in
all other Contracts shall be twenty percent (20%) or such other goal fixed by
the Director for a particular Contract.
   (b)   To meet the goals fixed under division (a) of this section,
Contracting Departments, in consultation with the Director, shall consider use
of Bid Discounts under division (b) and (d) of Section
187.03 when recommending a bid as lowest and best or lowest responsible or
recommending a proposal as best. Each Contracting Department shall be
responsible for ensuring that invitations to bid or requests for proposal
issued by or for that department comply with all provisions and procedures set
forth in this chapter.
   (c)   In determining the CSB participation that shall be applied toward
meeting the goals fixed under division (a) of this section, the Director shall
credit:
      (1)   Expenditures to CSBs that perform Commercially Useful Functions in
implementation or performance of a Contract;
      (2)   Expenditures to CSB manufacturers (i.e. Suppliers that produce
goods from raw materials or the product of raw materials and add value by
substantially altering them before resale);
      (3)   Sixty percent (60%) of expenditures to CSB Suppliers that are not
manufacturers, provided that the CSB Supplier performs a Commercially Useful
Function in the supply process;
      (4)   Should a CSB subcontractor further subcontract its participation in
a Contract to a non-CSB subcontractor, only the work or supplies actually
performed or furnished by the CSB subcontractor shall be applied towards
meeting the goals fixed under division (a) of this section;
      (5)   No credit shall apply for a Contractor's or a subcontractor's
contract(s) for the purchase of materials, equipment, services, or supplies
that are incident to the performance of services under the Contract or for the
general operation of its business and not attributable exclusively to the
particular subcontract; and
      (6)   A percentage of the total dollar value of the Contract with a CSB
Joint Venture equal to the percentage of CSB participation in the Joint Venture
shall be counted towards meeting the goals fixed under division (a) of this
section. If the CSB is responsible for performance of a clearly defined portion
of the work to be performed, equal in proportion to its share in the ownership,
control, management, responsibility, risk, and profits of the Joint Venture.
   (d)   To fulfill the purposes of the goals fixed under division (a) of this
section, Contractors shall use CSBs to perform a Commercially Useful Function
during the implementation or performance of the Contract. Failure to do so will
be a material breach of the Contract, and may subject the Contractor to
criminal prosecution, decertification, and other sanctions.
   (e)   The Director shall not apply credit toward the CSB subcontractor
participation goals fixed in division (a) of this section for participation
under any Contract in a calendar year by any CSB subcontractor that has
contracted under a City contract more than a maximum annual dollar amount per
year fixed by the Director in the Regulations from time to time, except that
the Director may apply credit toward the CSB subcontractor participation goals
upon written request of a Bidder or Contractor attesting that no other
certified CSBs are available to perform the work or supply the materials
required for the Contract under which the CSB is a subcontractor, or in an
emergency, or for such other reasons that the Director determines require use
of that CSB. Nothing in the foregoing shall be deemed to prohibit a Contractor
from subcontracting to that CSB, or that CSB from performing work or supplying
materials under any Contract without participation credit.
(Ord. No. 532-13. Passed 5-13-13, eff. 5-16-13)
§ 187.05 Certification of Minority Business Enterprises and Female Business
Enterprises
   (a)   A Business Enterprise is eligible for certification as a Minority
Business Enterprise if:
      (1)   The Business Enterprise is owned, operated and controlled by one
(1) or more Minority Persons who have at least fifty-one percent (51%)
ownership;
      (2)   The Minority Persons who own the Business Enterprise have
operational and managerial control, interest in capital, and earnings
commensurate with the percentage of ownership; and
      (3)   The Business Enterprise is located and doing business in the
Cleveland Contracting Market.
   (b)   A Business Enterprise is eligible for certification as a Female
Business Enterprise if:
      (1)   The Business Enterprise is owned, operated and controlled by one
(1) or more Females who have at least fifty-one percent (51%) ownership;
      (2)   The Female owners have operational and managerial control, interest
in capital, and earnings commensurate with the percentage of ownership; and
      (3)   The Business Enterprise is located and doing business in the
Cleveland Contracting Market.
   (c)   Contracting Departments may apply a Bid Discount of five percent (5%)
for bids received from certified MBE and FBE prime contractors, as the
Regulations provide to remediate past or present discrimination as provided in
Section
187.28.
   (d)   Contracting Departments may apply an Evaluation Credit of five percent
(5%) of the total points awarded for proposals received from MBE and FBE prime
contractors, as the Regulations provide to remediate past or present
discrimination as provided in Section
187.28.
   (e)   Contracting Departments may apply a Bid Discount for bids received for
a Public Improvement Contract from a Business Enterprise in the amount of five
percent (5%) of the portion of the total amount of the goods, labor, and
materials that the Bidder represents it will subcontract to one (1) or more
MBEs and FBEs.
      (1)   If a Contracting Department applies the Bid Discount under division
(d) of this section to the bid of a Bidder that would not have otherwise been
the lowest and the Bidder is awarded the Public Improvement Contract, the City
shall retain as Additional Retainage an amount equal to the total dollar amount
by which the bid was adjusted for bid comparison in addition to the retainage
required under Section
185.41 of the Codified Ordinances.
      (2)   If a Contractor uses MBE and FBE subcontractors in the performance
of a Public Improvement Contract in an amount equal to or greater than offered
in the Contractor’s bid, the City shall pay the Contractor any Additional
Retainage retained under division (e)(1) of this section upon the Contracting
Department director’s acceptance of the contract work under division (d) of
Section
185.41. If a Contractor uses MBE and FBE subcontractors in the performance of a
Public Improvement Contract in an amount less than represented in its bid, the
Contractor shall forfeit the amount of Additional Retainage equal to the amount
of shortfall in its total MBE and FBE usage, in addition to any other sanctions
or penalties applicable under this chapter or the Contract.
      (3)   If a Contracting Department applies the Bid Discount under division
(e) of this section to a bid that would not have otherwise been the lowest and
the Bidder is awarded the Public Improvement Contract, the Contract terms shall
prohibit the Contractor from deducting the amount of the Additional Retainage
from progress payments to the MBE and FBE subcontractors.
   (f)   The maximum cumulative dollar amount of all Bid Discounts to a Bidder
for a bid under divisions (c) and (e) of this section shall not exceed fifty
thousand dollars ($50,000.00).
   (g)   If a Contracting Department applies a Bid Discount under divisions (c)
or (e) of this section to one (1) or more bids for the award of a Contract, no
Bid Discounts may be applied under divisions (b) or (d) of Section
187.03 to any bid under review for the award of that Contract. If a Contracting
Department applies an Evaluation Credit under division (d) of this section to
one (1) or more proposals for the award of a Contract, no Evaluation Credits
may be applied under division (c) of Section
187.03 to any proposal under review for the award of that Contract.
   (h)   Certificates issued under this section shall be valid for the period
specified by the Director in the Regulations.
   (i)   By fifteen (15) days after the close of each calendar quarter, the
Director shall publish a list of all MBEs and FBEs certified during the
preceding quarter, including the type(s) of work that each is certified to
perform, and a list of all Business Enterprises that have lost their
certification as an MBE or FBE during the preceding quarter, including whether
an appeal of the denial of certification is pending. Concurrently, the Director
shall furnish to the Council the name of any Business Enterprise to which OEO
has denied certification as an MBE or FBE during the preceding quarter,
including whether an appeal of the denial is pending. Publication of the MBE’s
or FBE’s name shall not be a prerequisite for eligibility for the award of a
Contract.
(Ord. No. 77-08. Passed 2-4-08, eff. 3-15-08)
§ 187.06 MBE/FBE Goals of Contracting Departments
   (a)   Consistent with the City's goal of increasing the level of MBE and FBE
participation in City Contracts when past or present discrimination against
such type of MBEs or FBEs or category of contract has been evidenced as
provided in Section
187.28, each Contracting Department shall use its best efforts to utilize
certified MBEs and FBEs as Contractors or subcontractors for all contracts in
excess of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) where applicable. The Director
may determine the appropriate annual City-wide goals for MBE and FBE
participation for each type of Contract, including, but not limited to,
Construction, non-professional and professional services, supplies, and
concessions, and for each type of work to be performed under a particular
Contract, based on the availability of certified MBEs and FBEs as to which past
or present discrimination has been demonstrated as provided in Section
187.28. The Director shall cause the goals to be published in the Regulations.
   The Director shall fix the goals for MBE and FBE participation in a
particular Contract in consultation with the Contracting Department based upon
the annual City-wide goals for each type of Contract and for each type of work
to be performed in the Contract and the availability of certified MBEs and
FBEs. The Director may fix the goals for a particular Contract at a level
exceeding the annual City-wide goals to assist a Contracting Department in
meeting the annual City-wide goal for the particular type of Contract to be
awarded.
   (b)   Contracting Departments shall consider use of certified MBEs and FBEs
when recommending a lowest and best or lowest responsible bid to meet the
specified annual goals and may apply a Bid Discount for Bid Comparison under
division (c) of Section
187.05. However, these goals are not intended as quotas. Each Contracting
Department shall ensure that bids or proposals emanating from that department
comply with the procedures and provisions in this chapter and the Regulations.
   (c)   In evaluating the MBE and FBE participation that shall apply toward a
Contracting Department's annual goals, the Director shall credit:
      (1)   Expenditures to certified MBEs and FBEs that perform Commercially
Useful Functions in implementation or performance of a Contract;
      (2)   Expenditures to certified MBE and FBE manufacturers (i.e. Suppliers
that produce goods from raw materials or the product of raw materials and add
value by substantially altering them before resale);
      (3)   Sixty percent (60%) of expenditures to certified MBE and FBE
Suppliers that are not manufacturers, provided that the MBE and FBE Supplier
performs a Commercially Useful Function in the supply process;
      (4)   Should a MBE or FBE subcontractor further subcontract its
participation in a Contract to a non-MBE or non-FBE only the work actually
performed by the MBE or FBE subcontractor shall apply towards the Contracting
Department's annual MBE or FBE participation goals;
      (5)   No credit shall apply to a Contractor's or a subcontractor's
contract(s) for the purchase of materials, equipment, services, or supplies
that are incident to the performance of services under the Contract or for the
general operation of its business and not attributable exclusively to the
particular subcontract;
      (6)   A Contractor or subcontractor that qualifies as both a MBE and FBE
may obtain certification as both a MBE and FBE. The total dollar value of a
particular Contract with such Contractor or subcontractor may count only toward
the MBE or FBE goal, but not toward both. The Contractor must choose the
category to which the Contract value should be applied; and
      (7)   A portion of the total dollar value of the Contract with a CSB,
MBE, or FBE Joint Venture equal to the percentage of certified CSB, MBE, or FBE
participation in the Joint Venture may count toward meeting MBE and FBE goals.
The CSB, MBE, or FBE must be responsible for performance of a clearly defined,
distinct portion of the Contract work of equal proportion to its share in the
ownership, control, management, responsibility, risk, and profits of the Joint
Venture.
   (d)   To fulfill the purposes of the MBE and FBE goals, Contractors shall
use MBEs and FBEs to perform a Commercially Useful Function in implementation
or performance of the Contract. Failure to do so will not only be considered a
material breach of the Contract, but may also subject the Contractor to
criminal prosecution for fraudulent misrepresentation, decertification, and to
other sanctions.
   (e)   The Director shall not apply credit toward the MBE and FBE
subcontractor participation goals fixed under division (a) of this section for
participation under any Contract in a calendar year by any one (1) MBE or FBE
subcontractor that has contracted under a City contract more than a maximum
annual dollar amount per MBE or FBE per year fixed by the Director in the
Regulations from time to time, except that the Director may apply credit toward
the MBE or FBE subcontractor participation goals upon written request of a
Bidder or Contractor attesting that no other certified MBEs or FBEs are
available to perform the work or supply the materials required for the Contract
under which the MBE or FBE is a subcontractor, or in an emergency, or for such
other reasons that the Director determines require use of that MBE or FBE.
Nothing in the foregoing shall be deemed to prohibit a Contractor from
subcontracting to that MBE or FBE, or that MBE or FBE from performing work or
supplying materials under any Contract without participation credit.
   (f)   This section shall apply, as remedial action, only to the specified
types and categories of Contracts and the contracting for those types and
categories of Contracts, for which the City has developed or obtained, by
disparity study or otherwise, a legally sufficient basis in evidence to
demonstrate past or present discrimination as to participation of Minority
Persons, Females, MBEs, or FBEs.
(Ord. No. 532-13. Passed 5-13-13, eff. 5-16-13)
§ 187.07 Certification as a Contract Prerequisite; Certification Process
   (a)   Each Bidder must hold a valid certificate of employment compliance for
the equal employment of minorities and women in the contractor’s workforce, as
described in division (b) of Section
187.16, unless the Mayor has waived such compliance.
   (b)   Each Bidder whose bid includes participation by CSBs, MBEs, or FBEs
must demonstrate that the Bidder:
      (1)   Has reached a specific written agreement with each participating
CSB, MBE, or FBE subcontractor;
      (2)   Has accurately and fully represented the essence of their agreement
in the bid documents; and
      (3)   Is using CSBs, MBEs, or FBEs in a way which complies with this Code
and the Regulations.
   If the Administrator has made a finding of noncompliance by a Bidder under
division (f)(3) of Section
187.17 and the Bidder disputes the finding, the City may reject the bid until
such dispute is resolved.
   (c)   CSBs, MBEs, and FBEs must be certified under division (d) of this
section. Contractors seeking to use certified CSBs, MBEs, or FBEs shall ensure
that all forms and related materials required for certification are submitted
to the Director in a timely fashion.
   (d)   The Administrator may issue a certificate of employment compliance
under division (a) of this section, or a certificate for the following:
      (1)   Bona fide status as CSB, MBE, or FBE; and
      (2)   Bona fide status as a CSB, MBE, or FBE Joint Venture.
   Any certification under this section with regard to a professional service
Contractor under a Contract entered into by the Director of Law may be deferred
at the discretion of the Director of Law but shall occur prior to making final
payment under the Contract.
(Ord. No. 77-08. Passed 2-4-08, eff. 3-15-08)
§ 187.08 Good-Faith Effort of Bidders and Contract Provisions
   (a)   Each Bidder for a Contract shall make a good-faith effort to utilize
certified CSBs, MBEs, and FBEs in a percentage that equals or exceeds the
applicable goal.
   (b)   The City and each Contracting Department in soliciting bids and
approving, awarding, and administering a Contract exceeding or reasonably
anticipated to exceed the Contract amount above which Charter Section
108 requires ordinance authority shall comply with the following requirements:
      (1)   Each Bid invitation, request for proposals and other solicitation
for a Contract shall require each Bidder to complete and submit with its bid or
proposal the representations, documentation, and schedules the Director
specifies for the Bidder to identify its efforts to utilize CSBs, MBEs, and
FBEs in a percentage that equals or exceeds the applicable goal. The Bidder
shall keep such records of its efforts as the Director specifies are adequate
to permit determination of a successful Bidder’s compliance with this section.
      (2)   If a bid invitation or request for proposals contains alternates,
the percentage of CSB, MBE and FBE participation in the prospective Contract
will be computed upon the total dollar amount of the Contract as awarded,
including the cost of alternates the Contracting Department recommends for
award.
      (3)   If a Bidder is unable to achieve the goal for CSB utilization or
MBE and FBE utilization for a particular Contract, the Bidder may request an
exception to the goal under division (a) of Section
187.13.
      (4)   Prior to execution of a Contract, a Bidder shall submit to the City
such additional documents as the Director may specify to identify the
particular CSBs, MBEs, FBEs and other subcontractors it will use under the
Contract, and to specify the dollar and percentage value of each
subcontractor’s participation, the type of work or services to be performed,
and such other information as the Director may reasonably require to determine
whether the Bidder meets the applicable CSB, MBE, and FBE participation goals.
   (c)   All Contracts shall require the Contractor to:
      (1)   Use certified CSBs, MBEs, and FBEs in performing the Contract
according to the participation identified in its bid or proposal, subject only
to any substitution and waiver granted under division (b) of Section
187.08;
      (2)   Make a good-faith effort to maintain and increase the use of CSBs,
MBEs, and FBEs during performance of the Contract;
      (3)   Maintain such records as the Director requires that demonstrate
compliance with this chapter’s and the Contract’s requirements relating to CSB,
MBE, and FBE participation;
      (4)   Comply with all provisions of this chapter. Any failure of the
Contractor or any subcontractor to comply with applicable provisions of this
chapter shall constitute a material breach;
      (5)   Whenever a Contract is amended or modified, any change order is
issued, or subsidiary agreement is authorized increasing the total original
Contract cost by more than ten percent (10%,) comply with this chapter
regarding the work, services, or supplies to be paid for through such
amendment, modification, change order, or subsidiary agreement to ensure that
it maintains the same percentage of CSB, MBE, and FBE participation identified
in its bid or proposal in performing the additional work, services, or
supplies.
   (d)   To be considered lowest and best or lowest responsible, a Bidder shall
disclose with its bid or proposal such information as the Director requires in
the Regulations to demonstrate the extent to which, in contracts not within the
purview of this chapter, the Bidder has awarded subcontracts to CSBs, MBEs, and
FBEs.
(Ord. No. 77-08. Passed 2-4-08, eff. 3-15-08)
§ 187.09 Contracts with Other Governmental Entities as Contractors
   Contracts or other agreements between the City and other political
subdivisions, governmental, or quasi-governmental agencies, under which
entities receive money from or through the City for the purpose of contracting
with Business Enterprises to perform projects in the City, shall encourage
Business Enterprises to comply with the provisions of this chapter in awarding,
administering, and implementing the contracts.
(Ord. No. 77-08. Passed 2-4-08, eff. 3-15-08)
§ 187.10 CSB Joint Ventures
   When a certified CSB Joint Venture participates in a Contract, the CSB’s
participation value will be measured by first determining the percentage of the
CSB’s participation in the CSB Joint Venture, and then multiplying that
percentage by the value of the CSB Joint Venture’s participation in the
Contract.
(Ord. No. 77-08. Passed 2-4-08, eff. 3-15-08)
§ 187.11 MBE/FBE Joint Ventures
   Participation of MBEs and FBEs in Joint Ventures is encouraged. When a
certified MBE or FBE Joint Venture participates in a Contract to which MBE and
or FBE goals apply, the MBE’s or FBE’s participation value will be measured by
first determining the percentage of the MBE’s or FBE’s participation in the MBE
or FBE Joint Venture, and then multiplying that percentage by the value of the
MBE or FBE Joint Venture’s participation in the Contract.
(Ord. No. 77-08. Passed 2-4-08, eff. 3-15-08)
§ 187.12 Responsibilities of Contracting Departments
   The Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies and each Contracting Department
shall:
   (a)   Endeavor to maximize the participation of CSBs, MBEs, and FBEs in
Contracts of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) or less;
   (b)   Develop lists of CSBs, MBEs, and FBEs experienced in the various types
of services, products, or property for which the City typically contracts;
   (c)   Report to the Director quarterly not later than thirty (30) calendar
days after the end of the previous quarter specifying, with respect to
Contracts and subcontracts:
      (1)   The means by which it intends to meet goals established under this
chapter in the forthcoming quarter;
      (2)   The percentage and dollar amount of those Contracts and
subcontracts awarded in the previous quarter to CSBs, MBEs, and FBEs;
      (3)   For each Contracting Department, the degree to which it has met
goals set forth in this chapter, any past and current activities undertaken and
being undertaken to meet such goals and, if applicable, a detailed explanation
of why it has not met the goals; and
      (4)   Other information as the Director may request; and
   (d)   Appoint one (1) or more members of each Contracting Department to
serve as a liaison between the Contracting Department and the OEO, and to
nominate a member of the contracting department or division to serve on the
Review and Evaluation Committee provided under Section
187.23.
(Ord. No. 532-13. Passed 5-13-13, eff. 5-16-13)
§ 187.13 Exceptions, Substitutions and Waivers
   (a)   If a Bidder is unable to meet the goals for a Contract established
under division (a) of Section
187.04 for CSBs or division (a) of Section
187.06 for MBEs and FBEs, it may submit a request for exception to the Director
prior to bid opening. The request for exception shall include such
documentation as the Director specifies in the Regulations that demonstrates
the Bidder’s good-faith effort to use CSBs, MBEs, and FBEs to achieve the
applicable goal.
   (b)   If, after a Contract is awarded, a Contractor is unable to utilize a
CSB, MBE, or FBE identified in the Contractor’s bid or proposal, it shall make
a good- faith effort to identify and propose, and request the Director’s
approval of a substitute CSB, MBE, or FBE, respectively, to fulfill its
utilization commitment. If, after good-faith effort, the Contractor is unable
to find a substitute, it may request the Director to waive its utilization
commitment. The request must document, as the Director prescribes in the
Regulations, both the Contractor’s good-faith effort to find a substitute and
the reasons it is unable to meet the goal.
   (c)   A Contracting Department may request the Director to waive or reduce
the goal for CSB, MBE, and FBE participation in a particular Contract by
submitting the reasons for the request in writing prior to soliciting bids or
proposals.
      (1)   The Director may grant a waiver or reduction upon determination
that:
         A.   The reasonable and necessary requirements of the Contract
preclude subcontracting or participation of Business Enterprises other than the
Bidder or proposer; or
         B.   Based upon documentation submitted to the Director, sufficient
CSBs, MBEs, and/or FBEs, certified, qualified and capable of providing the
goods or services the Contract requires are unavailable despite every
practicable attempt to locate and utilize them.
      (2)   In any grant of a goal reduction, the Director shall specify the
percentage to which the goal is reduced.
      (3)   Whenever the Director denies a request to waive or reduce a goal,
the Contracting Department may appeal that denial to the Mayor whose decision
on the request shall be final.
   (d)   A Contracting Department may waive or reduce the goal established
under division (a) of Section
187.04 for CSBs or division (a) of Section
187.06 for MBEs and FBEs for a particular Contract under the following
circumstances:
      (1)   Whenever the director of a Contracting Department finds, with the
advice of the Director, that the goods or services are available only from a
sole source, and the prospective Contractor is not currently disqualified from
doing business with the City; and
      (2)   If the director of a Contracting Department certifies in writing to
the Director that:
         A.   An emergency exists which requires goods or services to be
provided with such immediacy that it is impracticable to comply with the
requirements of this chapter; and
         B.   The prospective Contractor is a CSB, MBE, or FBE, or if not, that
the prospective Contractor will make a good-faith effort to subcontract to
CSBs, MBEs, and FBEs, as applicable, should subcontracting opportunities exist.
(Ord. No. 77-08. Passed 2-4-08, eff. 3-15-08)
§ 187.14 Small Contract Rotation Program
   (a)   Provided that a disparity study or otherwise establishes a legally
sufficient basis to employ a Small Contract Rotation Program as a remedy for
past or present discrimination under Section
187.28, the Director shall establish a Small Contract Rotation Program for MBEs
and FBEs, including procedures, applicable to the categories of construction,
professional services and purchase contracts where the cost of the Contract is
anticipated to be under fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). The purposes of
the Small Contract Rotation Program are to increase contract opportunities for
categories of MBEs and FBEs, that have been underutilized at a statistically
significant level in Contracts under fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), to
provide an orderly and efficient method of awarding purchases and work, and to
equitably distribute purchases and work among qualified Contractors.
   (b)   Under the Small Contract Rotation Program, the City shall limit every
second contract to be let by the City for each type of contract, within a
category where MBEs and FBEs are underutilized at a statistically significant
level, to competition among certified MBEs and FBEs who submit an application
in a form acceptable to the Director. The Director shall compile an approved
list comprised of not less than two (2) certified MBEs and FBEs for each
industry and, as needed, compile specialized lists within industries. The
eligible businesses shall be alphabetically ranked on each list and, for a
thirty (30) day period commencing on January 1st and June 1st of each year, the
Director shall hold open enrollment for applicants. The lists of prequalified
vendors shall be made available to the public. The Commissioner of Purchases
and Supplies shall solicit bids or proposals from all MBEs or FBEs on the list
for each contract to be entered into under the Small Contract Rotation Program.
When only one (1) qualified vendor is on the list, the Commissioner of
Purchases and Supplies may purchase directly from that firm by direct
negotiation of the purchase price.
   (c)   A CSB or a Business Enterprise located and doing business in the
Cleveland Contracting Market is eligible for certification as a "Very Small
Business" ("VSB") if it has annual gross revenues less than three million
dollars ($3,000,000.00) on average over the three (3) year period immediately
preceding its application for certification as a VSB. The Director, in
consultation with the Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies, shall establish a
Small Contract Rotation Program for VSBs, including procedures applicable to
the categories of purchase contracts where the cost of the Contract is
anticipated to be under fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). The purposes of
the Small Contract Rotation Program for VSBs are to increase City contract
opportunities for VSBs, to provide an orderly and efficient method of awarding
purchases and work to VSBs, and to equitably distribute purchases and work
among qualified VSBs.
   (d)   Under the Small Contract Rotation Program for VSBs, the City shall
limit every second contract to be let by the City for each type of contract for
which there are certified VSBs to competition among those VSBs who submit an
application in a form acceptable to the Director. The Director and the
Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies shall compile an approved list comprised
of not less than two (2) VSBs for each industry when possible and, as needed,
compile specialized lists within industries. The eligible businesses shall be
alphabetically ranked on each list. The lists of prequalified VSBs shall be
made available to the public. The Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies shall,
according to a procedure established by the Commissioner and made available to
the public, solicit bids or proposals from the list for each type of contract
to be entered into under the Small Contract Rotation Program for VSBs and
qualified to perform the contract work or services. When only one (1) qualified
VSB is on the list, the Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies may purchase
directly from that firm by direct negotiation of the purchase price.
(Ord. No. 1083-2019. Passed 10-7-19, eff. 10-8-19)
§ 187.15 Employment; Nondiscrimination; Goals of Contractors
   (a)   No Contractor shall Discriminate against any employee or applicant for
employment because of race, religion, color, sex, sexual orientation, gender
identity or expression, national origin, age, Disability, ethnic group or
Vietnam-era or disabled veteran status. Contractors shall take affirmative
action to ensure that applicants are employed and that employees are treated
during employment without regard to race, religion, color, sex, sexual
orientation, gender identity or expression, national origin, age, Disability,
ethnic group or Vietnam-era or disabled veteran status. As used in this
chapter, “treated” means and includes without limitation the following:
recruited whether by advertising or other means; compensated, whether in the
form of rates of pay or other forms of compensation; selected for training,
including apprenticeship, promoted, upgraded, demoted, transferred, laid off
and terminated. Contractors shall post in conspicuous places available to
employees and applicants for employment, notices to be provided by the hiring
representative of contractors setting forth the provisions of this
nondiscrimination clause.
   (b)   Within sixty (60) days after entering into a Contract, each Contractor
shall have filed with the Director a written affirmative action program,
approved by the Administrator, containing standards and procedures ensuring
that the Contractor, by specified affirmative actions with regard to its
employees, facilities and performance of the Contract, affords all qualified
employees and applicants for employment equal opportunities in the Contractor’s
recruitment, selection, and advancement processes.
   (c)   Each Contractor’s affirmative action program shall contain the
following components:
      (1)   A diagnostic component that includes quantitative analyses
comparing the composition of the Contractor’s workforce to the composition of
the Cleveland Contracting Market employment pool according to the most current
census data available, grouped by EEO occupations.
      (2)   Each affirmative action program shall contain placement goals as
follows:
         A.   For each non-construction Contract, placement goals equal to the
availability percentage for women or minorities where the percentage of women
or minorities employed by the Contractor in a particular job group is less than
would reasonably be expected given their percentage availabilities in the
corresponding Cleveland Contracting Market employment pool. Placement goals are
objective targets reasonably attainable by applying a good-faith effort to
implement all aspects of the affirmative action program; they are not
inflexible quotas. Placement goals do not authorize or require a Contractor to
grant a preference to any individual or adversely affect an individual’s
employment status for an unlawful discriminatory reason.
         B.   For each construction Contract, establish placement goals for
minorities and women for each trade involved in the performance of the Contract
equal to the goals established by the Director. Placement goals are objective
targets reasonably attainable by applying a good-faith effort to implement all
aspects of the affirmative action program; they are not inflexible quotas.
Placement goals do not authorize or require a Contractor to grant a preference
to any individual or adversely affect an individual’s employment status for an
unlawful Discriminatory reason.
      (3)   Identification of problem areas through analysis of the
Contractor’s employment process to determine if it affords or incorporates, or
contains impediments to, equal employment opportunities.
      (4)   Action-oriented programs consisting of practical steps the
Contractor will implement to address any identified problem areas or the
underutilization of women or minorities in relation to their availability in
the relevant labor pool.
      (5)   Internal auditing and reporting systems that monitor and examine
the impact the Contractor’s employment decisions and compensation systems have
on women and minorities and their progress toward achieving a workforce that
would be expected in the absence of discrimination.
      (6)   Policies, practices, and procedures that the Contractor will
implement to ensure that all qualified applicants and employees enjoy equal
opportunity in recruitment, selection, advancement, and every other term and
privilege associated with employment.
      (7)   Any additional requirements the Administrator may require through
the Regulations or on a case-by-case review of a Contractor’s proposed
affirmative action program.
(Ord. No. 1445-13. Passed 11-17-14, eff. 11-19-14)
§ 187.16 Compliance with Employment Goals
   (a)   Each Contractor shall be eligible for a certificate of employment
compliance required under Section
187.07 when the Administrator, from the required submittals and other
information supplied by the Contractor, determines that the Contractor is
complying with this Code and the Regulations.
   (b)   Each Contractor shall submit to the Administrator and implement a
written affirmative action program containing the components required under
division (c) of Section
187.15. When the Administrator is satisfied that the Contractor has complied
with the Code and its regulations, the Administrator shall issue a written
“certificate of employment compliance.”
   (c)   Immediately upon a finding that sixty (60) days after entering into a
Contract, a Contractor has no affirmative action program, has deviated
substantially from an approved affirmative action program, or has Discriminated
against any employee or applicant for employment because of race, religion,
color, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, national origin,
age, Disability, ethnic group or Vietnam-era or disabled veteran status, the
Administrator shall proceed according to division (f) of Section
187.17. Anything in the foregoing to the contrary notwithstanding, the Director
shall not impose sanctions or remedial action against a Contractor solely
because the Contractor fails to achieve the established placement goals.
   (d)   By notice in writing to the Director and the Clerk of Council, the
Mayor may waive compliance with the employment goals established under division
(c) of Section
187.15 with respect to a specific Contractor seeking the award of a specific
Contract when, in the Mayor’s sole judgment, the action is necessary in the
best interests of the City and its citizens.
(Ord. No. 1445-13. Passed 11-17-14, eff. 11-19-14)
§ 187.17 Compliance Monitoring
   (a)   The Director shall monitor a Contractor’s compliance with the
requirements of this chapter during the term of a Contract. If the Director
determines that there is cause to believe that a Contractor or a subcontractor
has failed to comply with any applicable requirements of this chapter or the
Contract provisions pertaining to CSB, MBE, or FBE participation, the
Administrator shall notify the Contractor as provided in division (f) of this
section. The provisions of divisions (f), (g) and (h) of this section, Section
187.18, and Section
187.20 shall apply to the review and appeal of this determination by an
Administrator.
   (b)   The Director and the Administrator may require such reports,
information and documentation from Contractors, Bidders, Contracting
Departments, and the head of any City department, division, or office, as
reasonably necessary to determine compliance with requirements of this chapter
and any Contract provisions regarding CSB, MBE, and FBE participation, as
applicable.
   (c)   Contracting Departments shall maintain accurate records for each
Contract awarded, including dollar value, the nature of the goods and services
to be provided, the name of the Contractor, the efforts it employed to solicit
bids from CSBs, MBEs, and FBEs, and all subcontracts awarded by the Contractor,
including dollar value, the nature of the goods or services provided, and the
name of each subcontractor.
   (d)   If the Administrator finds that a Contractor is not in compliance with
the applicable provisions of this Code or is in default with respect to any
representation made by the Contractor regarding applicable provisions of this
Code and upon which a certificate or approval was awarded, then the
Administrator may rescind or withdraw the relevant certificate or approval
prior to its expiration. All certificates must be renewed on forms provided by
the OEO.
   (e)   Any person having knowledge of facts tending to show that a Contractor
has obtained or is seeking certification or approval by false or inaccurate
representations to the OEO may initiate the administrative procedures set forth
in this section, Section
187.18 and Section
187.20. For purposes of these sections, each Contractor must maintain its
current address(es) and those of its subcontractors with the Administrator; the
City’s mailing of any notice to a Contractor by regular mail to the filed
address shall constitute the required notice.
   (f)   If the Administrator has reason to believe that a Contractor is in
default with respect to any representation by the Contractor regarding
applicable provisions of this Code and its regulations, and on which a
certification or Contract was awarded, the Administrator shall:
      (1)   Send the Contractor written notice by certified mail or personal
delivery of any apparent noncompliance with applicable terms of the Code;
      (2)   Give the Contractor ten (10) days from receipt of the notice, or
other specified reasonable opportunity to submit records or offer other
information in support of its continued certification and compliance with the
provisions of the Code. The Administrator may consider the Contractor’s failure
to submit records or other information timely, or promptly when requested by
the Administrator, as agreement to the conditions and circumstances of the
noncompliance specified in the Administrator’s notice to the Contractor; and
      (3)   If, after reviewing the information submitted under division (f)(2)
of this section, the Administrator determines that the Contractor is not in
compliance with the Code, then the Administrator shall issue a written finding
of noncompliance or default, stating the basis for that finding and notifying
the Contractor of its right to object to the finding.
   (g)   Any Contractor taking exception to a finding of the Administrator may
attempt to reconcile the differences through informal methods of conciliation
and persuasion and/or file a written objection by an appeal, with reasons for
the objection, to the Administrator by certified mail within ten (10) days
after receipt of the Administrator’s written finding. The Administrator may
recommend a settlement agreement regarding the finding. If a written objection
is filed, the Administrator shall forward the objection to the Director within
five (5) days of its receipt, along with all materials relating to the
determination which is being appealed, together with any recommendations of
appropriate remedial action. The provisions of Section
187.18 will then apply.
   (h)   If the Administrator finds a Contractor is in default with respect to
any representation by the Contractor regarding applicable provisions of this
Code and the Regulations on which a certificate was issued or a Contract was
awarded, and if the Contractor fails to attempt reconciliation under division
(g) of this section within ten (10) days after mailing of the written finding,
the Administrator shall forthwith forward his or her findings to the Director
along with a recommendation of appropriate remedial action to be taken or
sanctions to be imposed. The Director shall then, based solely on the findings
of the Administrator, decide whether or not noncompliance exists and shall take
such actions set forth in division (a) of Section
187.20 as the Director determines, applicable, appropriate, and consistent with
the decision.
(Ord. No. 77-08. Passed 2-4-08, eff. 3-15-08)
§ 187.18 Hearing Procedure
   If the Contractor files a timely objection, as provided in division (g) of
Section
187.17, to a written finding by the Administrator, the Director shall hold a
hearing on the matter of the objection. The hearing shall be held not less than
five (5) days nor more than ten (10) days from the filing, unless the
Contractor and the Director otherwise mutually agree. The Director shall send
notice of the date, time, and place for hearing by mail to all interested
parties. The Contractor shall have the right to record the proceedings of the
hearing at the sole expense of the Contractor.
(Ord. No. 77-08. Passed 2-4-08, eff. 3-15-08)
§ 187.19 Subpoena Power
   (a)   In any investigation relating to compliance by Contractors or Business
Enterprises with this Code, the Regulations and any Contract provisions
concerning CSB, MBE, or FBE participation, or in any hearing held under Section
187.18 relating to a Contractor’s compliance with the City’s requirements, the
Administrator or the Director may issue in writing and cause to be served a
subpoena requiring the following:
      (1)   The production of any records or other things relevant to the
investigation; and
      (2)   Relevant testimony.
   (b)   Any subpoena issued under division (a) of this section is subject to
the same limitations as would apply if the subpoenas were issued or served in
aid of a civil action in a court of common pleas.
   (c)   In case of refusal to obey a subpoena issued by the Administrator or
the Director, the Director of Law may petition for its enforcement in the court
of common pleas in the county in which the Person to whom the subpoena was
addressed resides, was served, or transacts business.
(Ord. No. 77-08. Passed 2-4-08, eff. 3-15-08)
§ 187.20 Decision and Available Sanctions for Noncompliance
   (a)   Within five (5) business days after the hearing required by Section
187.18, the Director shall issue and send by certified mail to the Contractor,
findings of fact and a determination of compliance or noncompliance with the
Code, the Regulations, or any Contract provisions concerning CSB, MBE, or FBE
participation. If the Director determines that the Contractor is in compliance
with the applicable provisions of the Code, the Director shall issue an
appropriate certificate. If the Director determines that the Contractor is in
default with respect to any representation upon which it was awarded a
certificate or contract or that the Contractor is not in compliance with the
applicable provisions of the Code, the Regulations and any Contract provisions
concerning CSB, MBE, or FBE participation, the Director, in addition to other
remedies available with respect to the foregoing and other defaults under any
Contract in question, may take any of the following actions:
      (1)   Cancel any existing certificate of employment compliance or
withhold issuance of a certificate of employment compliance until the
Contractor cures the default or complies fully with the applicable provisions
of the Code, the Regulations, and any Contract provisions concerning CSB, MBE,
or FBE participation;
      (2)   Recommend that the City withhold all or part of any payments due
the Contractor until such time as the Contractor cures the default or is in
full compliance with the applicable provisions of the Code, its Regulations and
any Contract provisions concerning CSB, MBE, or FBE participation;
      (3)   Recommend that the City cancel the Contract and declare a
forfeiture of any performance bond;
      (4)   Recommend that the Director of Law take such legal action, whether
civil or criminal, as he or she deems appropriate;
      (5)   Recommend rescission of the Contract based upon a material breach
of the Contract pertaining to CSB, MBE, or FBE participation;
      (6)   Recommend disqualification of a Bidder, Contractor, or other
Business Enterprise from eligibility for providing goods or services to the
City for a period not to exceed two (2) years; or
      (7)   Recommend a claim for payment of damages, including any liquidated
damages specified in the Contract.
   (b)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, if the Director
determines after an investigative hearing that the City has contracted with a
Front Organization and/or that a Contractor has participated with a CSB, FBE,
or MBE Contractor in activities that would create a Front Organization, then
the Director shall:
      (1)   Decertify the Contractor and/or Front Organization;
      (2)   Not permit the Contractor and/or Front Organization to be certified
for a period of not less than one (1) year after a final determination; and
      (3)   Refer the matter to the City Prosecutor’s office for appropriate
action.
   (c)   A decision of the Director under this section is final and may be
appealed to the Board of Zoning Appeals by filing a notice of appeal with the
Board and a copy to the Director within fifteen (15) days of the decision. The
Board of Zoning Appeals shall, after a hearing, determine whether the decision
of the Director is arbitrary, capricious, or unreasonable. The decision of the
Board of Zoning Appeals, in turn, may be reviewed by the Common Pleas Court of
Cuyahoga County under RC Chapter 2506, or as otherwise provided by law.
(Ord. No. 1056-10. Passed 10-25-10, eff. 10-28-10)
§ 187.21 Notices Required in Advertisement for Bids
   (a)   If the Director is unable to demonstrate a legally sufficient basis in
evidence of past or present discrimination against MBEs and FBEs as provided in
Section
187.28, the Director shall cause the following notice to be included in
advertisements for invitations to bid and in requests for proposals: “Under the
Cleveland Area Business code, each Business Enterprise seeking to do business
with the City as a Cleveland Area Small Business (“CSB”) must first be
certified by the City’s OEO before it may contract with the City as a CSB.
Therefore, if CSB status has not been previously obtained, any prime Contractor
wishing to receive credit for making a good-faith effort to use a CSB shall
ensure that applications for certification as to CSB status, compliance with
the Code, employment compliance and, if applicable, joint venture status, are
submitted to the City’s OEO prior to the date of bid opening or submission of
proposals or as specified by regulations. Failure to comply with the Cleveland
Area Business Code or with representations made on these forms may result in
denial or cancellation of the contract or other civil or criminal penalties.”
   (b)   If the Director is able to demonstrate a legally sufficient basis in
evidence of past or present discrimination against MBEs and FBEs as provided in
Section
187.28, the Director shall cause the following notice to be included in
advertisements for invitations to bid and in requests for proposals: “Under the
Cleveland Area Business Code, each Business Enterprise seeking to do business
with the City as a Cleveland Area Small Business, Minority Business Enterprise
(“MBE”) and/or Female Business Enterprise (“FBE”) first must be certified by
the City’s Office of Equal Opportunity before contracting as a CSB, MBE, or
FBE. Therefore, any prime Contractor wishing to receive credit for making a
good-faith effort to use a CSB, MBE, and/or FBE shall submit applications for
certification as to CSB, MBE, and/or FBE status, compliance with the Code,
affirmative action in employment and, if applicable, joint venture status, to
the City’s Office of Equal Opportunity prior to the date of bid opening or
submission of proposals or as specified by regulations. Failure to comply with
the Cleveland Area Business Code or with representations made on these forms
may result in denial or cancellation of the contract or other civil or criminal
penalties.”
(Ord. No. 77-08. Passed 2-4-08, eff. 3-15-08)
§ 187.22 Equal Opportunity Clause; Terms in Contracts
   (a)   Contracting Departments shall include the notice(s) set forth in
Section
187.21 and the requirements set forth in division (c) of Section
187.08 in all specifications for contracts. The Director shall consider
satisfaction of the duties and agreements set forth in the notice(s) in
determining whether a Contractor is in compliance with this Code.
   (b)   Each Contract also shall contain the following equal opportunity
clause:
   “During the performance of this contract, the contractor agrees as follows:
      (1)   The contractor shall not discriminate against any employee or
applicant for employment because of race, religion, color, sex, sexual
orientation, gender identity or expression, national origin, age, disability,
ethnic group or Vietnam-era or disabled veteran status. The contractor shall
take affirmative action to insure that applicants are employed and that
employees are treated during employment without regard to race, religion,
color, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, national origin,
age, disability, ethnic group, or Vietnam-era or disabled veteran status. As
used in this chapter, “treated” means and includes without limitation the
following: recruited, whether by advertising or other means; compensated,
whether in the form of rates of pay or other forms of compensation; selected
for training, including apprenticeship, promoted, upgraded, demoted,
downgraded, transferred, laid off and terminated. The contractor agrees to and
shall post in conspicuous places, available to employees and applicants for
employment, notices to be provided by the hiring representatives of the
contractor setting forth the provisions of this nondiscrimination clause.
      (2)   The contractor will, in all solicitations or advertisements for
employees placed by or on behalf of the contractor, state that the contractor
is an equal opportunity employer.
      (3)   The contractor shall send to each labor union or representative of
workers with which he or she has a collective bargaining agreement or other
contract, or understanding, a notice advising the labor union or worker’s
representative of the contractor’s commitments under the equal opportunity
clause, and shall post copies of the notice in conspicuous places available to
employees and applicants for employment.
      (4)   It is the policy of the City that local businesses, minority-owned
businesses and female- owned businesses shall have every practicable
opportunity to participate in the performance of contracts awarded by the City
subject to the applicable provisions of the Cleveland Area Business Code.
      (5)   The contractor shall permit access by the Director or his or her
designated representative to any relevant and pertinent reports and documents
to verify compliance with the Cleveland Area Business Code, and with the
Regulations. All such materials provided to the Director or designee by the
contractor shall be considered confidential.
      (6)   The contractor will not obstruct or hinder the Director or designee
in the fulfillment of the duties and responsibilities imposed by the Cleveland
Area Business Code.
      (7)   The contractor agrees that each subcontract will include this Equal
Opportunity Clause, and the contractor will notify each subcontractor, material
supplier and supplier that the subcontractor must agree to comply with and be
subject to all applicable provisions of the Cleveland Area Business Code. The
contractor shall take any appropriate action with respect to any subcontractor
as a means of enforcing the provisions of the Code.”
(Ord. No. 1260-08. Passed 11-30-09, eff. 12-3-09)
§ 187.23 Review and Evaluation Committee
   The Director shall serve as chairperson of a Review and Evaluation Committee
comprised of at least one (1) member from each Contracting Department, one (1)
liaison from the Division of Purchases and Supplies, and one (1) member of
Council or its representative nominated by the President of Council. Except for
the member nominated by the President of Council, the members may be appointed
by the Mayor from among nominees presented to him or her by the Contracting
Departments and shall serve at the discretion of the Mayor. The Committee shall
meet as is necessary to fulfill the following responsibilities:
   (a)   Review and monitor each Contracting Department’s performance under the
Cleveland Area Business Program;
   (b)   Assist the Director in preparing annual reports to the Mayor on the
progress of the Cleveland Area Business Program;
   (c)   Recommend changes in the regulations promulgated under this Code;
   (d)   Assist, as appropriate, in the implementation of this Code;
   (e)   Prepare, review and make recommendations concerning the directory of
certified CSBs, MBEs and FBEs;
   (f)   Assist in preparing a Business Enterprise monthly awards report; and
   (g)   Carry out such other oversight or coordination functions as may be
requested by the Director.
(Ord. No. 77-08. Passed 2-4-08, eff. 3-15-08)
§ 187.24 Reports
   (a)   If a construction contract is estimated to take more than ninety (90)
days to complete or calls for the City to expend five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00) or more, each Contractor and subcontractor shall submit project
site reports to the Administrator which shall contain such information as the
Administrator may require. Reports shall be submitted to the Administrator at
least every ninety (90) days, or as sooner requested by the Administrator;
   (b)   Failure to submit any required report constitutes a violation of this
Code for which sanctions may be imposed under this chapter.
(Ord. No. 77-08. Passed 2-4-08, eff. 3-15-08)
§ 187.25 Violations; Disqualification; Penalty
   (a)   No Person shall:
      (1)   Willfully obstruct, impede, or attempt to obstruct or impede any
authorized official or employee who is investigating the qualifications of a
Business Enterprise that has requested certification as a CSB, MBE, or FBE;
      (2)   Fraudulently obtain, retain, attempt to obtain or retain, or aid
another in fraudulently obtaining or retaining, or attempting to obtain or
retain certification as a CSB, MBE, or FBE for purposes of this chapter;
      (3)   Falsely state to any Person that any other is or is not certified
as a CSB, MBE, or FBE for purposes of this chapter;
      (4)   Willfully falsify, conceal or cover up by a trick, scheme, or
device a material fact, or make any false, fictitious, or fraudulent statements
or representations or make use of any false writing or document knowing the
same to contain any false, fictitious, or fraudulent statement or entry in any
matter administered under this chapter; or
      (5)   Fraudulently obtain, attempt to obtain, or aid another Person
fraudulently obtaining or attempting to obtain, public monies to which the
Person is not entitled under this chapter.
   (b)   Any Person who violates the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(Ord. No. 77-08. Passed 2-4-08, eff. 3-15-08)
§ 187.26 Training Courses and Development Activities
   (a)   The Director is authorized to conduct the James H. Walker Construction
Management Training Course up to twice annually, to conduct other training and
facilitate and coordinate development activities authorized by and consistent
with Section
123.08, and to fix and collect registration fees from training seminar or
development activity participants.
   (b)   The Director is authorized to make purchases and enter into one (1) or
more agreements under the Charter and relevant Codified Ordinances for training
and development materials, supplies, refreshments, graduation dinners, and, if
necessary, rental of a site for a course or activity.
   (c)   The Director shall deposit the registration fees collected from
participants in the training courses or development activities into OEO’s
Educational Program Account. All expenditures made under this section shall be
paid from registration fees collected, which are appropriated for these
purposes, and from funds appropriated for the use of the OEO.
(Ord. No. 77-08. Passed 2-4-08, eff. 3-15-08)
§ 187.27 Severability
   Each section and each part of each section of this Cleveland Area Business
Code is an independent section or part of a section, and notwithstanding any
other evidence of legislative intent, it is the controlling legislative intent
that if any section or part of a section or any provision, or the application
of it to any person or circumstances, is held invalid, the remaining sections
or parts of sections and the application of the provision to any other person
or circumstances, other than those as to which it is held invalid, shall not be
affected. It is further the legislative intent that the other provisions of
this Code would have been adopted independently of the section or parts of a
section which are held invalid.
(Ord. No. 77-08. Passed 2-4-08, eff. 3-15-08)
§ 187.28 Applicability of this Code to MBEs and FBEs
   When the City has developed or obtained, by disparity study or otherwise, a
legally sufficient basis in evidence to demonstrate past or present
discrimination as to participation of MBEs, or FBEs in specific types and
categories of Contracts and contracting, the City may, as remedial action with
respect to the discrimination to the extent necessary, apply the provisions of
this Chapter
187 pertaining to the use of MBEs and FBEs in Contracts as specified in the
evidence.
(Ord. No. 77-08. Passed 2-4-08, eff. 3-15-08)
§ 187.29 Professional Consultants
   The Director is authorized to employ by contract or contracts professional
consultants for the purpose of supplementing the regularly employed staff of
the City of Cleveland in order to provide professional services necessary to
develop or obtain a disparity study or other documentation to determine whether
there exists a legally sufficient basis in evidence to demonstrate past or
present discrimination as to participation of MBEs or FBEs in specific types
and categories of Contracts. The selection of the consultants shall be made by
the Board of Control on the nomination of the Director. The compensation to be
paid for the services shall be fixed by the Board of Control and shall be paid
from the fund or funds deemed appropriate by the Director of Finance and that
are appropriated for this purpose.
(Ord. No. 77-08. Passed 2-4-08, eff. 3-15-08)
CHAPTER 187A – LOCAL PRODUCER, LOCAL-FOOD PURCHASER, AND SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS
PREFERENCE CODE
187A.01   Definitions of Terms
187A.02   Preference for Local Producers, Local- Food Purchasers, and Local
Sustainable Businesses
187A.03   Duties of Director of Office of Equal Opportunity; Compliance
Monitoring
187A.04   Sanctions for Noncompliance
187A.05   Responsibilities of Commissioner and Contracting Departments
187A.06   Contracts with Other Governmental Entities as Contractors
187A.07   Reports; Reconsideration of Scope
187A.99    Violations; Penalty
   Note: Pursuant to Ord. No. 1660-A-09, the effective date of Sections
187A.01 to 187A.07 and 187A.99 is May 30, 2010.
§ 187A.01 Definitions of Terms
   As used in this chapter, the following words, phrases, and terms shall be
defined as set forth below:
   (a)   “Bidder” means a Person offering or proposing to contract with the
City respectively in response to an invitation to bid or to a request for
proposals.
   (b)   “Bid Discount” means the application of a percentage discount to the
total amount of a bid submitted by a Bidder for a Contract solely for the
purpose of bid comparisons when determining the lowest and best bid, or lowest
responsible bid. The use of a Bid Discount for Bid Comparison does not alter
the total amount of the bid submitted by a Bidder or the Contract executed
based on a bid.
   (c)   “Business Enterprise” means a firm, sole proprietorship, partnership,
association, corporation, company, or other business entity of any kind
including, but not limited to, a limited liability corporation, incorporated
professional association, joint venture, estate, or trust.
   (d)   “City” means the City of Cleveland, Ohio.
   (e)   “Commercially Useful Function” means when a Local Producer or Local-
Food Purchaser:
      (1)   Assumes the actual and contractual responsibility for furnishing
the supplies or materials;
      (2)   Is recognized as a provider of the contracted supplies and
materials by the industry involved;
      (3)   Owns or leases a warehouse, yard, building or other facilities for
stocking inventory or otherwise conducts business in a manner which is usual
and customary in the industry and market for the supplies or materials; and
      (4)   Distributes, delivers, and services products primarily with its own
staff and/or equipment.
   (f)   “Commissioner” means the Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies or the
Commissioner’s designee.
   (g)   “Contract” means a binding agreement executed on or after the
effective date of this Local Producer, Local-Food Purchaser, and Sustainable
Business Preference Code by which the City either grants a privilege or is
committed to expend or does expend its funds or other resources, or confers a
benefit having monetary value including, but not limited to, a grant, loan,
interest in real or personal property, or tax incentive in any form for or in
connection with any work, project, or public purpose including, but not limited
to, a contract for the:
      (1)   Construction of any public improvement, including change orders or
subsidiary agreements approved by the City during the performance of such
Construction;
      (2)   Purchase of personal property;
      (3)   Purchase of any supplies, equipment or services; or
      (4)   Lease of any personal property.
   “Contract” shall include a binding agreement, funded or benefitted by the
City, between a party to a Contract and a third party, but shall exclude
contracts with other public entities, except as provided in Section
187.09.
   (h)   “Contracting Department” includes any administrative department under
charge of the Mayor or any office, board, or commission treated or construed as
a department of City government for any purpose under the Charter or ordinances
of the City for the benefit or program of which the City enters into a
particular Contract.
   (i)   “Contractor” means a separate or distinguishable Business Enterprise
employing one (1) or more persons and participating in the performance of a
Contract and shall include a Person in privity of contract with a Contractor
for implementation of a Contract.
   (j)   “Director” means the official authorized to enter into a Contract on
behalf of a particular Contracting Department.
   (k)   “Evaluation Credit” means a predetermined number of points in the
evaluation of proposals submitted by a Bidder for a Contract to be added solely
for the purpose of proposal comparison when evaluating competing proposals. The
use of Evaluation Credits does not alter the amount of the proposal submitted
by a Bidder or the Contract executed based on the proposal.
   (l)   “Local Contracting Market” or “Contracting Market” means the
geographic market area consisting of Cuyahoga County, Geauga County, Lake
County, Lorain County, and Medina County, Ohio; provided, however, that with
respect to growers or producers of food only, the geographic market area also
shall include: Erie County, Huron County, Richland County, Ashland County,
Wayne County, Holmes County, Stark County, Summit County, Portage County, and
Tuscarawas County.
   (m)   “Local Food” means and includes food that is grown, extracted,
produced, recycled or manufactured within the Local Contracting Market.
   (n)   “Local Producer, Local-Food Purchaser, and Sustainable Business
Preference Code”, “Preference Code”, “Code” or “Chapter” means all of the
provisions of this Chapter
187A of the Codified Ordinances of Cleveland, Ohio, 1976.
   (o)   “Local Producer” means a Person that:
      (1)   Has its principal office (headquarters) located physically in the
Local Contracting Market and whose highest executive officers and highest level
managers maintain their offices and perform their respective executive and
managerial functions and duties in the Local Contracting Market; and
      (2)   A.    Grows food or fabricates goods, whether or not finished, from
organic or raw materials;
         B.   Processes goods, materials, food or other products so as to
increase their commercial value by not less than fifty percent (50%);
         C.   Supplies goods by performing a Commercially Useful Function; or
         D.   Provides, by its qualified full-time employees, maintenance,
repair, personal, or professional services.
   (p)   “Local-Food Purchaser” means a Business Enterprise that, in
implementation of its City contract, purchases Local Food in an amount
comprising not less than twenty percent (20%) of the Business Enterprise’s City
Contract amount.
   (q)   “Local Sustainable Business” means a Business Enterprise that:
      (1)   Has its principal office (headquarters) located physically in the
Local Contracting Market and whose highest executive officers and highest level
managers maintain their offices and perform their respective executive and
managerial functions and duties in the Local Contracting Market; and
      (2)   Has established sustainability goals for itself and is a member of
or signatory to a nationally- recognized sustainability program, which goals
and program have been determined acceptable by the City Chief of Sustainability
or other officer designated by the Mayor.
   (r)   “OEO Director” means the Director of the Office of Equal Opportunity
of the City.
   (s)   “Person” means and includes a natural person, a Business Enterprise or
other entity, unless the context or usage requires otherwise.
(Ord. No. 1660-A-09. Passed 3-29-10, eff. 5-30-10)
§ 187A.02 Preference for Local Producers, Local- Food Purchasers, and Local
Sustainable Businesses
   (a)   Application of Bid Discount – A Contracting Department shall apply a
Bid Discount of two percent (2%) to a bid received from a Local Producer; two
percent (2%) to a bid received from a Local Sustainable Business; and two
percent (2%) to a bid received from a Local-Food Purchaser; provided that the
maximum total Bid Discount applied under this division (a) shall not exceed
four percent (4%). Bid Discounts applied under this division (a) shall be in
addition to any Bid Discount applied under Sections
187.03 and
187.05. The maximum amount of any Bid Discounts applied to a bid under this
division (a) shall not exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), provided,
however, that the maximum cumulative amount of all Bid Discounts applied to the
bid under this division (a) and under Sections
187.03 and
187.05 shall not exceed seventy- five thousand dollars ($75,000.00).
   (b)   Application of Evaluation Credit – A Contracting Department shall
apply an Evaluation Credit of two percent (2%) of the total points awarded for
a proposal received from a Local Producer, two percent (2%) of the total points
awarded for a proposal received from a Local Sustainable Business, and two
percent (2%) of the total points awarded for a proposal received from a Local-
Food Purchaser; provided that the maximum total Evaluation Credit applied under
this division (b) shall not exceed four percent (4%).
(Ord. No. 1660-A-09. Passed 3-29-10, eff. 5-30-10)
§ 187A.03 Duties of Director of Office of Equal Opportunity; Compliance
Monitoring
   (a)   In addition to those duties specified in Section
123.08 and Section
187.02, the OEO Director, through the Office of Equal Opportunity employees as
necessary, shall implement and enforce the provisions of this Code. The OEO
Director’s duties shall include, but not be limited to:
      (1)   Reviewing all submittals and other information required or
necessary under this Code to determine whether a particular Person qualifies
for certification or approval as a Local Producer or a Local-Food Purchaser or
a Local Sustainable Business and is in compliance with this Code;
      (2)   Notifying an affected Contracting Department that the certificate
or approval pertaining to a particular person is or is not currently effective
with respect to the matters for which the same were issued;
      (3)   Initiating and receiving complaints of non-compliance with this
Code; and
      (4)   Investigating complaints pertaining to non-compliance with this
Code and recommending appropriate sanctions.
   (b)   The OEO Director shall monitor a Contractor’s compliance with its bid
representations of its qualification(s) as a Local Producer or Local-Food
Purchaser or Local Sustainable Business during the performance of a Contract it
was awarded because of applying a Bid Discount or Evaluation Credit under
Section
187A.02. If the OEO Director determines that there is cause to believe that a
Contractor failed to qualify as a Local Producer or Local-Food Purchaser or
Local Sustainable Business as represented in its bid or proposal, the OEO
Director shall notify the Contractor of the apparent breach of or default under
the contract. The OEO Director may require a Contractor or Bidder to submit
such reports, information and documentation as reasonably necessary to
determine its status as a Local Producer or Local-Food Purchaser or Local
Sustainable Business in the performance of its Contract.
   (c)   The OEO Director shall maintain complete and accurate records of the
use of Local Producer’s or Local-Food Purchaser’s or Local Sustainable
Businesses’ goods, materials, supplies, or services in performance of the
Contracting Department’s Contracts, including the dollar value of orders
supplied by Local Producers or Local-Food Purchasers or Local Sustainable
Businesses, the nature of the goods, materials, supplies, or services provided,
and the name and address, and the qualifications of each Local Producer or
Local-Food Purchaser or Local Sustainable Business as such.
(Ord. No. 1660-A-09. Passed 3-29-10, eff. 5-30-10)
§ 187A.04 Sanctions for Noncompliance
   If the OEO Director determines that a Contractor is in breach or default
with respect to any representation regarding its status as a Local Producer or
Local-Food Purchaser or Local Sustainable Business when the Contractor would
not have been the lowest bidder or recommended proposer for a Contract but for
application of any Bid Discount(s) or Evaluation Credit(s) based upon that
status, the OEO Director, in addition to other remedies available with respect
to the foregoing or other defaults under any Contract in question, may
recommend that the Contracting Department Director cancel the contract and
declare a forfeiture of any performance bond.
(Ord. No. 1660-A-09. Passed 3-29-10, eff. 5-30-10)
§ 187A.05 Responsibilities of Commissioner and Contracting Departments
   The Commissioner and each Contracting Department shall:
   (a)   Endeavor to maximize the purchase of Local Producers, Local-Food
Purchasers, and Local Sustainable Businesses goods, materials, supplies, or
services in Contracts of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) or less; and
   (b)   Develop lists of Local Producers, Local-Food Purchasers, and Local
Sustainable Businesses for whose goods, materials, supplies, or services the
City typically contracts.
(Ord. No. 532-13. Passed 5-13-13, eff. 5-16-13)
§ 187A.06 Contracts with Other Governmental Entities as Contractors
   Contracts or other agreements between the City and other political
subdivisions, governmental, or quasi-governmental agencies, under which those
entities receive money from or through the City for the purpose of contracting
with Business Enterprises to perform projects in the City, shall encourage
Business Enterprises to comply with the provisions of this chapter in awarding,
administering, and implementing the contracts.
(Ord. No. 1660-A-09. Passed 3-29-10, eff. 5-30-10)
§ 187A.07 Reports; Reconsideration of Scope
   (a)   As part of the annual report submitted under Section
123.08, the OEO Director shall summarize the utilization of this chapter in the
award of City contracts during the preceding year.
   (b)   The Council shall reconsider the scope of this chapter, including the
size of the Local Contracting Market, five (5) years after the effective date
of this section.
(Ord. No. 1660-A-09. Passed 3-29-10, eff. 5-30-10)
§ 187A.99 Violations; Penalty
   (a)   No Person shall willfully falsify, conceal or cover up by a trick,
scheme, or device a material fact, or make any false, fictitious, or fraudulent
statements or representations or make use of any false writing or document
knowing the same to contain any false, fictitious, or fraudulent statement or
entry in any matter administered under this chapter.
   (b)   No Person shall fraudulently obtain, attempt to obtain, or aid another
Person fraudulently obtaining or attempting to obtain a Local Producer’s or
Local- Food Purchaser’s or Local Sustainable Business’ Bid Discount or
Evaluation Credit.
   (c)   Any Person who violates the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (d)   In addition to other remedies available with respect to violations of
divisions (a) and (b) of this section, the OEO Director may recommend to a
Contracting Department Director, and a Contracting Department Director may:
      (1)   Recommend to the Director of Law that the City take such legal
action, whether civil or criminal, as the Director of Law deems appropriate;
      (2)   Disqualify a Bidder, Contractor, or other Business Enterprise from
eligibility as Contractor, subcontractor, or Local Producer or Local-Food
Purchaser or Local Sustainable Business for providing goods, materials,
supplies, or services to the City for a period not to exceed two (2) years; or
      (3)   Make a claim for payment of damages, including but not limited to
any liquidated damages specified in the Contract.
(Ord. No. 1660-A-09. Passed 3-29-10, eff. 5-30-10)
CHAPTER 188 – FANNIE M. LEWIS CLEVELAND RESIDENT EMPLOYMENT LAW
188.01   Definitions
188.02   Employment of City Residents
188.03   Standards, Reductions and No Waiver
188.04   Monitoring by Director: Reporting by Contractor, and Advisory
Committee to the Director
188.05   Violation and Penalty
188.06   Severability
188.07   Duration
188.08   Effective Date
   Note: Ordinance No. 2031-A-02, passed June 10, 2003, enacted Chapter
188, the “Fannie M. Lewis Cleveland Resident Employment Law” and provides for
an effective date of January 1, 2004.
§ 188.01 Definitions
   For purposes of this chapter, the following words, phrases and terms are
defined as follows:
   (a)   “City” means the City of Cleveland, Ohio.
   (b)   “Construction Contract” means any agreement whereby the City either
grants a privilege or is committed to expend or does expend its funds or other
resources, or federal grant opportunities, including without limitation,
Community Development Block Grants, Urban Development Action Grants and
Economic Development Administration Grants, in an amount of one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000.00) or more, for the erection, rehabilitation,
improvement, alteration, conversion, extension, demolition or repair of
improvements to real property, including facilities providing utility service
and includes the supervision, inspection, and other on-site functions
incidental to construction, but does not include professional services.
Construction Contract includes any contract that is entered into by a person or
entity that receives a grant, loan, privilege, credit, or resources from the
City, from its funds or from federal grant opportunities for the poor,
minorities and/or unemployed in an amount of one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) or more, for the purpose of erecting, improving, rehabilitating,
altering, converting, extending, demolishing, or repairing real property or
improvements to real property.
   (c)   “Construction Worker Hours” means the total hours worked on a
Construction Contract by Skilled and Unskilled Construction Trade Workers,
whether those workers are employed by the Contractor or any Subcontractor. In
determining the total Construction Worker Hours to be furnished at the
construction site, there shall be included the number of hours devoted to all
tasks customarily performed on a construction site, whether or not such tasks
are, in fact, performed on the construction site. Construction Worker Hours
excludes the number of hours of work performed by non-Ohio residents.
   (d)   "Contractor" means any person or company receiving a Construction
Contract from the City of Cleveland, any subdivision of the City, or any
individual legally authorized to bind the City under said contract.
   (e)   “Director” means the Director of the Office of Equal Opportunity.
   (f)   "Low-Income Person" means a Resident who, when first employed by a
contractor, is a member of a family having a total income equal to or less than
the "Section 8" Low-Income limit established by the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development. Low-Income family is defined as a family whose
annual income does not exceed eighty percent (80%) of the median family income
for the area in which they reside, as determined by HUD. Income limits are
adjusted for family size. A Resident who is not a member of a family shall be
considered as a one (1) person family for this purpose. A Resident shall retain
"Low-Income Person" status for a continuous five (5) year period starting upon
the OEO's written acknowledgement that the Resident's family income does not
exceed the above-stated limit, provided the Resident remains a Resident during
the five (5) year period.
   (g)   “Resident” or “Resident of the City” shall mean persons domiciled
within the boundaries of City of Cleveland. The domicile is an individual’s one
(1) and only true, fixed and permanent home and principal establishment.
   (h)   “Skilled and Unskilled Construction Trade Worker” means all work site
foremen, journeyworkers, including technical engineers, apprentices,
construction trainees and elevator construction helpers and apprentices that
are in a bona fide apprenticeship training program that is certified by the
U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training. Also included
are other workers appropriate for construction activities. Salaried
superintendents are excluded from this special provision.
   (i)   “Subcontractor(s)” means any person or company that assumes by
secondary contract some or all of the obligations of the original Contractor.
(Ord. No. 1323-18. Passed 11-19-18, eff. 11-21-18)
§ 188.02 Employment of City Residents
   (a)   Where not otherwise prohibited by federal, state, or local law or the
terms of federal or state grants, every Construction Contract shall:
      (1)   Require that one (1) or more Residents perform twenty percent (20%)
of the total Construction Worker Hours (“Resident Construction Worker Hours”)
performed under the Construction Contract;
      (2)   State the penalties set forth in Section
188.05 for failure to meet the requirement of division (a)(1) of this section;
and
      (3)   Require the contractor and its Subcontractors to use significant
effort to ensure that no less than four percent (4%) of the Resident
Construction Worker Hours required by this division are performed by Low-Income
Persons.
   Upon submission of documentary proof of the hours satisfactory to the
Director, a Contractor may include in its Resident Construction Worker Hours
the hours worked for the Contractor or its Subcontractors by Residents who are
Skilled and Unskilled Construction Trade Workers on projects that are not under
a Construction Contract, between the dates that work under the Construction
Contract begins and ends. A Contractor may also include in its Resident
Construction Worker Hours the hours worked by Residents who are graduates of
established, bona fide pre-apprenticeship programs approved by the Fannie M.
Lewis Advisory Committee, including, but not limited to, the Bricklayers &
Allied Crafts Preapprenticeship program, Cement Masons Pre- apprenticeship
program, or Union Construction Industry Partnership-Apprenticeship Skill
Achievement Program (“UCIP-ASAP”).
   (b)   The percentage levels set forth in division (a) of Section
188.02 are intended as minimum requirements for use of Residents under
Construction Contracts and shall not be construed as limiting or deferring the
full use of Residents beyond this numerical level.
   (c)   Prior to the commencement of work, each Contractor and Subcontractor
shall, if requested by the Director, complete and submit to the Director a
work-force table. The table shall identify the estimated work-force
requirements for the duration of the job, broken down by trade and month. The
Contractor or Subcontractor shall revise the table as required, but not less
than once a month.
(Ord. No. 1056-10. Passed 10-25-10, eff. 10-28-10)
§ 188.03 Standards, Reductions and No Waiver
   (a)   The Director, consistent with the provisions of this chapter, shall
establish standards and procedures, as the Director deems proper and necessary,
to effectively administer the intent and purpose of this chapter. In creating
these standards and procedures and in creating any subsequent modifications
thereof, the Director shall work with the Chairperson of the Employment,
Affirmative Action and Training Committee. The standards and exceptions shall
be effective thirty (30) days after publication in the City Record. However, at
least ten (10) days prior to publication in the City Record, the Director shall
provide the President of City Council and the Chairperson of the Employment,
Affirmative Action and Training Committee with a copy of the proposed standards
and procedures.
   (b)   Such standards and procedures shall specify that the employment of the
minimum percentage of Residents may be reduced prior to or during construction
only when a Contractor or potential Contractor can demonstrate the high
impracticality of complying with this percentage level for particular contracts
or classes of employees. The Director shall apply the standard of “efforts to
the greatest extent feasible” to the Contractor’s or Subcontractor’s efforts
when evaluating requests for reduction. A reduction may be deemed appropriate
by the Director if a Contractor or potential Contractor has unsuccessfully
solicited a sufficient number of Residents of the City to perform the work
identified in the bid specifications and has documented such effort to the
satisfaction of the Director. In addition, such standards and procedures shall
require that a Contractor or potential Contractor seeking a reduction shall
have provided timely notice of the need for Residents of the City to an
appropriate source(s) of referrals, as determined by the Director, which source
(s) shall be entitled to comment on any reduction application. If the Director
determines that a lesser percentage of Residents is appropriate with respect to
a potential Construction Contract for which bids will be solicited, bid
specifications shall include a statement of the revised standards. The
standards established by the Director shall also provide for a reduction during
construction based on petition by the Contractor demonstrating serious
unforeseen circumstances, such as new governmental regulations, national or
natural disasters, war and/or other disastrous events or high impracticality.
   (c)   The Director shall file his or her determination on all reductions,
and the reasons for the reduction, with the Clerk of City Council, the
President of City Council, and the Chairperson of the Employment Affirmative
Action and Training Committee, within five (5) working days of making a
determination.
   (d)   The Director shall not waive the Resident Construction Worker Hours of
this chapter.
(Ord. No. 2031-A-02. Passed 6-10-03, eff. 1-1-04)
§ 188.04 Monitoring by Director: Reporting by Contractor, and Advisory
Committee to the Director
   (a)   The Director shall separately monitor the use of Residents of the City
on all applicable projects in Skilled and Unskilled Construction Trade Worker
positions, and shall report his or her findings in writing to the Clerk of City
Council, the President of City Council, and to the Employment Affirmative
Action and Training Committee of this Council on a bimonthly basis.
   (b)   The Contractor shall provide for the maintenance of all records
documenting that Residents of the City are employed in pursuance of the
Construction Contract. The Contractor and Subcontractor(s) shall maintain
copies of personnel documents supportive of every Resident employee’s actual
record of residence.
   (c)   The Contractor shall designate a principal officer of its firm to be
responsible for administering the Resident requirements for the Contractor and
all of its Subcontractor(s) pursuant to the requirements detailed in this
chapter. This officer shall meet regularly, or as may be required, with the
Director or his or her designee to ensure compliance with the Resident
requirements set forth herein. Primary responsibility for meeting established
goals shall remain with the Contractor. Certified payroll reports (U.S.
Department of Labor form WH-347 or equivalent) in a format specified by the
Director shall be submitted monthly to the Director for applicable construction
contracts and shall identify clearly the actual residence of every employee on
each submitted certified payroll. The first time an employee’s name appears on
a payroll, a hire date for the employee should be included after the employee’s
name.
   (d)   Full access to the Contractor(s’) and Subcontractor(s’) employment
records that document information that relates to the requirements of this
chapter shall be granted to the Director, his or her designated agents, the
Chief of Police, or any duly authorized representative thereof. The Contractor
and Subcontractor(s) shall maintain all relevant personnel data in records for
a period of at least three (3) years after final completion of work. This
retention period may be extended in writing by the Director based upon audit
irregularities.
   (e)   The Director may require affidavits and other supporting documentation
from the Contractor and/or Subcontractor(s) to verify or clarify that an
employee is a Resident when doubt or lack of clarity has arisen.
   (f)   There shall be established a Residency Construction Advisory Committee
to the Director with the charge of furthering the intent and purpose of this
chapter. Membership shall consist of one (1) representative appointed by the
Mayor, one (1) representative appointed by the President of City Council, one
(1) representative appointed by the Executive Director of the Cleveland
Building and Construction Trade Council, one (1) representative appointed by
the Executive Director of the Construction Employers Association or its
delegate and one (1) representative jointly appointed by the Mayor and the
President of City Council who is not affiliated with Cleveland Building and
Construction Trade Council or the Construction Employers Association or its
delegate. This Committee may establish one (1) or more advisory subcommittees
to help achieve the goals established pursuant to this legislation.
(Ord. No. 2031-A-02. Passed 6-10-03, eff. 1-1-04)
§ 188.05 Violation and Penalty
   (a)   When work under a Construction Contract is completed, and in the event
that the Director determines that the Contractor has failed to fulfill the
requirements contained in Section
188.02 concerning Construction Worker Hours performed by Residents of the City
or has failed to submit reports as required in Sections
188.02 and
188.04, the City is deemed to have been damaged. Good faith efforts on the part
of the Contractor or Subcontractor to provide employment to Residents of the
City shall not suffice to replace the actual, verified achievement of the
requirements contained in Section
188.02.
   (b)   If a Contractor breaches a Construction Contract by failing to meet
the Resident Construction Worker Hours requirement of Section
188.02, it shall pay the City one-eighth of one percent (0.125%) of the final
total amount of the Construction Contract for each percentage by which it fails
to meet the requirement or any reduced requirement determined appropriate by
the Director according to Section
188.03. If a Contractor does not achieve the Low-Income Person objective, the
Director in his or her sole discretion shall determine whether a penalty is
appropriate and, if so, the penalty amount the Contractor shall pay the City.
   (c)   The Director, in addition to any other remedies available for the
breaches by a Contractor identified in division (b) of this section or for
other defaults under a Construction Contract, may:
      (1)   Recommend that the City withhold all or part of any payments due
the Contractor until such time as the Contractor cures its defaults, pays or
credits all penalties or other payments due under the Construction Contract,
the Code, or the Standards and Procedures, and is in full compliance with all
applicable provisions of the Code, the Construction Contract, and the Standards
and Procedures relating to Resident or Low- Income Person employment or
reporting;
      (2)   Recommend, based upon a breach of or default under the Contract
relating to Resident or Low- Income Person employment, that the City rescind,
cancel, or otherwise terminate the Construction Contract and declare a
forfeiture of any performance bond;
      (3)   Recommend that the Director of Law take such legal action, whether
civil or criminal, as he or she deems appropriate;
      (4)   Recommend disqualification under Section
181.27 or Section
185.08 of the Codified Ordinances of Cleveland, Ohio, 1976 of a Contractor from
eligibility to bid to or contract with the City for a period not to exceed two
(2) years; or
      (5)   Recommend that the City make a claim for payment of damages,
including any liquidated damages specified in the Contract.
   (d)   A decision of the Director under this section is final and may be
appealed to the Board of Zoning Appeals by filing a notice of appeal with the
Board and a copy to the Director within fifteen (15) days of the decision. The
Board of Zoning Appeals shall, after a hearing, determine whether the decision
of the Director is arbitrary, capricious, or unreasonable. The decision of the
Board of Zoning Appeals, in turn, may be reviewed by the Common Pleas Court of
Cuyahoga County under RC Chapter 2506, or as otherwise provided by law.
   (e)   Failure to submit, or knowing falsification of, the reports required
in Sections
188.02 and
188.04 shall result in a breach of the Construction Contract subject to
assessment of the maximum penalty provided in division (b) of this section, and
the penalty shall be calculated as if no Residents of the City were employed on
the construction project in furtherance of the Construction Contract.
   (f)   No Contractor shall knowingly falsify any required reports, statements
or payroll certifications. Any Contractor who knowingly falsifies reports,
statements or the certification of payroll data is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree and subject to a fine of not more than five thousand dollars
($5,000.00). If a Contractor is convicted under this division, that Contractor
shall be barred from contracting with the City on any construction project
subject to this chapter for a period of five (5) years.
   (g)   Pending determination by the Director whether a Contractor must pay a
penalty under this chapter, the Director may recommend that the City withhold
from amounts retained by the City under Section
185.41 and payable to the Contractor, the amount of any penalty payable by the
Contractor under this chapter.
   (h)   The imposition of any penalty or fine under this section shall not
preclude the City from exercising any other rights or remedies to which it is
entitled.
   (i)   All funds collected by the City of Cleveland under division (b) or (c)
of this section shall be deposited into a special account which shall be
created for the sole purpose of receiving said funds. The funds deposited into
this account shall be used for the operation of the Office of Equal Opportunity
provided such funds have been appropriated for that purpose, provided there is
any necessary legislative authority and provided the funds are used in
compliance with all laws or restrictions regarding their use.
   (j)   No person shall knowingly supply false information to establish that
the person is a Resident for purposes of this chapter. Any person who knowingly
supplies false information to establish that he or she is a Resident is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the first degree. Upon conviction, such person shall be
barred from employment in furtherance of a Construction Contract for a period
of five (5) years.
(Ord. No. 1056-10. Passed 10-25-10, eff. 10-28-10)
§ 188.06 Severability
   Each section and each part of each section of this Fannie M. Lewis Cleveland
Resident Employment Law is declared to be an independent section or part of a
section, and notwithstanding any other evidence of legislative intent, it is
declared to be the controlling legislative intent that if any section or part
of a section or any provision thereof, or the application thereof to any person
or circumstances, is held to be invalid, the remaining sections or parts of
sections and the application of such provision to any other person or
circumstances, other than those as to which it is held invalid, shall not be
affected thereby. It is further declared to be the legislative intent that the
other provisions of this Code would have been adopted independently of such
section or parts of a section which are held to be invalid.
(Ord. No. 2031-A-02. Passed 6-10-03, eff. 1-1-04)
§ 188.07 Duration
   This Fannie M. Lewis Cleveland Resident Employment Law is enacted as a
temporary measure to alleviate the lack of use of Residents on City of
Cleveland construction projects found to exist by the Council of the City of
Cleveland. This code shall remain in full force and effect, subject to periodic
review by the Council of the City of Cleveland. The City Council shall
regularly, but at a minimum of once every five (5) years, determine whether
there is a continuing need to ensure adequate resident employment, and make
relevant findings in support of that determination, and, if necessary amend
this chapter as appropriate. In addition thereto, every two (2) years after
enactment of this Fannie M. Lewis Cleveland Resident Employment Law, the City
Council shall review the twenty percent (20%) resident requirement, and the
four percent (4%) requirement for Low Income Persons, to determine the
appropriateness of each percentage and make relevant findings of that
determination, and if necessary, amend
188.02(a).
(Ord. No. 2031-A-02. Passed 6-10-03, eff. 1-1-04)
§ 188.08 Effective Date
   This chapter shall be effective and be in force upon its passage and
approval as of January 1, 2004.
(Ord. No. 2031-A-02. Passed 6-10-03, eff. 1-1-04)
CHAPTER 189 – CLEVELAND FAIR EMPLOYMENT LAW
189.01   Definitions
189.02   Fair Employment Wage
189.03   Compliance
189.031   Health Care Insurance Preference
189.04   Fair Employment Wage Board
189.05   Monitoring and Enforcement
189.06   Exemptions
189.07   Evaluation
189.08   Severability
189.09   Effective Date
§ 189.01 Definitions
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following words, phrases and terms are
defined as follows:
   (a)   “Applicable Department” means the City department administering
Service Contracts or the City department to which a person or entity applies
for Assistance.
   (b)   “Assistance” means any form of City financial assistance, except for
financial assistance provided for the development, rehabilitation or other
means of providing residential housing, that is awarded, renegotiated or
renewed after the effective date of this Ordinance. Assistance covered by this
chapter includes but is not limited to: grants; economic development loans; tax
credits, incentives and abatements; subsidies; and bonds. For purposes of
determining coverage under this chapter, financial assistance shall be valued
to the extent the recipient of the assistance derives a monetary benefit from
the City. For instance, loans shall be considered Assistance only to the extent
they are forgiven or discounted below the available market rate over the life
of the loan. Tax credits, incentives and abatements shall be considered
Assistance to the extent of the tax reduction realized by the recipient. For
purposes of this chapter, Assistance does not include financial assistance
which is received from another government or other entity with the City acting
only as a conduit or fiscal agent for the funds, where the City exercises no
control over the identity of any recipient or of the terms of the contract.
Community Development Block Grant Funds are not considered conduit funds under
this section and, to the extent they otherwise qualify, are included as
Assistance and are covered by this chapter.
   (c)   “City” means the City of Cleveland and all City divisions,
departments, and offices.
   (d)   “Covered Employee” means:
      (1)   Any person employed by or working as a trainee, except as otherwise
provided in subsection (4)B. below, for a “Covered Employer” who is a for-
profit contractor or subcontractor on a City Service Contract;
      (2)   Any person employed by or working as a trainee for a “Covered
Employer” who is a not-for- profit contractor or subcontractor on one (1) or
more City Service Contracts if such person expends at least half of his or her
time performing services pursuant to such Service Contract(s); or
      (3)   Any person employed by a Covered Employer who is a Recipient of
Assistance from the City.
      (4)   The following are not “Covered Employees” for purposes of this
chapter:
         A.   An individual who provides solely volunteer services that are
uncompensated except for reimbursement of expenses such as meals, parking or
transportation;
         B.   An individual in a job training program where job training and
classroom instruction is being provided to clients in order to develop new
specialized skills for employment and the individual would be considered a
client of the program even though the individual receives compensation;
         C.   An individual, employed in public construction work that is
subject to the provisions of state or federal law pertaining to wage rates for
public works employment;
         D.   Employees covered by a collective bargaining agreement or the
Railway Labor Act;
         E.   Employees of commercial retail establishments;
         F.   Persons not employed in the State of Ohio;
         G.   Persons under eighteen (18) years of age;
         H.   Employees of residential/single and multi-family housing
projects;
         I.   Persons employed by a Covered Employer who, on average, work less
than thirty (30) hours per week, other than seasonal employees employed by the
City of Cleveland.
   (e)   “Covered Employer” means the following:
      (1)   Any person or entity that is a Recipient of Assistance from the
City that has an aggregate value at least seventy-five thousand dollars
($75,000.00) that has not been granted an exemption from this chapter pursuant
to Section
189.06 and is either:
         A.   A for-profit employer having at least twenty (20) employees at
the time of execution of agreement with the City;
         B.   A not-for-profit employer having at least fifty (50) employees at
the time of execution of agreement with the City and the salary ratio between
the highest paid and lowest paid employees at such not-for-profit is more than
five (5) to one (1).
      As used in this division, “aggregate value” means the actual dollar
benefit received from Assistance over the term of the Assistance.
      (2)   Any company or person that is a tenant or leaseholder of a
Recipient of Assistance and that occupies property or uses equipment or
property that is improved or developed as a result of Assistance; and is
either:
         A.   A for-profit employer having at least twenty (20) employees at
the time of execution of agreement with the City;
         B.   A not-for-profit employer having at least fifty (50) employees at
the time of execution of agreement with the City and if the salary ratio
between the highest paid and lowest paid employees at such not- for-profit is
more than five (5) to one (1).
      (3)   A contractor or subcontractor of a Recipient of Assistance
providing service in the project or matter for which the Recipient of
Assistance has received Assistance.
      (4)   Any person or entity that has entered into one (1) or more Service
Contracts, as defined in this section, with the City that have an aggregate
value of at least twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), that has not been
granted an exemption from this chapter pursuant to Section
189.06 and is either:
         A.   A for-profit employer having at least twenty (20) employees at
the time of execution of agreement with the City;
         B.   A not-for-profit employer having at least fifty (50) employees at
the time of execution of agreement with the City and if the salary ratio
between the highest paid and lowest paid employees at such not- for-profit is
more than five (5) to one (1).
   Any Subcontractor of a covered Service Contractor performing services
pursuant to the Service Contract.
   (f)   “Fair Employment Wage” has the meaning stated in Section
189.02 of this Ordinance.
   (g)   “Fair Employment Wage Board” “(FEWB)” has the meaning stated in
Section
189.04 of this Ordinance.
   (h)   “Person” means any individual, proprietorship, partnership, joint
venture, corporation, limited liability company, trust, association or other
entity that may employ individuals or enter into contracts and all other
entities recognized at law by the State of Ohio.
   (i)   “Recipient of Assistance” means:
      (1)   Any person or entity who enters into one (1) or more contracts with
the City for Assistance, as defined in this section;
      (2)   Any person or entity that is a direct recipient of Assistance, as
defined in this section;
   (j)   “Service Contract” means any contract or subcontract between a person,
business or corporation and the City of Cleveland that primarily involves the
furnishing of services to the City (as opposed to the purchase of goods or
other property or the leasing of property), and shall be limited to the
following categories of services: food service, janitorial, security services,
parking lot attendants, home health care, health care aides, waste management,
automotive repair services, landscaping, towing contracts, building and
maintenance services, carpentry, clerical services, urban forestry,
housekeeping, street maintenance and repair, and sidewalk maintenance and
repair. This includes services performed on City-owned premises including the
following City-owned locations: airports, parking lots, municipal parks,
recreational facilities, and City-owned buildings. Contracts that are primarily
for the purchase of goods or other property are not considered Service
Contracts for purposes of this chapter.
   (k)   “Service Contractor” means a person who enters into a Service Contract
with the City.
   (l)   “Subcontractor” means any person who enters into a contract with a
Service Contractor that is a Covered Employer under subsection (e)(2) of this
section to assist the Service Contractor in performing a City Service Contract.
(Ord. No. 2009-A-99. Passed 6-19-00, eff. 7-29-00 without the signature of the
Mayor)
§ 189.02 Fair Employment Wage
   All Covered Employers shall pay no less than the Fair Employment Wage to
Covered Employees. Determination of the Fair Employment Wage shall be in
accordance with the following:
   (a)   Amount of Fair Employment Wage:
      (1)   The Fair Employment Wage shall be calculated on an hourly basis and
shall be at least eight dollars and twenty cents ($8.20) per hour beginning
January 1, 2001; eight dollars and seventy cents ($8.70) beginning October 1,
2001; and nine dollars and twenty cents ($9.20) beginning October 1, 2002. As
of October 1, 2023, the annual Fair Employment Wage shall be at least fifteen
dollars and thirty-three cents ($15.33).Thereafter, the Fair Employment Wage
shall be adjusted by the City of Cleveland on an annual basis, beginning
October 1, 2024 and each year thereafter in proportion to the Consumer Price
Index for Northeast Ohio, as published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S.
Department of Labor.
      (2)   Tipped employees, i.e., employees for whom a substantial portion of
their compensation consists of tips or gratuities, shall be paid an hourly wage
which, when combined with the compensation received in tips, will at least
equal the Fair Employment Wage.
   (b)   All employees working for the City shall be paid at least a Fair
Employment Wage. Work being performed by City employees at the time of the
effective date of this chapter may not be contracted out unless the contractor
pays employees performing that work the Fair Employment Wage or the current
wages and benefits being paid to workers doing that or similar work, whichever
is higher, regardless of the number of employees.
   (c)   Any new jobs created by the City that are not currently being
performed by City employees as of the effective date of this ordinance must be
paid a fair employment wage if contracted out, regardless of the number of
employees.
   (d)   Health Care Incentives:
      (1)   In order to encourage Covered Employers to provide reasonable
health care coverage to their employees, the City shall provide the following
incentives to Covered Employers:
         A.   Applicable Departments shall consider the fact that a Service
Contractor provides or agrees to provide during the course of the Service
Contract reasonable health care insurance to Covered Employees working thirty
(30) or more hours a week as a factor in determining the lowest and best or
lowest responsible bid for any Service Contract. If a Service Contractor can
demonstrate that it has offered reasonable health care insurance to its
employees but as a group the employees have refused the health care insurance
coverage, the Service Contractor is entitled to the same consideration and
treatment in the bidding process as a Service Contractor who provides or agrees
to provide reasonable health care insurance. The Division of Purchases and
Supplies shall promulgate regulations for the evaluation of bids and proposals
that provide for meaningful consideration of the offering of reasonable health
care insurance in determining the lowest and best or lowest responsible bid.
Such regulations must be reviewed and approved by Cleveland City Council.
         B.   Applicable Departments shall offer additional financial
incentives to Recipients of Assistance who will provide reasonable health care
insurance to their Covered Employees working thirty (30) or more hours a week
during the term of the contract for Assistance. Examples of such incentives
include: more favorable terms for a loan, such as a lower interest rate; a
higher percentage of taxes to be credited or abated; a higher amount for a
grant, etc. Whether or not such incentives have been offered; the reasons for
offering or not offering such incentives; the terms of such incentives, if
offered; and any evidence of the intent of the proposed Recipient of Assistance
to provide reasonable health care insurance shall be a part of the information
provided by the Applicable Department to Cleveland City Council for
consideration in connection with any ordinance authorizing a contract for
Assistance.
      (2)   In order to qualify a Covered Employer for an incentive as provided
in the previous section, the reasonable health care insurance provided to
employees must be comparable to a family health care insurance plan provided by
the City to its employees.
      (3)   Evidence of the offer or provision or the intent to provide or
offer reasonable health care insurance benefits qualifying a Covered Employer
for such incentives shall lie submitted to the Applicable Department upon
request.
(Ord. No. 802-2023. Passed 8-16-23, eff. 8-16-23)
§ 189.03 Compliance
   (a)   All bids, proposals and applications for City Service Contracts or for
Assistance shall contain the following:
      (1)   The number of persons employed by the applicant for a service
contractor or assistance and, if different, the number of persons who will be
employed if the applicant obtains the contract;
      (2)   Whether the employer provides or offers to provide health care
insurance for its employees and the basic outlines of any health care plan;
      (3)   A sworn declaration signed by a duly authorized officer of a
Covered Employer stating that the applicant will comply with the requirements
of this Ordinance;
      (4)   As to any applicant awarded a contract for Assistance, such
information will be provided to City Council for consideration in connection
with any ordinance authorizing such contract. The information will be
maintained in the Council legislative file for the ordinance and shall be
provided by the Applicable Department to the Fair Employment Wage Board;
      (5)   As to any applicant awarded a service contract, the following
information shall be provided to the Clerk of City Council: amount of the
contract, name of the contractor, service to be provided, and a sworn affidavit
stating that all covered employees are being paid a Fair Employment Wage.
   (b)   All City Service Contracts and Assistance Agreements subject to this
chapter shall contain the following language:
      This agreement is subject to the City of Cleveland Fair Employment Wage
Chapter
189 of the Codified Ordinances and requires, among other things, that unless
specific exemptions apply, Covered Employers, as defined, under contracts with
the City and recipients of City financial assistance, as defined, shall provide
payment of a minimum level of compensation to employees. Failure to comply with
that chapter and/or any implementing regulations may result in termination of
the contract or debarment from future contracts or financial assistance.
   (c)   Maintenance of Payroll Records. Each Covered Employer shall maintain
payrolls for all Covered Employees and basic records related thereto and shall
preserve them for a period of three (3) years following termination of the
Covered Employer’s agreement with the City. The records shall contain the
following for each Covered Employee:
      (1)   His or her name and address, job title and classification;
      (2)   The number of hours worked each day, gross wages earned, deductions
made, and net wages paid;
      (3)   A record of contributions to health care plans; and
      (4)   Any such other data the Applicable Department or Cleveland City
Council may require.
   (d)   Access. Upon demand by the Applicable Department, Covered Employers
shall provide to such department access to the Payroll Records required to be
maintained by this section, and will permit representatives of such department
to observe work being performed upon the work site and to interview employees
as deemed necessary by the department to monitor compliance or to investigate a
charge of noncompliance with the terms of this chapter.
   (e)   Notice Requirements.
      (1)   Covered Employers shall be required to provide notice to Covered
Employees of their rights arising from this chapter. The notice will be
provided by the FEWB and must be posted in a conspicuous place frequented by
Covered Employees in the Covered Employer’s workplace(s).
      (2)   Covered Employers shall inform employees making less than twelve
dollars ($12.00) per hour, or such amount as may be modified from time to time
by federal law, of their possible right to the federal Earned Income Credit
(“EIC”) under Section
32 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, 28 U.S.C. 32, as may be amended from
time to time, and shall make available to employees forms informing them about
the EIC and forms required to secure advance EIC payments from the employer
within thirty (30) days of employment. The forms shall be provided to the
eligible employees in English, Spanish and other languages spoken by a
significant number of employees.
      (3)   Covered employer shall establish a goal that at least forty percent
(40%) of persons newly hired to perform work on service contracts or contracts
receiving Assistance shall be residents of the City of Cleveland.
   (f)   Compliance with Federal Labor Laws. Covered Employers must comply with
all applicable federal labor laws, including the National Labor Relations Act.
(Ord. No. 2009-A-99. Passed 6-19-00, eff. 7-29-00 without the signature of the
Mayor)
§ 189.031 Health Care Insurance Preference
   (a)   All bid specifications and requests for proposals for Service
Contracts shall request the bidder to specify the information required in the
preceding section about the health care insurance offered to its Covered
Employees who work thirty (30) or more hours a week.
   (b)   In evaluating bids or proposals for a Service Contract, the
Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies or the Applicable Department may give
preference to a prospective Service Contractor who provides reasonable health
care insurance to its Covered Employees who work thirty (30) or more hours a
week. If a prospective Service Contractor can demonstrate that it has offered
reasonable health care insurance to its employees, but as a group the employees
have refused the health care insurance coverage, that prospective Service
Contractor may be entitled to a preference. However, no preference shall be
given if the price bid for the Service Contract exceeds by more than five
percent (5%) the lowest price bid for the Service Contract.
   (c)   In order to be eligible for a preference, the bidder shall submit with
its bid or proposal the following information as to all of its health care
insurance plans:
      (1)   The amount of employee contribution to the health care plan; and
      (2)   The amount of any deductible; and
      (3)   The amount of any copayments; and
      (4)   Whether dental insurance is provided; and
      (5)   The range of services covered.
   (d)   Health care insurance is reasonable if the health care insurance
offered is comparable or superior to that offered by the City of Cleveland to
its employees with respect to all of the following factors:
      (1)   The amount of employee contribution to the health care plan; and
      (2)   The amount of any deductible; and
      (3)   The amount of any copayments; and
      (4)   Whether dental insurance is provided; and
      (5)   The range of services covered.
(Ord. No. 2265-2000. Passed 1-29-01, eff. 2-1-01)
§ 189.04 Fair Employment Wage Board
   (a)   The Fair Employment Wage Board (FEWB) shall review the effectiveness
of the living wage ordinance to ensure that the community is informed on
whether those companies that are receiving public assistance, government loans,
and service contracts from the City are adhering to the ordinance. The FEWB
shall make recommendations to the Cleveland City Council, when appropriate,
regarding issues pertaining to the living wage policy. The FEWB shall also
perform the duties and responsibilities assigned to it under the Wage Theft and
Payroll Fraud Prevention ordinance as codified in Chapter
190 and under the Unlawful Discriminatory Salary Practices ordinance as
codified in Chapter
669.
   (b)   The FEWB shall be composed of two (2) representatives from the
business community, two (2) representatives from labor organizations, one (1)
representative from community groups, one (1) representative from the Mayor’s
office and one (1) representative from Cleveland City Council. The FEWB members
shall be appointed to the FEWB by the Mayor, subject to the approval of City
Council. Each FEWB member shall be a resident of the City of Cleveland. No
person shall be appointed to the Fair Employment Wage Board who has any
interest in a contract, loan, grant or other financial assistance from the City
of Cleveland.
   (c)   The Mayor shall initially appoint three (3) members of the FEWB for
one (1) year terms, two (2) members to two (2) year terms, and two (2) members
for a three (3) year term. Thereafter, all members shall serve three (3) year
terms. Members may serve more than one (1) term.
   (d)   At the beginning of each year the FEWB members shall elect a
chairperson and vice chairperson by majority vote. The FEWB shall hold meetings
quarterly and in special sessions as called by the chairperson or by a majority
of the members. All meetings of the FEWB shall be open to the public. All
meetings will allow for public testimony on compliance with the Fair Employment
Wage Chapter and minutes of all meetings shall be taken. The FEWB shall adopt
such rules and regulations as the Board may deem necessary or desirable for the
conduct of its business.
   (e)   The FEWB shall be provided with and shall review:
      (1)   All reports on compliance filed by Applicable Departments as
provided by this chapter;
      (2)   The results of any investigations of Covered Employers as provided
by this chapter;
      (3)   All applications for exemptions from coverage filed by recipients
of Assistance and Service Contractors as provided by this chapter.
   The FEWB shall provide recommendations regarding such matters to City
Council.
   (f)   The FEWB shall monitor, analyze and study information provided by the
City to ensure that Covered Employees whose employers are receiving incentives
for the offer or provision of health care insurance are receiving or being
offered substantially equivalent health care benefits as are provided to City
employees.
(Ord. No. 104-2025. Passed 4-28-25, eff. 10-27-25)
§ 189.05 Monitoring and Enforcement
   (a)   Monitoring and Reporting.
      (1)   Assistance. Semi-annually the Applicable Department shall inspect
the Payroll Records of each Covered Employer receiving Assistance to determine
whether the Covered Employer is in compliance with the requirements of this
chapter. Semi-annually, the Applicable Department shall file a report with the
Fair Employment Wage Board and with the Clerk of City Council stating whether
each Covered Employer receiving Assistance inspected by the Department within
the preceding six (6) months is in compliance and, if not, the specific reasons
that cause the determination of noncompliance.
      (2)   Service Contracts. As to Service Contractors who are Covered
Employers, enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will primarily depend
on charges of noncompliance filed by Covered Employees who will have been
informed of their rights through posting of the notice of such rights and such
other educational efforts as may be undertaken by the FEWB. Such charges will
result in investigations by the Applicable Department, as described below.
   (b)   Any person, including a Covered Employee who alleges that his or her
employer is not complying with the requirements of this chapter, may allege
that a violation of this section has occurred by filing a charge of
noncompliance with the Applicable Department within one hundred and eighty
(180) days of the alleged violation or knowledge thereof. Such charge shall
state, in writing and under oath, the name and address of the person making the
charge, the name and address of the employer(s) alleged to have committed the
violation of this chapter and the particular facts thereof and such other
information as may be required. Upon the filing of a charge of noncompliance,
the Applicable Department shall acknowledge the receipt of the charge, and
shall forward the charge to the Clerk of Council. A copy of the charge shall
also be forwarded to the FEWB.
   (c)   Investigations. The Applicable Department shall initiate an
investigation to determine whether a violation of this chapter has occurred
under any of the following circumstances:
      (1)   Upon receiving a charge of noncompliance;
      (2)   If the Department’s review of information maintained or reported by
a Covered Employer indicates that the Covered Employer may have violated this
chapter;
      (3)   The Department has other reason to believe that a Covered Employer
may have violated this chapter.
   (d)   Any investigation shall be completed within thirty (30) days of the
occurrence triggering the investigation. To the extent permitted by law, the
City shall not make public in any manner and shall retain as confidential all
information obtained as a result of the preliminary investigation. At the
completion of the investigation, the Director of the Applicable Department
shall take one (1) of the following actions:
      (1)   Notify the charging party, if any, the FEWB and the Covered
Employer that it is not probable that a violation of this chapter has been or
is being engaged in and that a complaint will not issue in the matter; or
      (2)   Notify the charging party, if any, the FEWB and the Covered
Employer that it is probable that a violation of this chapter has occurred,
initiate a complaint against the Covered Employer and schedule it for informal
methods of conciliation pursuant to division (e) of this section.
   (e)   Conciliation. If the investigation leads to a finding by the Director
of the Applicable Department of probable cause to believe that a Covered
Employer is in noncompliance with this chapter, the Director shall attempt to
conciliate the matter. The Director shall send out notice to the Covered
Employer(s), the affected Covered Employee(s) and to the FEWB with a time and
date set for the conciliation meeting. The conciliation meeting must be
scheduled to occur within fifteen (15) working days of completion of the
investigation, though for good cause shown it can be rescheduled. If the
investigation resulted from a filed charge of noncompliance, a conciliation
agreement may be not be entered without the consent of both the Covered
Employer and the charging party. If the investigation was initiated by the
Applicable Department on its own, the Director has authority to enter into a
conciliation agreement.
   (f)   Hearing. If conciliation does not result in a settlement of the
complaint, the Director of the Applicable Department shall appoint a Hearing
Officer to conduct a hearing on the complaint. Any Hearing Officer shall be
either a member of Ohio’s Judiciary or an attorney licensed to practice in
Ohio. The Hearing Officer shall schedule a hearing with a thirty (30) day
notice of the hearing provided to the Covered Employer, Covered Employee(s) or
other charging parties, if any, the Clerk of City Council and the FEWB. In
conducting such hearings, the Hearing Officer shall be empowered to subpoena
witnesses, compel their attendance, administer oaths, take sworn testimony and
require the production for examination of any documents relating to the
complaint.
   (g)   After the conclusion of the hearing, the Hearing Officer shall report
his or her findings to the Director within fifteen (15) days. The Director may
adopt, reject or modify the findings of the Hearing Officer. Within seven (7)
days after receipt of the findings of the Hearing Officer, the Director shall
render a decision in the form of a written order which shall include findings
of fact, a statement as to whether the Covered Employer has violated this
chapter and such remedial actions as the Director may order. The order shall be
served upon the parties by certified mail within fifteen (15) days of the date
of the decision. A copy of the decision shall be provided to the FEWB and the
Clerk of City Council.
   (h)   Appeals. Any Covered Employer or Employee who objects to any decision
of the Director of the Applicable Department relative to enforcement of this
chapter may appeal such decision to the Common Pleas Court or as otherwise
provided by law.
   (i)   Sanctions. Any covered employer found not to be in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter or who has submitted false or fraudulent information
may be subject to one (1) or more of the following sanctions imposed by the
City of Cleveland:
      (1)   Withholding of payments, either in whole or in part, until the
Covered Employer cures the default or is in full compliance with this chapter;
      (2)   Termination, suspension or cancellation of the contract in whole or
in part;
      (3)   Denial of the right of the Covered Employer to bid on future
contracts for no more than five (5) years after the violation is found;
      (4)   In the case of Assistance, to refund any sums disbursed by the
City;
      (5)   The filing of a complaint with any pertinent federal agency.
   No remedy set forth in this chapter is intended to be exclusive or a
prerequisite for asserting a claim for relief to enforce any rights granted
under this chapter in a court of law.
   (j)   Retaliation and Discrimination Barred. During the term of the
contract, a Covered Employer shall not discharge, reduce the compensation or
otherwise discriminate against any employee for making a complaint to the City
or otherwise asserting his or her rights under this chapter, participating in
any of its proceedings or using any remedies to enforce his or her rights under
this chapter. A person who believes he or she has been retaliated against in
violation of this section may file a charge of noncompliance with the Clerk of
City Council, as provided in subsection (b) of this section. Such charge shall
be processed, investigated and, if necessary, conciliated and heard according
to the procedure set forth in this. If, after a hearing, the allegations of
retaliation are found to be true, the Director of the Applicable Department
shall order appropriate sanctions, including the denial of the right to bid on
future City contracts for a specified time period, as provided in subsection
(i) of this section.
   (k)   This Chapter shall not prevent the City or any person from exercising
any right or seeking any remedy to which that person might otherwise be
entitled, or from filing any complaint with any other agency or court of law or
equity.
   (l)   No criminal penalties shall attach for any violation of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 2009-A-99. Passed 6-19-00, eff. 7-29-00 without the signature of the
Mayor)
§ 189.06 Exemptions
   (a)   Construction and Prevailing Wage Exemption. Nothing in this chapter
shall apply to jobs in public construction work that are subject to federal
and/or state law pertaining to wage rates or covered by prevailing wage
agreements or collective bargaining agreements.
   (b)   Granted Exemptions.
      (1)   Cleveland City Council may, through passage of legislation, grant a
partial or whole exemption from the requirements of this chapter on the
following grounds:
         A.   A hardship exemption for otherwise Covered Employers that can
demonstrate a specific, particular harm that would be felt uniquely by the
Covered Employer if this chapter were to be applied. Economic harm alone will
not suffice to demonstrate hardship unless it is of a type that would not
affect any other actual competitor for the contract, subcontract or lease. The
following types of specific particular harm may provide grounds for a hardship
exemption:
            1.   A loss of profitability that will result in the elimination of
jobs;
            2.   A loss in profits that will substantially impact the Covered
Employer’s long-term stability;
            3.   As to not-for-profit community or social service agencies or
organizations, a substantial hindrance in the ability to deliver service.
      (2)   Procedures. Application for an exemption shall be made to the
Applicable Department. If the need for the exemption is known to the applicant
at the time it applies or during the term of the contract for a Service
Contract or Assistance, the application for the exemption should be submitted
with the application for the Service or Assistance Contract.
         A.   The Director of the Applicable Department shall review and make a
determination on the application within ten (10) days and respond to the
applicant in writing, setting forth the reasons for the determination.
            1.   Notice of the request for an exemption shall be forwarded to
the Fair Employment Wage Board and the Clerk of Cleveland City Council.
            2.   A copy of the Director’s determination regarding the
application for the hardship exemption shall be forwarded to the Fair
Employment Wage Board and the Clerk of Cleveland City Council.
         B.   Should the exemption be recommended by the Director, the Director
shall cause legislation to be drafted and acted upon by Cleveland City Council
granting the exemption. At such time, the Director shall forward to Council
along with the recommendation all supporting documents and other materials,
including those supplied by the applicant for the exemption, as provided in the
next section. If the exemption is recommended and Council adopts the
recommendation before the Service or Assistance contract is entered into, the
legislation authorizing such contract shall include a provision granting the
exemption.
      (3)   Contents of Exemption Request.
         A.   Hardship Exemption requests shall include:
            1.   The lower wage to be paid by the Covered Employer;
            2.   A detailed explanation of how the payment of the Fair
Employment Wage will cause particular harm; and
            3.   Supporting financial statements and/or other documents.
(Ord. No. 2009-A-99. Passed 6-19-00, eff. 7-29-00 without the signature of the
Mayor)
§ 189.07 Evaluation
   After a three (3) year period from the effective date of this ordinance, an
evaluation on the impact of this ordinance shall be done. The Mayor, City
Council, and the FEWB shall decide on who shall perform the evaluation and the
scope of the evaluation. After one (1) year following the effective date of
this ordinance, Cleveland City Council shall hold a hearing for the purpose of
reviewing this legislation.
(Ord. No. 2009-A-99. Passed 6-19-00, eff. 7-29-00 without the signature of the
Mayor)
§ 189.08 Severability
   In the event any provision of this chapter is held unconstitutional or
invalid or unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, such holding
shall not invalidate or render unenforceable any other provision hereof.
(Ord. No. 2009-A-99. Passed 6-19-00, eff. 7-29-00 without the signature of the
Mayor)
§ 189.09 Effective Date
   The Fair Employment Wage Ordinance shall be effective on January 1, 2001.
(Ord. No. 2009-A-99. Passed 6-19-00, eff. 7-29-00 without the signature of the
Mayor)
CHAPTER 190 – WAGE THEFT AND PAYROLL FRAUD PREVENTION
190.01   Definitions
190.02   Disclosure of Adverse Determination; Effect
190.03   Monitoring Contracts; Adverse Determination List
190.04   Waiver
190.05   Community Education
190.06   Violations; Penalty
§ 190.01 Definitions
   For purposes of this chapter:
   (a)   (1)   "Adverse Determination" means a final adjudication, not subject
to appeal, by a court of competent jurisdiction, a final action by a state or
federal governmental agency, or a final adjudication by an arbitrator or
arbitral body of competent jurisdiction, including, but not limited to, an
administrative merit determination, arbitration award or decision, civil
judgment, or criminal conviction, that a Contractor, Subcontractor or recipient
of Assistance has committed Wage Theft or Payroll Fraud, or a final
adjudication, not subject to appeal, by a court of competent jurisdiction, that
a Contractor, Subcontractor, or Recipient of Assistance has violated Section
669.02 of these Codified Ordinances. If the person or entity appeals or
contests the final adjudication, final action, or final determination, the
Adverse Determination becomes effective whenever that initial adjudication,
action, or determination, in whole or in part, is affirmed on appeal or after
the contest, or the appeal or contest is denied.
      (2)   A settlement agreement or other similar agreement entered into by a
person or entity related to any allegations of Wage Theft or Payroll Fraud to
resolve the matter prior to the issuance of an Adverse Determination or while
an appeal is pending shall not constitute an Adverse Determination.
      (3)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit a collateral
attack on the jurisdiction of a court, state or federal governmental agency, or
an arbitrator or arbitral body to avoid being placed on the Adverse
Determination List.
   (b)   "Adverse Determination List" means a list published by the Fair Wage
Employment Board and updated every month, of persons or entities that have
received an Adverse Determination within the preceding three (3) years.
   (c)   "Applicable Department" means the City department administering
Construction and Improvement Contracts or Service Contracts or the City
department to which a person or entity applies for Assistance.
   (d)   "Assistance" shall have the same meaning as in division (b) of Section
189.01.
   (e)   "Contract" means any Construction or Improvement Contract and any
Service Contract entered into pursuant to these Codified Ordinances.
   (f)   "Contractor" means any person or entity who enters into a Construction
or Improvement Contract or Service Contract with the City.
   (g)   "Construction or Improvement Contract" means any contract entered into
pursuant to Charter Section
167 or Chapter
185 of the Codified Ordinances.
   (h)   "City" means the City of Cleveland and all City departments, divisions
and offices.
   (i)   "Fair Employment Wage Board" or "FEWB" means the board established
under Chapter
189 of these Codified Ordinances.
   (j)   "Payroll Fraud" means concealing an entity's true payroll tax
liability or other financial liability to a government agency from government
licensing, regulatory or taxing agencies through misclassification of
employees, failure to report or underreported payment of wages, or executing a
cash transaction while failing to maintain proper records of reporting and
withholding.
   (k)   "Person or Entity" means any individual, proprietorship, partnership,
joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, trust, association, or
other entity recognized at law by the State of Ohio, and their successors,
predecessors, affiliates, and assigns, who may employ individuals or enter into
contracts with the City.
   (l)   "Recipient of Assistance" means:
      (1)   Any Person or Entity who enters into one (1) or more Contracts with
the City for Assistance;
      (2)   Any Person or Entity that is a direct recipient of Assistance.
   (m)   "Service Contract" shall have the same meaning as in division (j) of
Section
189.01.
   (n)   "Subcontract" means any contract between a Contractor and a person or
entity to assist in performance of a Contract; and a contract between a person
receiving Assistance and a person or entity to support the project or matter
for which the person is receiving Assistance.
   (o)   "Wage Theft" means a violation of the Ohio Prompt Pay Statute, RC
4113.15; the Ohio Minimum Fair Wage Standards Act, RC Chapter 4111; Oh. Const.
Art. II, Sec. 34a; RC Chapters 4109 or 4115; RC 4113.17, 4113.18, 4113.52 or
4113.61; or a violation of any substantially equivalent federal or state law;
as any of these laws may be amended or superseded.
(Ord. No. 104-2025. Passed 4-28-25, eff. 10-27-25)
§ 190.02 Disclosure of Adverse Determination; Effect
   (a)   Any person or entity bidding on or making a proposal for a
Construction or Improvement Contract or a Service Contract, or applying for
Assistance, and any prospective Subcontractors, shall disclose any Adverse
Determinations occurring within the previous three (3) years to the Fair
Employment Wage Board (FEWB) and to the Applicable Department.
   (b)   A person or entity that has received an Adverse Determination within
the previous three (3) years from the due date of a bid or proposal for a
Construction or Improvement Contract or Service Contract, or application for
Assistance, shall not be eligible to enter into any Contract, or an application
for Assistance, or a Subcontract, for three (3) years from the date of the last
Adverse Determination, unless the person or entity receives a waiver pursuant
to Section
190.04.
(Ord. No. 892-2022. Passed 12-5-22, eff. 12-7-22)
§ 190.03 Monitoring Contracts; Adverse Determination List
   (a)   Any person employed on a Contract or Subcontract, who alleges that a
violation of federal or state law relating to Wage Theft or Payroll Fraud has
occurred, may file a written complaint with the Director of the Applicable
Department within one hundred and eighty (180) days of the alleged violation or
knowledge of the alleged violation. The complaint shall be a statement with the
name and address of the person making the charge, the name and address of the
employer alleged to have committed the violation of federal or state law, and
any other information as may be required by the Director of the Applicable
Department. The Director of the Applicable Department shall inform the FEWB of
the complaint and refer the complainant to the appropriate governmental agency
for review.
   (b)   The FEWB shall create and maintain a list of persons or entities that
have reported Adverse Determinations pursuant to Section
190.02, the Adverse Determination List. The FEWB shall cause the list to be
published on the City website and updated every month. The FEWB shall monitor
the outcome of any assessed civil penalties under Section
669.99 of these Codified Ordinances and any referral made pursuant to division
(a) of this section and update the Adverse Determination List as necessary.
(Ord. No. 104-2025. Passed 4-28-25, eff. 10-27-25)
§ 190.04 Waiver
   (a)   An Applicable Department may request a waiver from the FEWB on behalf
of a person or entity with an Adverse Determination that places the person or
entity on the Adverse Determination List. The FEWB may grant the waiver if the
Applicable Department demonstrates that the inability of the Applicable
Department to contract with that person or entity would result in serious
disruption to the efficient and orderly operations of the City or the person or
entity is a sole source provider of goods or services that are necessary for
the efficient and orderly operations of the City.
   (b)   A person or entity may request a waiver from the FEWB of an Adverse
Determination that places that person or entity on the Adverse Determination
List. The request shall be in writing and shall include one or more of the
following reasons for granting the waiver:
      (1)   that there has been a bona fide change in ownership of the person
or entity since the Adverse Determination;
      (2)   the person or entity has taken significant and verifiable actions
to prevent any future Adverse Determinations and has complied with the
requirements of the final adjudication, final action, or final determination
placing that person or entity on the Adverse Determination List, including the
payment of required back pay, interest penalties and fines; and
      (3)   any other information the person or entity deems relevant to
granting the waiver, or that the FEWB wishes to consider.
   (c)   The FEWB may grant a waiver under division (b) of this section by
removing the person or entity from the Adverse Determination List, reducing the
time period a person or entity is on the Adverse Determination List, or
allowing the person or entity a one-time waiver to enter into a Contract,
Subcontract or to apply for Assistance.
   (d)   A majority vote of the FEWB is required to grant a waiver under this
section.
(Ord. No. 892-2022. Passed 12-5-22, eff. 12-7-22)
§ 190.05 Community Education
   (a)   The FEWB shall partner with employers, labor organizations and
community groups to inform residents of their workplace rights under federal,
state and local law, provide information to residents about available
resources, and to communicate the benefits of this chapter to businesses,
employees and community groups.
   (b)   The FEWB shall review the effectiveness of the wage theft and payroll
fraud ordinance to ensure that those entities receiving public assistance,
government loans, and contracts from the City are adhering to the ordinance.
The FEWB shall make recommendations to the Council, when appropriate, regarding
issues pertaining to the wage theft and payroll fraud policy.
(Ord. No. 892-2022. Passed 12-5-22, eff. 12-7-22)
§ 190.06 Violations; Penalty
   (a)   No person shall willfully withhold the information required under
Section
190.02.
   (b)   Any person who violates division (a) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(Ord. No. 892-2022. Passed 12-5-22, eff. 12-7-22)
CHAPTER 190A – COMMUNITY BENEFITS AGREEMENTS
190A.01   Definitions
190A.02   Community Benefits Agreement Required
190A.03   Community Benefits for Large Development Projects
190A.04   Cleveland Citywide Development Corporation Advisory Review
190A.05   Reporting and Public Dashboard
190A.06   Regulations and Procedures
190A.07   Penalties for Noncompliance
§ 190A.01 Definitions
   For purposes of this chapter:
   (a)   "City Financial Assistance" means any City-funded grant, loan, tax
increment financing, residential multi-family tax abatement in compliance with
Ordinance No. 482-2022, passed March 25, 2022, Section 3, below market-value
land transfer, and/or City-funded capital infrastructure improvements
associated with a development project;
   (b)   "Community Benefits Agreement" or "CBA" means a legally enforceable
agreement between the City of Cleveland and the Developer that provides
community benefits;
   (c)   "Community Benefits" means the amenities, benefits, or commitments
described in Sections
190A.02 and
190A.03;
   (d)   "Developer" means any person, firm, partnership, limited liability
company, corporation, joint venture, proprietorship, or other entity that
proposes a Development Project, excluding public improvement projects, in the
City of Cleveland; and
   (e)   "Development Project" means new construction of and alterations to
buildings and structures located in the City.
(Ord. No. 297-2023. Passed 6-5-23, eff. 9-6-23)
§ 190A.02 Community Benefits Agreement Required
   To receive City Financial Assistance of two hundred fifty thousand dollars
($250,000) or more towards a Development Project, a Developer shall enter into
an agreement with the appropriate City director that provides at least the
following Community Benefits:
   (a)   A plan to meet Minority Business Enterprise, Female Business
Enterprise, and Cleveland Area Small Business (MBE, FBE, and CSB) participation
goals, consistent with
Chapter 187, from any or all of the following, including at team leadership,
preconstruction, construction, trade and craft sub-contractor, professional
services, including architectural and engineering design, real estate and
property management, and/or post-project hiring levels;
   (b)   A plan to meet resident and low-income resident employment goals the
City establishes for each Development Project;
   (c)   Participation in mentor / protégé programs for certified MBEs, FBEs,
CSBs and residents;
   (d)   Registered apprenticeship and internship opportunities for adult
Cleveland residents and City of Cleveland community college students that are
Cleveland residents; and providing pre-apprenticeship, internship, and/or
information and networking session opportunities for City of Cleveland high
school graduates and students that are Cleveland residents;
   (e)   A commitment to meet periodically with community stakeholders to gain
community input on the Development Project;
   (f)   Additionally, the agreement shall require the Developer to provide
quarterly reports to the Office of Equal Opportunity (OEO) regarding compliance
with the above workforce, contracting and subcontracting, and community
benefits commitments, in addition to and coordination with the reports required
by Codified Ordinance Section
187.24 in the spirit of collaboration and partnership with OEO that serves as a
resource to Developers.
(Ord. No. 297-2023. Passed 6-5-23, eff. 9-6-23)
§ 190A.03 Community Benefits for Large Development Projects
   To receive City Financial Assistance of two hundred fifty thousand dollars
($250,000) or more towards a Development Project expected to cost twenty
million dollars ($20,000,000) or more, a Developer shall enter into an
Agreement providing the Community Benefits required in Section
190A.02, and additionally include those of the following development-specific
Community Benefits, as determined by the director of the applicable department
in consultation with the Developer, in that Agreement:
   (a)   Joint-venture, co-development, and owner's representative
opportunities for MBEs, FBEs, and CSBs;
   (b)   Associate partner opportunities for MBEs, FBEs, and CSBs;
   (c)   Promotion, support, and participation in workforce collaborations,
similar to those supported in the manufacturing, information technology, and
healthcare sectors, that expand job opportunities for communities of color and
women;
   (d)   Hosting job fairs and contractor information and networking sessions
about upcoming contracting opportunities;
   (e)   Unbundling construction work into smaller bid packages of sizes
suitable for competition by MBE, FBE, and CSB firms;
   (f)   Facilitating access to bonding, financing, insurance, and other
capacity-building assistance to MBEs, FBEs, and CSBs;
   (g)   Promoting opportunities for investment in the Development Project,
including but not limited to community investment trusts and community land
ownership;
   (h)   Incorporating LEED principles, and additional sustainable business
practices, into the design and construction of the Development Project;
   (i)   Providing neighborhood infrastructure and safety improvements,
including but not limited to curbs, street paving, sidewalks, multi-purpose and
bicycle paths, pedestrian traffic-calming measures, parks and greenspace,
landscaping, lighting, security cameras, bicycle racks, signage, public art,
and blight removal, to the extent not provided by the City or other public
entity;
   (j)   Affordable housing units in conjunction with the Development Project
and/or contribution to a fund for that purpose;
   (k)   Use of project financing from a financial institution that has
submitted an Affidavit of Intent required under Codified Ordinance Section
178.05 and in the form contained in Section
178.07, affirming its lending and financing opportunities and defined lending
program in support of residential and commercial development in Cleveland's
neighborhoods;
   (l)   Use of Cleveland Public Power as preferred electricity provider for
the Development Project, to the extent feasible;
   (m)   A commitment to enter into a Project Labor Agreement (PLA) with one or
more construction unions for the Development Project;
   (n)   Providing work opportunities for formerly incarcerated persons and at-
risk youth;
   (o)   Meeting other community needs related to the Development Project;
   (p)   Contribution to a community equity fund designated by the Director of
Finance with all expenditures requiring legislative approval;
   (q)   Any other negotiated community benefits, including but not limited to
those enumerated in the regulations and procedures promulgated under Section
190A.06;
   (r)   Implementation plan for items listed above; and
   (s)   This section shall not apply to Development Projects under seventy-
five million dollars ($75,000,000) receiving only a residential multi-family
tax abatement as City Financial Assistance; however, the community benefits
agreement requirements of Section
190A.02 and Ordinance No. 482-2022, passed March 25, 2022, Section 3 shall
apply to such Development Projects.
(Ord. No. 297-2023. Passed 6-5-23, eff. 9-6-23)
§ 190A.04 Cleveland Citywide Development Corporation Advisory Review
   Cleveland Citywide Development Corporation (CCDC) shall consult with and
advise the appropriate Departments of Development, Community Development and/or
the Office of Equal Opportunity for the following purposes: reviewing Community
Benefits commitments for proposed Development Projects as presented by the
Departments, based on community and developer input, prior to passage of
legislation by City Council authorizing City Financial Assistance for such
projects.
(Ord. No. 297-2023. Passed 6-5-23, eff. 9-6-23)
   Note: Pursuant to Section 11 of Ord. No. 1226-2025, any references to the
Department of Economic Development (and, by extension, the Director of Economic
Development) shall be amended to read the Department of Development (and, by
extension, the Director of Development).
§ 190A.05 Reporting and Public Dashboard
   (a)   The Office of Equal Opportunity shall send quarterly reports of
workforce and Community Benefits compliance data to Cleveland City Council's
Finance, Diversity, Equity and Inclusion Committee for review.
   (b)   Upon its execution, the appropriate Department shall provide a copy of
each Community Benefits Agreement to the Clerk of Council to include in the
legislative file attached to legislation authorizing City Financial Assistance
for such Development Project.
   (c)   The Office of Equal Opportunity shall develop and host a publicly
available dashboard of workforce and Community Benefits data, which shall
include at least revenue to certified MBE, FBE, and CSB firms, revenue to
Cleveland residents, and tangible Community Benefits – disaggregated by race
and gender, as appropriate.
   (d)   The Office of Equal Opportunity (OEO) shall develop and maintain lists
of the following: (1) certified MBEs, FBEs, and CSBs and the types of services
they provide; (2) mentorship and apprenticeship programs; and (3) training
programs for laborers. These resources shall be posted on the websites of OEO,
the Department of Development, and the Department of Community Development, and
shall be provided to any Developer seeking City Financial Assistance upon
request, updated quarterly by OEO, and reviewed annually by the Cleveland
Citywide Development Corporation (CCDC) and City Council.
(Ord. No. 297-2023. Passed 6-5-23, eff. 9-6-23)
   Note: Pursuant to Section 11 of Ord. No. 1226-2025, any references to the
Department of Economic Development (and, by extension, the Director of Economic
Development) shall be amended to read the Department of Development (and, by
extension, the Director of Development).
§ 190A.06 Regulations and Procedures
   The Directors of Development, Community Development, and the Office of Equal
Employment Opportunity as appropriate (collectively, the "Directors") may
promulgate regulations and procedures to carry out the provisions of this
chapter, including a scorecard evaluation process and CBA template with Section
190A.02 requirements for qualifying proposed Development Projects.
(Ord. No. 297-2023. Passed 6-5-23, eff. 9-6-23)
   Note: Pursuant to Section 11 of Ord. No. 1226-2025, any references to the
Department of Economic Development (and, by extension, the Director of Economic
Development) shall be amended to read the Department of Development (and, by
extension, the Director of Development).
§ 190A.07 Penalties for Noncompliance
   Failure by a Developer to comply with any provisions of a CBA as determined
by the City in its sole discretion may result in any one or more of the
following, as provided in the CBA, subject to applicable notice and cure
provisions: denial or termination of City Financial Assistance; proportional
recovery of previously provided financial assistance; and/or stipulated damages
to be deposited into a community equity fund designated by the Director of
Finance. All expenditures from this community equity fund shall require
legislative authority from City Council.
(Ord. No. 297-2023. Passed 6-5-23, eff. 9-6-23)
TITLE XVII: TAXATION
   Chapter
191   Municipal Income Tax
   Chapter
192   2016 Municipal Income Tax
   Chapter
193   Transient Occupancy Tax
   Chapter
195   Admissions Tax
   Chapter
196   Parking Occupancy Tax
   Chapter
197   Motor Vehicle License Tax
   Chapter
198   Motor Vehicle Lessor Tax
   Chapter
199   Tax on Coin Operated Amusement Devices
CHAPTER 191 – MUNICIPAL INCOME TAX
191.0101   Purpose of Levy
191.0301   Definitions Generally
191.030101   Adjusted Federal Taxable Income
191.030102   Administrative Rulings
191.0302   Administrator
191.0303   Association
191.0304   Board of Review
191.030401   Board of Tax Appeals
191.0305   Business
191.030501   City
191.0306   Corporation
191.0307   Employee
191.0308   Employer
191.0309   Fiscal Year
191.0310   Gross Receipts
191.031001   Intangible Income
191.031002   Internal Revenue Code
191.0311   Net Profits
191.0312   Nonresident
191.031201   Nonresident Owner
191.0313   Nonresident Unincorporated Business Entity
191.031301   Ohio Revised Code
191.031302   Other Payer
191.031303   Owner
191.031304   Pass-Through Entity
191.0314   Person
191.0315   Place of Business
191.031501   Qualifying Wages
191.0316   Resident
191.031601   Resident Owner
191.0317   Resident Unincorporated Business Entity
191.031701   Rules and Regulations
191.031702   S Corporation
191.031703   State
191.031704   Tax Commissioner
191.0318   Taxable Income
191.031801   Taxable Situs
191.0319   Taxable Year
191.0320   Taxpayer
191.0321   Unincorporated Business Entity
191.0501   Rate and Taxable Income
191.050101   Additional Taxable Income – Repealed
191.0502   Effective Date
191.0701   Method of Determination
191.0702   Sales Made in the City
191.0703   Total Allocation
191.0704   Rentals
191.0705   Operating Loss; Carry Forward
191.0901   Sources of Income Not Taxed
191.1101   Date for Filing Returns
191.1102   Form and Content of Return
191.1103   Extension of Time for Filing Returns
191.1104   Consolidated Returns
191.1105   Amended Returns
191.1301   Payment of Tax on Filing of Return
191.1302   Collection at Source
191.1303   Declarations of Income Not Collected at Source
191.1304   Filing of Declaration
191.1305   Form of Declaration
191.1306   Payment to Accompany Declaration
191.1307   Annual Return
191.1501   Interest on Unpaid Tax
191.1502   Penalties on Unpaid Tax
191.1503   Exceptions to Penalties
191.1504   Abatement of Interest and Penalty
191.1505   Violations
191.1506   Limitation of Prosecution
191.1507   Failure to Procure Tax Forms
191.1701   Unpaid Taxes Recoverable as Other Debts
191.1702   Refund of Taxes Erroneously Paid
191.1703   Amounts of Less than One Dollar
191.1901   Reserved
191.1902   Cleveland Resident Subject to Income Tax in Other Municipality
191.1903   Claim for Credit
191.2001   Deposit of Funds
191.2002   Monthly Report of Undistributed Balance
191.2101   Disbursement of Funds Collected
191.2301   Receipt and Records of Tax
191.2302   Enforcement of Collection
191.2303   Authority to Make and Enforce Regulations
191.2304   Authority to Arrange Installment Payments
191.2305   Authority to Determine Amount of Tax Due
191.2306   Investigations
191.2307   Authority to Compel Production of Records
191.2308   Refusal to Produce Records
191.2309   Confidential Nature of Information; Disclosure of Returns and Return
Information
191.2310   Taxpayer Required to Retain Records
191.2311   Authority to Contract for Central Collection Facilities
191.2312   Withholding Taxes from Federal Employees
191.2501   Board of Review Established
191.2502   Board to Approve Regulations and Hear Appeals
191.2503   Right of Appeal
191.2701   Declaration of Legislative Intent
191.2702   Collection of Tax after Termination of Chapter
191.99   Penalty
Charter reference:
   Taxpayer’s suit, Charter §
90
Cross-reference:
   Division of Taxation; Administrator, CO
127.30,
127.31
Statutory reference:
   Municipal income taxes, RC Ch. 718
   Payroll deductions, RC 9.42
   Power to levy income tax, O Const Art XVIII § 3
§ 191.0101 Purpose of Levy
   (a)   To provide funds for the purposes of general municipal operations,
procurement of fixed assets or permanent improvements, payment of debt charges,
the elimination of deficits in City funds and for all other lawful purposes,
there shall be, and is hereby levied a tax on qualifying wages as defined in
this chapter, on net profits, and on all other taxable income, as hereinafter
provided.
   (b)   Eight-ninths (8/9) of all monies derived from the tax so levied shall
be unrestricted and may be applied to any of the purposes described in division
(a) of this section.
   (c)   One-ninth (1/9) of all monies derived from the tax so levied shall be
credited to a special revenue fund to be known as the Restricted Income Tax
Fund. Moneys credited to the Restricted Income Tax Fund may be applied to only
the following purposes:
      (1)   Elimination of any deficit balance in any fund of the City,
provided that such deficit balance existed as of December 31, 1984, or exists
at any subsequent time during a fiscal emergency period, as defined in RC
118.01; or
      (2)   Payment of the principal of or interest or any premium on any bonds
or notes issued by the City to finance the construction, purchase or
acquisition of fixed assets or permanent improvements; or
      (3)   Payment of the costs of constructing or acquiring (whether by
outright purchase, lease or lease- purchase and irrespective of whether payment
is made in installments or in a lump sum) of fixed assets of permanent
improvements.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.0301 Definitions Generally
   For the purposes of this chapter the terms, phrases, words and their
derivatives shall have the meanings given in the next succeeding sections.
   The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include the
feminine and the neuter.
(Ord. No. 2393-66. Passed 11-28-66, eff. 11-28-66)
§ 191.030101 Adjusted Federal Taxable Income
   “Adjusted Federal Taxable Income” means a C corporation’s federal taxable
income before net operating losses and special deductions as determined under
the Internal Revenue Code adjusted, as set forth in RC 718.01(A)(1).
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.030102 Administrative Rulings
   “Administrative Rulings” mean the rulings issued by the Tax Administrator,
upon the request of a taxpayer or employer, interpreting this chapter and the
Rules and Regulations. Administrative Rulings shall be binding and effective
upon issuance as to the taxpayer or employer requesting the ruling.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.0302 Administrator
   “Administrator” means the Commissioner of the Division of Taxation, who also
may be referred to in this chapter as the “Tax Administrator.”
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.0303 Association
   “Association” means any partnership, limited partnership, limited liability
company, limited liability partnership, Subchapter S corporation (“S
corporation”) as defined in the Internal Revenue Code, or any other form of
unincorporated business or enterprise taxed on a pass-through basis under the
Internal Revenue Code. The terms “association,” “pass- through entity,” and
“unincorporated business entity” are synonymous for purposes of this chapter
and the Rules and Regulations.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.0304 Board of Review
   “Board of Review” means the Board created by and constituted as provided in
Section
191.2501.
(Ord. No. 2393-66. Passed 11-28-66, eff. 11-28-66)
§ 191.030401 Board of Tax Appeals
   “Board of Tax Appeals” means the state board created pursuant to RC 5703.02.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.0305 Business
   “Business” means any enterprise, activity, profession or undertaking of any
nature conducted for profit or ordinarily conducted for profit, whether by an
individual, partnership, association, corporation or any other entity,
including but not limited to the renting or leasing of property, real, personal
or mixed. For purposes of determining if “business is conducted within the
city,” any direct and/or indirect ownership of an interest in an association,
pass-through entity or unincorporated business entity that conducts business
within the City is considered included.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.030501 City
   “City” means the City of Cleveland, Ohio.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.0306 Corporation
   “Corporation” means a corporation or joint stock association organized under
the laws of the United States, the State of Ohio or any other state, territory
or foreign country or dependency, or any unincorporated entity treated as a
corporation for federal income tax purposes. “Corporation” also includes a
combined company, an electric company and a telephone company, as defined in RC
5727.01.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.0307 Employee
   “Employee” means one who works for qualifying wages in the service of an
employer.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.0308 Employer
   “Employer” means an individual, partnership, association corporation
governmental body, unit or agency, or any other entity, whether or not
organized for profit, who or that employs one (1) or more persons on a
qualifying wage basis.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.0309 Fiscal Year
   “Fiscal year” means an accounting period of twelve (12) months or less
ending on any day other than December 31.
(Ord. No. 2393-66. Passed 11-28-66, eff. 11-28-66)
§ 191.0310 Gross Receipts
   “Gross receipts” means total revenue from any source whatever.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.031001 Intangible Income
   “Intangible income” means that income specified in RC 718.01(A)(5) including
any of the following types of income: income yield, interest, capital gains,
dividends, or other income arising from the ownership, sale, exchange or other
disposition of intangible property including, but not limited to, investments,
deposits, money or credits as those terms are defined in RC Chapter 5701, and
patents, copyrights, trademarks, tradenames, investments in real estate
investment trusts, investments in regulated investment companies, and
appreciation on deferred compensation. “Intangible income” does not include
prizes, awards or other income associated with, attributable to or derived from
any lottery winnings or other similar games of chance.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.031002 Internal Revenue Code
   “Internal Revenue Code” means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, 100 Stat.
2085, 26 U.S.C. 1, as amended.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.0311 Net Profits
   “Net profits” mean (i) if the taxpayer is a corporation, the corporation’s
“adjusted federal taxable income” as that term is defined in RC 718.01(A)(1)(a)
- (f); (ii) if the taxpayer is an “association,” “pass- through entity,” or
“unincorporated business entity,” “adjusted federal taxable income” as that
term is defined in RC 718.01(A)(1)(g); and (iii) if the taxpayer is an
individual, the individual’s profit, other than amounts specifically excluded
in RC 718.01(F), required to be reported on federal Schedule C, Schedule E, or
Schedule F, as provided by the Internal Revenue Service.
   The “net profits” of a taxpayer shall be adjusted in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and the Rules and Regulations.
(Ord. No. 2067-05. Passed 11-28-05, eff. 12-5-05)
§ 191.0312 Nonresident
   “Nonresident” means an individual domiciled outside the City of Cleveland.
(Ord. No. 2393-66. Passed 11-28-66, eff. 11-28-66)
§ 191.031201 Nonresident Owner
   “Nonresident owner” means an individual domiciled outside the City who has a
direct or indirect ownership interest in an association, pass-through entity or
unincorporated business entity that conducts business in the city or a
corporation that has a direct or indirect ownership interest in an association,
pass- through entity or unincorporated business entity that conducts business
in the City.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.0313 Nonresident Unincorporated Business Entity
   “Nonresident unincorporated business entity” means an unincorporated
business entity not having an office or place of business within the City.
(Ord. No. 2393-66. Passed 11-28-66, eff. 11-28-66)
§ 191.031301 Ohio Revised Code
   “Ohio Revised Code” means the codified statutes of the State of Ohio, as
amended.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.031302 Other Payer
   “Other payer” means any person, other than an individual’s employer or the
employer’s agent, that pays an individual any amount included in the federal
gross income of the individual.
(Ord. No. 2067-05. Passed 11-28-05, eff. 12-5-05)
§ 191.031303 Owner
   “Owner” means an individual, partner, member, or any other person having an
ownership interest in an association, pass-through entity, or unincorporated
business entity.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.031304 Pass-Through Entity
   “Pass-through entity” means a partnership, limited liability company, S
corporation or any other type of entity the income or profits of which are
given pass- through treatment under the Internal Revenue Code. “Income from a
pass-through entity” includes partnership income of partners, membership
interests of members of a limited liability company, distributive shares of
shareholders of an S corporation, or other distributive or proportionate
ownership shares of income from other pass-through entities.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.0314 Person
   “Person” means individuals, firms, companies, business trusts, estates,
trusts, partnerships, limited liability companies, associations, corporations,
governmental entities, and any other entity.
   With respect to provisions of this chapter that impose or prescribe a
penalty, the term “person” shall mean the owners of an association, pass-
through entity and unincorporated business entity and the officers of a
corporation.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.0315 Place of Business
   “Place of business” means any bona fide office, other than a mere statutory
office, factory, warehouse or other space which is occupied and used by the
taxpayer in carrying on any business activity individually or through one (1)
or more of his or her regular employees regularly in attendance.
(Ord. No. 2393-66. Passed 11-28-66, eff. 11-28-66)
§ 191.031501 Qualifying Wages
   “Qualifying wages” means wages, as defined in Section 3121(a) of the
Internal Revenue Code, without regard to any wage limitations, adjusted as
provided in division (A)(2) of RC 718.03. “Qualifying wages” includes
compensation attributable to a nonqualified deferred compensation plan or
program as defined in Section 3121(v)(2)(C) of the Internal Revenue Code and
compensation arising from the sale, exchange or other disposition of a stock
option, the exercise of a stock option, or the sale, exchange or other
disposition of stock purchased by the stock option. “Qualifying wages” does not
include compensation deferred before January 1, 2004, to the extent that the
deferred compensation does not constitute “qualifying wages” when paid or
distributed.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.0316 Resident
   “Resident” means an individual domiciled in the City.
(Ord. No. 2393-66. Passed 11-28-66, eff. 11-28-66)
§ 191.031601 Resident Owner
   “Resident owner” means an individual domiciled in the City who has an
interest in an association, pass-through entity or unincorporated business
entity.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.0317 Resident Unincorporated Business Entity
   “Resident unincorporated business entity” means an unincorporated business
entity having an office or place of business within the City.
(Ord. No. 2393-66. Passed 11-28-66, eff. 11-28-66)
§ 191.031701 Rules and Regulations
   “Rules and Regulations” mean the Rules and Regulations promulgated by the
Tax Administrator and approved by the Board of Review.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.031702 S Corporation
   “S Corporation” means a corporation that has made an election under
Subchapter S of Chapter 1 of Subtitle A of the Internal Revenue Code for its
taxable year.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.031703 State
   “State” means the State of Ohio.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.031704 Tax Commissioner
   “Tax Commissioner” means the Tax Commissioner of the State of Ohio.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.0318 Taxable Income
   “Taxable income” means all qualifying wages, net profits and all other
income from whatever source derived set forth in Section
191.0501, and the Rules and Regulations as taxable.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.031801 Taxable Situs
   “Taxable Situs” means that portion of a taxpayer’s net profits attributable
to the City where the taxpayer conducts a business or profession both within
and without the City, determined in accordance with RC 718.02.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.0319 Taxable Year
   “Taxable year” means the corresponding tax reporting period as prescribed
for the taxpayer under the Internal Revenue Code.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.0320 Taxpayer
   “Taxpayer” means a person subject to the tax imposed by this chapter,
whether the tax is imposed on the taxable income of the entity in the hands of
the entity or on the taxable income from the entity in the hands of the owners
of the entity. “Taxpayer” does not include any person that is a disregarded
entity or a qualifying subchapter S subsidiary for federal income tax purposes,
but “taxpayer” includes any other person who owns the disregarded entity or
qualifying subchapter S subsidiary.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.0321 Unincorporated Business Entity
   “Unincorporated Business Entity” means either an “association,” “pass-
through entity” or “corporation,” determined by the treatment afforded such
entity for federal income tax purposes.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.0501 Rate and Taxable Income
   For the purposes specified in Section
191.0101, on and after January 1, 1967, an annual tax of one-half of one
percent (0.5%) per annum shall be imposed upon the hereinafter specified
income; provided that on an after July 1, 1968, the rate of tax shall be a
total of one percent (1%) per annum; and that on and after March 1, 1979, the
rate of such tax shall be a total of one and five-tenths percent (1.5%) per
annum; and that on and after January 1, 1981, the rate of tax shall be two
percent (2%) per annum. Such tax shall be imposed upon all taxable income as
follows:
   (a)   On all qualifying wages, net profits and other taxable income earned
and/or received on and after January 1, 1967 by residents of the City;
   (b)   (1)   On all qualifying wages, earned and/or received on and after
January 1, 1967, by nonresidents of the City for work done or services
performed or rendered within the City or attributable to the City; on all net
profits earned and/or received by a nonresident from the operation or conduct
of any business or profession within the City; and on all other taxable income
earned and/or received by a nonresident derived from or attributable to
sources, events or transactions within the City;
      (2)   For nonresidents employed at a place of business or profession
within the City, only those qualifying wages earned and/or received by such
nonresident that are specifically attributable to a place or location worked
that is outside the City will be treated as earned outside the City;
   (c)   (1)   On the portion attributable to the City of the net profits
earned and/or received on and after January 1, 1967, of all resident
associations, pass- through entities or other unincorporated business entities
treated as a pass-through entity for federal income tax purposes or professions
or other activities, derived from sales made, work done, services performed or
rendered, and business, or other activities conducted in the City and/or
derived from sales made, work done, services performed or rendered and business
or other activities attributable to the City;
      (2)   On the portion of the distributive share of the net profits earned
and/or received on and after January 1, 1967, of a resident partner or owner of
a resident association, pass-through entity or other unincorporated business
entity treated as a pass- through entity for federal income tax purposes not
attributable to the City and upon which the City’s income tax has not been
imposed and levied;
   (d)   (1)   On the portion attributable to the City of the net profits
earned and/or received on and after January 1, 1967, of all nonresident
associations, pass- through entities or other unincorporated business entities
treated as a pass-through entity for federal income tax purposes, professions
or other activities, derived from sales made, work done, services performed or
rendered, and business, or other activities conducted in the City and/or
derived from sales made, work done, services performed or rendered and business
or other activities attributable to the City, whether or not such association,
pass-through entity or other unincorporated business entity treated as a pass-
through entity for federal income tax purposes has an office or place of
business in the City;
      (2)   On the portion of the distributive share of the net profits earned
and/or received on and after January 1, 1967, of a resident partner or owner of
a nonresident association, pass-through entity or other unincorporated business
entity treated as a pass- through entity for federal income tax purposes not
attributable to the City and upon which the City’s income tax has not been
imposed and levied from wherever such business is located;
   (e)   On the portion attributable to the City of the net profits earned and/
or received on and after January 1, 1967, of all corporations and all other
entities and business activities not defined herein as associations, pass-
through entity or unincorporated business entity treated as a pass-through
entity for federal income tax purposes derived from sales made, work done,
services performed or rendered, and business, or other activities conducted in
the City, and/or derived from sales made, work done, services performed or
rendered, and business, or other activities attributable to the City, whether
or not such corporations, entities or business activities have an office or
place of business in the City;
   (f)   On the net profits of an electric company, combined company or
telephone company apportioned and attributable to the City in accordance with
RC 718.01(F)(6) and RC Chapter 5745;
   (g)   On all income derived from prizes, awards, gaming, wagering, lotteries
or other similar games of chance by a resident from whatever source and from
anywhere derived;
   (h)   On all income earned and/or received from covenants not to compete or
similar agreements and on all income attributable to cancellation of
indebtedness to the extent reported on the taxpayer’s federal income tax
return;
   (i)   On all guardian, executor, conservator, trustee or administrator fees
earned and/or received by a taxpayer in connection with the operation or
conduct of a business or profession;
   (j)   On all other compensation, net profits and income earned and/or
received by the taxpayer that is not specifically exempted from the tax imposed
by this chapter as set forth in Section
191.0901 and RC 718.01(F);
   (k)   (1)   For taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2004, the net
profits from a business or profession shall be taxed only to the extent of the
taxpayer’s adjusted federal taxable income except that nothing shall be
construed as limiting the ability of the Tax Administrator to administer,
audit, or enforce the provisions of this chapter including making all necessary
adjustments and allocations to adjusted federal taxable income to produce a
fair and proper allocation of net profits to the City;
      (2)   Division (k)(1) of this section shall not apply to any taxpayer
required to file a return under RC 5745.03 or to the net profits from a sole
proprietorship;
   (l)   For taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2004, in the case
of a taxpayer who has a net profit from a business or profession that is
operated as a sole proprietorship, or in the case of a taxpayer who has a net
profit from a business and the taxpayer is an individual, the City shall not
tax or use as the base for determining the amount of the net profit that shall
be considered as having a taxable situs in the City, an amount other than the
net profit required to be reported on Internal Revenue Service Schedules C or F
from such sole proprietorship for the taxable year; and
   (m)   For taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2004, in the case
of a taxpayer who has a net profit from rental activity required to be reported
on Internal Revenue Service Schedule E, the City shall not tax or use as the
base for determining the amount of the net profit that shall be considered as
having a taxable situs in the City, an amount other than the net profit from
rental activities required to be reported by the taxpayer on Schedule E for the
taxable year.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.050101 Additional Taxable Income – Repealed
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.0502 Effective Date
   (a)   The city income tax shall be levied, imposed, collected and paid on
any and all qualifying wages, net profits and taxable income as provided in
Section 191.0501, earned and/or received on and after January 1, 1967.
   (b)   
Chapter 192, effective January 1, 2016, and corresponding changes to RC Chapter
718, apply to municipal taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2016.
(Ord. No. 1412-15. Passed 11-23-15, eff. 1-1-16)
§ 191.0701 Method of Determination
   This Section does not apply to taxpayers that are subject to and required to
file reports under RC Chapter 5745.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (d) of this section, for
taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2004, the net profits from a
business or profession conducted both within and without the City shall be
considered as having a taxable situs in the City for purposes of imposing the
city income tax to the extent of the amount determined by multiplying the
entire net profits by a business allocation percent determined by the average
ratio of the following:
      (1)   The average original cost of the real and tangible personal
property owned or used by the taxpayer in the business or profession in the
City during the taxable period to the average original cost of all the real and
tangible personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the business or
profession during the same period, wherever situated.
      As used in this division (a)(1), “real property” shall include property
rented or leased by the taxpayer and the value of such property shall be
determined by multiplying the annual rental thereof by eight (8).
      (2)   Wages, salaries and other compensation paid during the taxable
period to persons employed in the business or profession for services performed
in the City to wages, salaries and other compensation paid during the same
period to persons employed in the business or profession, wherever their
services are performed, excluding compensation that is not taxable by the City
under RC 718.011.
      (3)   Gross receipts of the business or profession from sales made and
services performed during the taxable period in the City to gross receipts of
the business or profession during the same period from sales and services,
wherever made or performed.
   In the event that the foregoing apportionment formula does not produce an
equitable result, another basis may be substituted, under the Rules and
Regulations, so as to produce an equitable result.
   (b)   For taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2004, no taxpayer
shall use the books and records method of apportionment. Except as otherwise
provided in RC 718.02 and division (a) of this section, all taxpayers shall use
the statutory apportionment formula set forth in this section.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in division (d) of this section, for
taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2004, the net profits from
rental activity not constituting a business or profession shall be subject to
tax by the City only if the property generating the net profit is located in
the City.
   (d)   This section shall not apply to individuals who are residents of the
City and, except as otherwise provided in RC 718.01, the City shall impose its
tax on all income earned and/or received by residents of the City from whatever
source derived in accordance with Section
191.0501 of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.0702 Sales Made in the City
   As used in Section
191.0701(a)(3), “sales made in the City” means:
   (a)   All sales of tangible personal property delivered within the City
regardless of where title passes if shipped or delivered from a stock of goods
within the City;
   (b)   All sales of tangible personal property delivered within the City
regardless of where title passes even though transported from a point outside
the City, if the taxpayer is regularly engaged through its own employees in the
solicitation or promotion of sales within the City, and the sales result from
such solicitation or promotion; or
   (c)   All sales of tangible personal property shipped from a place within
the City to purchasers outside of the City regardless of where title passes if
the taxpayer is not, through its own employees, regularly engaged in the
solicitation or promotion of sales at the place where delivery is made.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.0703 Total Allocation
   Add together the percentages determined in accordance with Section
191.0701(a), or such of the aforesaid percentages as are applicable to the
particular taxpayer, and divide the total so obtained by the number of
percentages used in deriving the total in order to obtain the business
allocation percentage referred to in Section
191.0701.
   A factor is applicable even though it may be allocable entirely within or
without the City.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.0704 Rentals
   (a)   Rental income received by a taxpayer shall be included in the
computation of net profits from business activities under divisions (c) to (e)
of Section
191.0501, only if and to the extent that the rental, ownership, management or
operations of the real estate from which such rentals are derived, whether so
rented, managed or operated by a taxpayer individually or through agents or
other representatives, constitutes a business activity of the taxpayer in whole
or in part.
   (b)   Where the gross monthly rental of any and all real properties,
regardless of number and value, aggregates in excess of one hundred twenty-five
dollars ($125.00) per month, it shall be prima facie evidence that the rental,
ownership, management or operation of such properties, is a business activity
of such taxpayer, and the net income of such rental property shall be subject
to tax. However, in the case of commercial property, the owner shall be
considered engaged in a business activity when the rental is based on a fixed
or fluctuating percentage of gross or net sales, receipts or profits, of the
lessee, whether or not such rental exceeds one hundred twenty-five dollars
($125.00) per month; provided further that in the case of farm property, the
owner shall be considered engaged in a business activity when he or she shares
in crops or when the rental is based on a percentage of the gross or net
receipts derived from the farm, whether or not the gross income exceeds one
hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) per month. It is provided further that
the person who operates a licensed rooming house shall be considered in
business whether or not the gross income exceeds one hundred twenty-five
dollars per month ($125.00).
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.0705 Operating Loss; Carry Forward
   (a)   The portion of a net operating loss sustained in any taxable year
subsequent to January 1, 1967, allocable to the City may be applied against the
portion of the net profit of succeeding tax years allocable to the City, until
exhausted but in no event for more than five (5) taxable years immediately
following the year in which the loss occurred. No portion of a net operating
loss shall be carried back against net profits of any prior year.
   (b)   The portion of net operating loss sustained shall be allocated to the
City in the same manner as provided herein for allocating net profits to the
City.
   (c)   The Tax Administrator shall provide by Rules and Regulations the
manner in which such net operating loss carry forward shall be determined.
(Ord. No. 2067-05. Passed 11-28-05, eff. 12-5-05)
§ 191.0901 Sources of Income Not Taxed
   The tax provided for in this chapter shall not be levied on the following:
   (a)   Military pay or allowance of members of the armed forces of the United
States and of members of their reserve components, including the Ohio National
Guard;
   (b)   Income of religious, fraternal, charitable, scientific, literary, or
educational institutions to the extent that such income is derived from tax
exempt real estate, tax exempt tangible or intangible property or tax exempt
activities;
   (c)   Proceeds from welfare benefits, unemployment benefits, social security
benefits;
   (d)   Proceeds of insurance paid by reason of the death of the insured;
pensions, disability benefits, annuities, or gratuities not in the nature of
compensation for services rendered from whatever source derived;
   (e)   Receipts from seasonal or casual entertainment, amusements, sports
events, and health and welfare activities when any such are conducted by bona
fide charitable, religious, or educational organizations and associations;
   (f)   Alimony received;
   (g)   Personal earnings of any natural person under eighteen (18) years of
age;
   (h)   Compensation for personal injuries or for damages to property by way
of insurance or otherwise;
   (i)   Interest, dividends, gains, and other revenue from intangible property
described in RC 718.01(A)(5);
   (j)   Gains from involuntary conversion; cancellation of indebtedness, to
the extent exempt from federal income tax; interest on Federal obligations;
items of income already taxed by the State that the City is specifically
prohibited from taxing; and income of a decedent’s estate during the period of
administration, except such income from the operation of a business;
   (k)   An S corporation shareholder’s distributive share of net profits of
the S corporation to the extent such distributive shares are allocated or
apportioned to sources outside the State of Ohio other than any portion of the
distributive shares of net profits that represents wages as defined in Section
3121(a) of the Internal Revenue Code or net earnings from self-employment as
defined in Section 1402(a) of the Internal Revenue Service Code;
   (l)   The rental value of a parsonage, or the rental allowance furnished as
compensation and actually used for a parsonage, by a minister;
   (m)   Compensation and net profits, the taxation of which is prohibited by
the United States Constitution or any act of Congress limiting the power of the
states or their political subdivisions to impose net income taxes on income
derived from interstate commerce;
   (n)   Compensation and net profits, the taxation of which is prohibited by
the Constitution of the State or any act of the Ohio General Assembly limiting
the power of the City to impose net income tax;
   (o)   Only the income items listed in this Section
191.0901 are not subject to the tax imposed by this chapter. All other
compensation, net profits and other income earned and/or received by a taxpayer
shall be subject to the tax imposed by this chapter unless prohibited by State
or federal law.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.1101 Date for Filing Returns
   (a)   Each taxpayer who engages in business or whose qualifying wages are
subject to the tax imposed by this chapter, except as herein provided, shall,
whether or not a city income tax is due thereon, make and file a return on or
before April 30 of the year following November 28, 1966, and on or before April
30 of each year thereafter. When the return is made for a fiscal year or other
period different from the calendar year, the return shall be filed within four
(4) months from the end of such fiscal year or period.
   (b)   Unless the filing exemption in division (e) of this section applies,
for taxable years beginning after 2003, each taxpayer shall, whether or not a
city income tax is due thereon, make and file an annual city income tax return
or report on the fifteenth (15th) day of the fourth (4th) month following the
end of the taxpayer’s taxable year.
   (c)   No taxpayer shall be required to file an annual city income tax return
or report prior to the filing date for the corresponding tax reporting period
as prescribed for such taxpayer under the Internal Revenue Code.
   (d)   Tax returns required to be filed under this section shall be deemed
filed when postmarked by the United States Postal Service or the date of
receipt recorded by authorized delivery service as defined in RC 5703.056. Tax
returns otherwise delivered to the Tax Administrator during normal business
hours shall be deemed filed on the date received.
   (e)   The Tax Administrator is authorized to provide by regulation that the
return of an employer, showing the amount of tax deducted by the employer from
the qualifying wages of an employee, and paid by him, her or them to the Tax
Administrator shall be accepted as the return required of any employee whose
sole income, subject to tax under this chapter, is such qualifying wages. This
filing exemption is limited to nonresident taxpayers whose sole income is
qualifying wages for which the tax imposed by this chapter has been withheld
and remitted to the City by the employer.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.1102 Form and Content of Return
   The city income tax return shall be filed with the Tax Administrator on a
form prescribed by and obtainable upon request from the Tax Administrator or on
a generic form in accordance with RC 718.05, setting forth:
   (a)   The aggregate amounts of all qualifying wages, net profits and all
other taxable income earned and/or received by the taxpayer during the taxable
year and subject to the city income tax;
   (b)   The amount of the tax imposed by this chapter on such qualifying
wages, net profits; and all other taxable income;
   (c)   Such other pertinent statements, schedules, information, returns,
copies of federal or state tax returns or any other information as the Tax
Administrator may require; and
   (d)   In accordance with RC 718.051 and the Rules and Regulations, taxpayers
subject to the city income tax on the net profits from a business or profession
may file the city income tax return by using the Ohio Business Gateway.
(Ord. No. 2067-05. Passed 11-28-05, eff. 12-5-05)
§ 191.1103 Extension of Time for Filing Returns
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (g) of this section, any
taxpayer who has requested an extension for filing a federal income tax return
may request an extension for filing the city income tax return for the same
taxable year by filing a copy of the request for federal extension with the Tax
Administrator in accordance with RC 718.05 and the Rules and Regulations. Any
taxpayer not required to file a federal income tax return may request an
extension for filing the city income tax return in accordance with RC 718.05
and the Rules and Regulations.
   (b)   Requests for extensions are not automatic and may be denied in
accordance with RC 718.05.
   (c)   If granted, request for extensions filed before January 1, 2004, shall
extend the due date of the city income tax return for a period not less than
the period of the federal extension requested.
   (d)   For taxable years beginning after 2003, if the request for extension
to file the city income tax return is granted, the extended due date shall be
the last day of the month following the month to which the due date of the
federal income tax return has been extended.
   (e)   The granting of an extension to file the city income tax return does
not extend the last date to pay any city income tax due without penalty or
interest in accordance with Sections
191.1501 and
191.1502 of this chapter.
   (f)   No late filing penalty shall be imposed if the city income tax return
is filed on or before the due date as extended.
   (g)   In accordance with RC 718.051 and the Rules and Regulations, taxpayers
subject to the city income tax on the net profits from a business or profession
that have received an extension to file the federal income tax return by using
the Ohio Business Gateway will receive an extension to file the city income tax
return for the same taxable year provided that, the requirements of RC 718.051
are met. In accordance with that Section, the extended due date will be the
last day of the same month to which the due date for filing the federal return
has been extended.
   (h)   Extensions to file the city income tax return granted through the Ohio
Business Gateway do not extend the time to pay any city income tax due without
penalty or interest in accordance with Sections
191.1501 and
191.1502 of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.1104 Consolidated Returns
   (a)   Filing of consolidated returns may be permitted or required in
accordance with the Rules and Regulations prescribed by the Tax Administrator.
A consolidated return may be filed by any affiliated group of corporations
subject to the tax imposed by this chapter if that affiliated group filed for
the same taxable year a consolidated return for federal income tax purposes
pursuant to Section 1501 of the Internal Revenue Code. If an affiliated group
of corporations subject to the tax imposed by this chapter is required to file
a consolidated return or files a consolidated return in accordance with this
section, the affiliated group of corporations must continue to file
consolidated returns including that group of corporations and any other group
of corporations included in the federal consolidated filing group for all
subsequent taxable years that the group files a consolidated tax return for
federal tax purposes unless, on or before the due date for filing the city
income tax return for the taxable year, the affiliated group obtains written
permission from the Tax Administrator to file separate returns for that year.
   (b)   In the case of a corporation that carried on transactions with its
stockholders or with other corporations related by stock ownership,
interlocking directorates or some other method, or in case any person operates
a division, branch, factory, office, laboratory or activity within the City
constituting a portion only of its total business, the Tax Administrator shall
require such additional information as he or she may deem necessary to
ascertain whether net profits are properly allocated to the City. If the Tax
Administrator finds that net profits are not properly allocated to the City by
reason of transactions with stockholders or with other corporations related by
stock ownership, interlocking directorates or transactions with such division,
branch, factory, office, laboratory or activity or by some other method, the
Tax Administrator shall make such allocation to produce a fair and proper
allocation of net profits to the City.
(Ord. No. 2067-05. Passed 11-28-05, eff. 12-5-05)
§ 191.1105 Amended Returns
   (a)   Where necessary an amended return shall be filed in order to report
additional income and pay any additional city income tax due, or claim a refund
of city income tax overpaid, subject to the requirements, limitations, or both,
contained in Sections
191.1701 to
191.1703,
191.1902 and
191.1903. Such amended return shall be on a form prescribed by and obtainable
upon request from the Tax Administrator. A taxpayer may not change the method
of accounting, filing status or method of apportionment of the net profits
after the due date for filing the original city income tax return.
   (b)   Within three (3) months from the final determination of any federal
tax liability affecting the taxpayer’s city tax liability, such taxpayer shall
make and file an amended city return showing income subject to the city income
tax based upon such final determination of federal tax liability, and pay any
additional city income tax shown due thereon or make claim for refund of any
over payment.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.1301 Payment of Tax on Filing of Return
   (a)   The taxpayer making a city income tax return shall, at the time of the
filing thereof, pay to the Tax Administrator the amount of taxes shown as due
thereon. However, where any portion of the tax so due has been deducted at the
source pursuant to the provisions of Section
191.1302, or where any portion of the tax has been paid by the taxpayer
pursuant to the provisions of Section
191.1303, or where an income tax has been paid to another municipality, credit
for the amount so paid in accordance with Section
191.1902, shall be deducted from the amount shown to be due and only the
balance, if any, shall be due and payable at the time of filing the return.
   (b)   Subject to the limitations set forth in Section
191.1702, any taxpayer who has overpaid the amount of tax to which the City is
entitled under the provisions of this chapter may have such overpayment applied
against any subsequent liability hereunder or, at his or her election indicated
on the return, such overpayment, or part thereof, shall be refunded, provided
that no additional taxes or refunds of less than one dollar ($1.00) shall be
assessed, collected or refunded.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.1302 Collection at Source
   (a)   In accordance with this chapter, and the Rules and Regulations, each
employer, agent of any employer or other payer within or doing business within
the City who employs one (1) or more persons shall deduct when any qualifying
wages are earned and/or received by the taxpayer, the amount of city income tax
imposed by Section
191.0501 on the gross qualifying wages earned and/or received by the taxpayer
and except as otherwise provided in divisions (f) and (g) of this section
shall, on or before the twentieth day of the month following the close of each
calendar quarter make a return and pay to the Tax Administrator the amount of
city income taxes so deducted from such qualifying wages, subject to the
provisions of divisions (c) to (e) of this section. Returns shall be on a form
or forms prescribed by or acceptable to the Tax Administrator, and shall be
subject to the Rules and Regulations prescribed therefor by the Tax
Administrator. Such employer shall be liable for the payment of the city income
tax required to be deducted and withheld, whether or not such taxes have in
fact been withheld.
   (b)   Each employer, agent of any employer or other payer in collecting the
city income tax shall be deemed to hold the same, until payment is made by such
employer, agent of any employer or other payer to the City, as a trustee for
the benefit of the City and any such tax collected by such employer, agent of
any employer or other payer from his or her employees shall, until the same is
paid to the City, be deemed a trust fund in the hands of such employer, agent
of any employer or other payer. Each employer, agent of any employer and other
payer shall be liable for the payment of city income tax required to be
deducted and withheld, whether or not such taxes have in fact been withheld.
   (c)   Each employer, agent of any employer or other payer who deducts and
withholds city income tax of one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more per month
shall pay to the Tax Administrator before the twentieth of the following month
the amount of taxes so deducted on a monthly basis beginning with the first
month the employer, agent of any employer or other payer exceeds one hundred
dollars ($100.00) in city income taxes withheld.
   (d)   Payments shall be reported on a form or forms prescribed by and
obtainable upon request from the Tax Administrator.
   (e)   No employer, agent of an employer or other payer shall be required to
withhold the city income tax on qualifying wages or other taxable income paid
to domestic servants employed by such employer or other payer exclusively in or
about such employer or other payer’s residence, even though such residence is
in the City, but such employee shall be subject to all of the requirements of
this chapter.
   (f)   (1)   Any person who shall employ or contract for the services of any
entertainer, entertainment act, sports event, promotional booth, special event,
band, orchestra, rock group, theatrical performance; or
      (2)   Any person who, acting as a promoter, booking agent or employer,
engages the services of, or arranges the appearance of any entertainer,
entertainment act, sports event, band, orchestra, rock group, theatrical
performance in the City, and who makes any payment arising from said appearance
in the City shall be deemed to be an employer and shall, for purposes of the
collection of the city income tax, be required to withhold, report and remit as
required by this section to the Tax Administrator the city income tax at the
rate provided in Section
191.0501 hereof, on the gross amount so paid to the entertainer, athlete, etc.
on completion of the engagement for the services performed in the City. The
reports required by this section shall be made and filed on forms prescribed by
and obtainable from the Tax Administrator.
   (g)   Any person, as defined in Section
191.0314, who rents facilities to any entertainer, entertainment act, sport
event, promotional booth, special event, band, orchestra, rock group,
theatrical performance for use in performing services in the City, and who
makes any payment arising from said use of facilities shall be deemed to be an
employer and shall, for purposes of the collection of the city income tax, be
required to withhold, report and remit as required by this section to the Tax
Administrator the city income tax at the rate provided in Section
191.0501 hereof based on the gross amount so paid to the entertainer, athlete,
etc. on completion of the engagement for the services performed in the City.
The reports required by this section shall be made and filed on forms
prescribed by and obtainable from the Tax Administrator.
   (h)   For taxable years beginning after 2003, no employer or agent of an
employer or other payer shall be required to withhold tax with respect to any
amount other than qualifying wages. Nothing in this section prohibits an
employer from withholding tax on a basis greater than qualifying wages.
   (i)   Every employer, agent of an employer or other payer required to
withhold and remit the city income tax in accordance with this chapter, shall
be directly liable to the City for the payment of such tax, whether or not
actually withheld or collected.
   (j)   For taxable years beginning after 2003, no employer is required to
make any withholding with respect to an individual’s disqualifying disposition
of an incentive stock option if, at the time of the disqualifying disposition,
the individual is not an employee of the corporation with respect to whose
stock the option has been issued.
   (k)   (1)   An employee is not relieved from liability for paying the city
income tax by the failure of the employer to withhold the tax as required by
this Section
191.1302 or the employer’s exemption from the requirement to withhold the tax.
      (2)   The failure of an employer to remit to the City the tax withheld
relieves the employee from liability for that tax unless the employee colluded
with the employer in connection with the failure to remit the tax withheld.
   (l)   In accordance with RC 718.051, the Rules and Regulations of the State
Tax Commissioner, this chapter and the Rules and Regulations, any employer
subject to this Section
191.1302 may report the amount of city income tax withheld from qualifying
wages and remit such amounts by using the Ohio Business Gateway.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.1303 Declarations of Income Not Collected at Source
   Every person who anticipates earning and/or receiving any taxable income
which is not subject to Section
191.1302, or who engages in any business, profession, enterprise or activity
subject to the tax imposed by Section
191.0501 shall file a declaration setting forth such estimated income or the
estimated profit or loss from such business activity together with the
estimated tax due thereon, if any. However, if a person’s income is wholly from
qualifying wages from which the city income tax will be withheld and remitted
to the City in accordance with Section
191.1302, such person need not file a declaration.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.1304 Filing of Declaration
   (a)   For taxable years beginning after 2003, the declaration required by
Section
191.1303 shall be filed on or before April 15 of each year during the effective
period set forth in Section
191.0502 or on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month following the
date the taxpayer becomes subject to tax for the first time.
   (b)   For taxable years beginning after 2003, for those taxpayers reporting
on a fiscal year or period other than a calendar year, the declaration required
by Section
191.1303 shall be filed on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month
after the beginning of each fiscal year or period.
   (c)   In accordance with RC 718.051, the Rules and Regulations of the State
Tax Commissioner, this chapter, and the Rules and Regulations, any taxpayer
subject to the city income tax on the net profits from a business or profession
may file declarations of estimated net profits and pay estimated city tax due
thereon by using the Ohio Business Gateway.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.1305 Form of Declaration
   (a)   The declaration required by Section
191.1303 shall be filed upon forms prescribed by and obtainable from the Tax
Administrator, or acceptable generic form, and credit shall be taken for City
income tax to be withheld from any portion of such income. In accordance with
the provisions of Section
191.1902, credit may be taken for city income tax to be paid to or withheld and
remitted to another taxing municipality.
   (b)   The original declaration, or any subsequent amendment thereof, may be
increased or decreased on or before any subsequent quarterly payment date as
provided for herein.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.1306 Payment to Accompany Declaration
   (a)   For taxpayers who are individuals, the declaration of estimated city
income tax required by Section
191.1303, shall be accompanied by a payment of at least twenty-two and one-half
percent (22.5%) of such taxpayer’s estimated city income tax for the taxable
year, and at least twenty-two and one-half percent (22.5%) of such estimated
city income tax shall be paid on or before each of the last day of the seventh,
tenth and thirteenth months after the beginning of the taxable year.
   (b)   For taxpayers that are not individuals, the declaration of estimated
city income tax required by Section
191.1303, shall be accompanied by a payment of at least twenty-two and one-half
percent (22.5%) of such taxpayer’s estimated city income tax for the taxable
year, and at least twenty-two and one-half percent (22.5%) of such estimated
city tax shall be paid on or before each of the fifteenth day of the sixth,
ninth and twelfth months after the beginning of the taxable year.
   (c)   No declaration shall be deemed filed unless accompanied by the
required payment of estimated city income tax.
   (d)   Declarations required to be filed by Section
191.1303 shall be deemed filed when the declaration with required payment are
post-marked by the United States Postal Service or the date of receipt recorded
by authorized delivery service as defined in RC 5703.056. Declarations
otherwise delivered with the required payment to the Tax Administrator during
normal business hours shall be deemed filed on the date received.
   (e)   A declaration of estimated city income tax may be amended at any time,
in accordance with the Rules and Regulations. In the event that an amended
declaration has been filed, the unpaid balance shown due thereon shall be paid
in equal installments on or before the remaining payment dates set forth in
this section.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.1307 Annual Return
   For taxable years beginning after 2003, the annual city income tax return
required to be filed after filing such declaration or amended declaration shall
be filed on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month following the end
of the taxpayer’s taxable year (calendar or fiscal year). Any balance of city
income tax remaining due in accordance with Section
191.1301 shall be remitted with the city income tax return.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.1501 Interest on Unpaid Tax
   All city income taxes imposed and all monies withheld or required to be
withheld by employers under the provisions of this chapter and remaining unpaid
after they become due shall bear interest at the rate of one and one-half
percent (1.5%) per month or fraction thereof.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.1502 Penalties on Unpaid Tax
   In addition to interest as provided in Section
191.1501, penalties are imposed on all city income tax remaining unpaid after
it becomes due as follows:
   (a)   For failure to pay city income taxes due other than taxes withheld:
one and one-half percent (1.5%) of such outstanding tax per month for each
month that the tax remains outstanding or fraction thereof;
   (b)   For failure to file an annual city income tax return by the due date
or extended due date: a minimum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00);
   (c)   For failure to remit city income taxes withheld or required to be
withheld from employees: ten percent (10%) of the outstanding unremitted tax
per month or fraction thereof for each month that the unremitted tax remains
outstanding; and
   (d)   In accordance with the Rules and Regulations, the Tax Administrator
may impose such other interest and penalty assessment as the Tax Administrator
deems necessary for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of
this chapter.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.1503 Exceptions to Penalties
   A penalty shall not be assessed on an additional tax assessment made by the
Tax Administrator when a city income tax return has been filed in good faith
and the tax paid thereon within the time prescribed by Section
191.1101 provided that the additional tax assessment shall be paid within the
time prescribed by the Tax Administrator for payment of such additional tax;
and provided further, that in the absence of fraud, neither penalty nor
interest shall be assessed on any additional city income tax assessment
resulting from a federal audit, providing an amended city income tax return is
filed and the additional city income tax is paid within three (3) months after
a final determination of the federal income tax liability.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.1504 Abatement of Interest and Penalty
   Upon recommendation of the Tax Administrator, the Board of Review may abate
penalty or interest, or both, or upon a written appeal by the taxpayer upon the
refusal of the Tax Administrator to recommend abatement of penalty, interest,
or both, the Board may nevertheless abate penalty or interest, or both, for
reasonable cause shown.
   The Rules and Regulations may authorize the Tax Administrator to abate
penalty, interest, or both, for reasonable cause shown in certain
circumstances.
(Ord. No. 2067-05. Passed 11-28-05, eff. 12-5-05)
§ 191.1505 Violations
   No person shall:
   (a)   Fail, neglect, or refuse to make any return or declaration required by
this chapter; or
   (b)   Knowingly make any incomplete, false, or fraudulent return; or
   (c)   Willfully fail, neglect, or refuse to pay the tax, penalties or
interest imposed by this chapter; or
   (d)   Fail, neglect, or refuse to withhold city income tax from his or her
employees; or
   (e)   Refuse to permit the Tax Administrator or any duly authorized agent or
employee to examine his or her books, records, papers, and federal income tax
returns relating to the income or net profits of a taxpayer; or
   (f)   Fail to appear before the Tax Administrator and to produce his or her
books, records, papers or Federal income tax returns relating to the income or
net profits of a taxpayer upon order or subpoena of the Tax Administrator; or
   (g)   Refuse to disclose to the Tax Administrator any information with
respect to such person’s income or net profits or, in the case of a person
responsible for maintaining information relating to his or her employers’
income or net profits, such person’s employer’s income or net profits; or
   (h)   Fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter or any order or
subpoena of the Tax Administrator authorized hereby; or
   (i)   To avoid imposition or collection of city income tax, willfully give
to an employer or prospective employer false information as to his or her true
name, correct social security number and residence address, or willfully fail
to promptly notify an employer or a prospective employer of any change in
residence address and date thereof; or
   (j)   Fail, as an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer, to
maintain proper records of employees residence addresses, total wages paid and
city tax withheld, or to knowingly give the Tax Administrator false
information; or
   (k)   Fail to remit or cause to be remitted the city income tax withheld
from all qualifying wages of employees to the City as required by Section
191.1302; or
   (l)   Willfully fail, neglect, or refuse to make any payment of estimated
city income tax for any taxable year or part of any taxable year in accordance
with Section
191.1306; or
   (m)   Attempt to do anything whatsoever to avoid the payment of the whole or
any part of the tax, penalties or interest imposed by this chapter.
   (n)   For purposes of this Section
191.1505, any violation that does not specify a culpable mental state or
intent, shall be one of strict liability and no culpable mental state or intent
shall be required for a person to be guilty of that violation.
   (o)   For purposes of this Section
191.1505, the term “person” shall, in addition to the meaning prescribed in
Section
191.0314, include in the case of a corporation, association, pass-through
entity or unincorporated business entity not having any resident owner or
officer within the city, any employee or agent of such corporation,
association, pass-through entity or unincorporated business entity who has
control or supervision over or is charged with the responsibility of filing the
city income tax returns and making the payments of the city income tax as
required by Section
191.1101,
191.1302 and Section
191.1306.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.1506 Limitation of Prosecution
   Prosecutions for an offense made punishable under this chapter shall be
commenced within three (3) years after the commission of the offense, except
that in the case of fraud, failure to file a return, or the omission of twenty-
five percent (25%) or more of the taxable income required to be reported,
prosecutions shall be commenced within six (6) years after the commission of
the offense.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.1507 Failure to Procure Tax Forms
   The failure of any employer, other payer, taxpayer or person to receive or
procure a city income tax return, declaration or other required form shall not
excuse such employer, other payer, taxpayer or person from making any
information return, or city income tax return or declaration, from filing such
return, or from paying the city income tax due.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.1701 Unpaid Taxes Recoverable as Other Debts
   All taxes imposed by this chapter shall be collectible, together with any
interest and penalties thereon, as other debts of like amount are recoverable,
including, but not limited to, collection by suit. Any suit shall be brought
within three (3) years after the city income tax was due or the return was
filed, whichever is later. Except in the case of fraud, of omission of twenty-
five percent (25%) or more of taxable income required to be reported, or of
failure to file a return, no additional assessment shall be made after three
(3) years from the time the city income tax was due or the city income tax
return was filed, whichever is later.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.1702 Refund of Taxes Erroneously Paid
   (a)   Taxes erroneously paid shall not be refunded unless a claim for refund
is made within three (3) years from the date on which such payment was made or
the return was due, or within three (3) months after the final determination of
the federal tax liability, whichever is later.
   (b)   No interest shall be paid by the City on any refunded overpayment of
city income tax if the overpayment is refunded within ninety (90) days after
the due date for filing the city income tax return or ninety (90) days after
the complete return is filed, whichever is later. For purposes of computing the
payment of interest on overpayments, no amount of city income tax for any
taxable year shall be treated as having been paid before the date on which the
city income tax return for that taxable year was due, without regard to any
extension of time for filing that return. Interest on any overpayment of city
income tax shall be paid at the rate of interest prescribed by RC 718.12 and RC
5703.47.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.1703 Amounts of Less than One Dollar
   Amounts of less than one dollar ($1.00) shall not be collected or refunded.
(Ord. No. 2393-66. Passed 11-28-66, eff. 11-28-66)
§ 191.1901 Reserved
§ 191.1902 Cleveland Resident Subject to Income Tax in Other Municipality
   (a)   When a resident is subject to and has paid a municipal income tax in
another municipality on the same income taxable under this chapter, regardless
of whether such other municipality allows a credit to its residents, and the
rate of Cleveland’s municipal income tax is less than two and one-half percent
(2.5%), such resident may claim a credit of the amount of income tax paid to
the other municipality, but not in excess of fifty percent (50%) of the tax
imposed by this chapter. When a resident is subject to and has paid a municipal
income tax in another municipality on the same income taxable under this
chapter regardless of whether such other municipality allows a credit to its
residents and the rate of Cleveland’s municipal income tax is two and one-half
percent (2.5%) or more, such resident may claim a credit of the amount of
income tax paid to the other municipality which credit shall not exceed the tax
assessed by this chapter on the resident’s taxable income subject to tax by
another municipality.
   (b)   In the event a resident is entitled to credit for taxes paid another
municipality, such resident is required to file a return on a form in such
manner as the Tax Administrator may prescribe.
   (c)   Assignment of any claim for refund to which a resident may be entitled
from another municipality shall be tentatively accepted as payment of that
portion of city income tax represented by such assignment. However, if
satisfactory evidence is offered that the taxpayer is entitled to the claim
covered by the assignment, such taxpayer shall not be deprived of credit
therefor because of fault or neglect on the part of either municipality.
   (d)   In the event such resident fails, neglects or refuses to file such
return or form as is prescribed by the Tax Administrator, such resident shall
not be entitled to such credit and shall be considered in violation of this
chapter for failure to file a return and make payment of taxes due hereunder.
   (e)   A resident owner of a pass-through entity that does not conduct
business in the City and that has paid an income tax to another municipality
may claim a credit equal to the lesser of (i) the resident owner’s
proportionate share of the amount, if any, of income tax paid by the pass-
through entity to another municipality in the State; or (ii) the resident
owner’s proportionate share of the amount of city income tax that would be
imposed on the pass-through entity if the pass-through entity conducted
business in the City.
   (f)   In no case shall the amount of the credit allowed under division (e)
of this section exceed the tax assessed by this chapter on the resident owner’s
taxable income subject to tax by another municipality.
   (g)   The credits provided in RC 718.021 and RC 718.121 shall be available
to residents, if applicable.
   (h)   Except as otherwise provided in RC 718.021, RC 718.121 and RC 718.14,
this chapter and the Rules and Regulations, where a nonresident is subject to
the tax imposed by this chapter and is subject to tax on the same taxable
income in the municipality where such nonresident resides, no credit against
the city income tax levied by this chapter shall be allowed.
(Ord. No. 2067-05. Passed 11-28-05, eff. 12-5-05)
§ 191.1903 Claim for Credit
   Any claim for credit for taxes paid by a resident to another municipality on
the same income taxable under this chapter or claim for or assignment of any
refund due to the credit provided for in Section
191.1902, must be filed with the Tax Administrator on a form acceptable to the
Tax Administrator within three (3) years from the due date of the city income
tax return. If the resident, fails, neglects, or refuses to file such claim for
refund or credit within the time prescribed by this section, such failure,
neglect, or refusal shall render such credit, claim for refund, or assignment
null and void and the resident shall be liable for the full amount of tax
assessed by this chapter, together with interest and penalties.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.2001 Deposit of Funds
   All monies collected by the Tax Administrator under the provisions of this
chapter shall be kept in a fund segregated from and not commingled with any
other funds from any sources whatsoever.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.2002 Monthly Report of Undistributed Balance
   The Tax Administrator shall prepare and furnish to Cleveland City Council
each month a statement containing the following information:
   (a)   Total undistributed balance from the previous month;
   (b)   Actual income for the month of the report including a summary of the
amount of delinquent taxes, penalties and interest collected for that month;
   (c)   Disbursements made during the month, identifying to whom and from
which collection period.
   (d)   Undistributed balance and indicate thereon:
      (1)   Current income in the process of collection for current
distribution;
      (2)   Current income reserved for collection agency expenses;
      (3)   Funds belonging to nonparticipating municipalities and period of
collection of the fund;
      (4)   Sources of balance of fund, if any.
   For the purpose of this section “current income” means income received
during the preceding three (3) month period; “current distribution” means
quarterly distribution, and “source of funds” means the period of time during
which funds were collected.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.2101 Disbursement of Funds Collected
   The funds collected under the provisions of this chapter shall be disbursed
in the following manner:
   (a)   First, such part thereof as shall be necessary to defray all expenses
of collecting the city income tax levied by this chapter shall be paid.
   (b)   The balance remaining after payment of the expenses referred to in
division (a) hereof shall be deposited in the General Fund for Municipal
purposes set forth in Section
191.0101.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.2301 Receipt and Records of Tax
   The Tax Administrator shall collect and receive the tax imposed by this
chapter in the manner prescribed herein from the taxpayers, keep an accurate
record thereof, and report all monies so received.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.2302 Enforcement of Collection
   The Tax Administrator shall enforce payment of all income taxes owing to the
City, keep accurate records for a minimum of five (5) years, showing the amount
due from each taxpayer required to file a declaration of estimated municipal
income tax and make any return, or both, including returns of taxes withheld
and show the dates and amounts of payments thereof.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.2303 Authority to Make and Enforce Regulations
   (a)   The Tax Administrator is hereby charged with the enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter and is hereby empowered, subject to the approval of
the Board of Review, to adopt and promulgate and to enforce and interpret rules
and regulations relating to any matter or thing pertaining to the collection of
taxes and the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter,
including provisions for the re-examination and correction of returns.
   (b)   Upon the request of a taxpayer or employer subject to this chapter,
the Tax Administrator is empowered to issue Administrative Rulings interpreting
this chapter and the Rules and Regulations. Those Administrative Rulings shall
be binding and effective upon issuance as to the taxpayer or employer
requesting the Ruling. Administrative Rulings may be appealed to the Board of
Review.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.2304 Authority to Arrange Installment Payments
   (a)   The Tax Administrator is authorized to arrange for the payment of
unpaid taxes, interest and penalties on a schedule of installment payments, not
to exceed twelve (12) months, when the taxpayer has proved to the Tax
Administrator that, due to certain hardship conditions, he or she is unable to
pay the full amount of the tax due. Such authorization shall not be granted
until proper returns are filed by the taxpayer for all amounts owed by him or
her under this chapter.
   (b)   Failure to make any deferred payment when due, shall cause the total
unpaid amount, including penalty and interest, to become payable on demand, and
the provisions of Sections
191.1701 and
191.1505 shall apply.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.2305 Authority to Determine Amount of Tax Due
   In any case where a taxpayer has failed to file a return or has filed a city
income tax return which does not show the proper amount of tax due, the Tax
Administrator may determine the amount of city income tax appearing to be due
the City from the taxpayer and may send to such taxpayer a written statement
showing the amount of tax so determined, together with interest and penalties
thereon, if any.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.2306 Investigations
   The Tax Administrator, or any authorized agent, representative or employee,
is authorized to examine the books, papers, records and federal income tax
returns of any employer or of any taxpayer or any person subject to, or whom
the Tax Administrator believes is subject to the provisions of this chapter,
for the purpose of verifying the accuracy of any return made, or, if no return
was made, to ascertain the tax or withholding due under this chapter. Every
such employer, supposed employer, taxpayer or supposed taxpayer is directed and
required to furnish within fifteen (15) days upon written request by the
Administrator, or his or her duly authorized agent, representative, or
employee, the means, facilities and opportunities for making such examinations
and investigations as are hereby authorized.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.2307 Authority to Compel Production of Records
   The Tax Administrator is hereby authorized to order any person presumed to
have knowledge of the facts to appear before him or her and may examine such
person, under oath, concerning any income which was or should have been
reported or withheld for city income tax purposes or any transaction tending to
affect such income, and for this purpose may compel the production of books,
papers, records and federal income tax returns and the attendance of all
persons before him or her, whether as parties or witnesses, whenever he or she
believes such persons have knowledge of such income or information pertinent to
such inquiry.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.2308 Refusal to Produce Records
   The refusal to produce books, papers, records and federal income tax
returns, or the refusal to submit to such examination by any employer or
persons subject or presumed to be subject to the city income tax or by any
officer, agent or employee of a person subject to the city income tax or
required to withhold such tax or the failure of any person to comply with the
provisions of this chapter, including this section, or with an order or
subpoena of the Tax Administrator is a violation of this chapter punishable in
accordance with Section
191.99.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.2309 Confidential Nature of Information; Disclosure of Returns and Return
Information
   (a)   Any information gained as a result of returns, investigations,
hearings or verifications required or authorized by this chapter or RC Chapter
718 shall be confidential and no person shall disclose such information except
in accordance with a proper judicial order or in connection with the
performance of that person’s official duties or the official business of the
City as authorized by this chapter.
   (b)   The Tax Administrator may furnish copies of returns filed under this
chapter to the Internal Revenue Service and to the State Tax Commissioner.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.2310 Taxpayer Required to Retain Records
   Every taxpayer shall retain all records necessary to compute his or her city
income tax liability for a period of five (5) years from the date his or her
city income tax return is filed or the city income taxes required to be
withheld are paid.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.2311 Authority to Contract for Central Collection Facilities
   The Tax Administrator is authorized to enter into an agreement on behalf of
the City with any other municipality or village for the purpose of
administering the city income tax laws of the other municipality or village as
its agent and for the purpose of providing a central collection facility for
the collection of the city income tax on behalf of the other municipality or
village.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.2312 Withholding Taxes from Federal Employees
   The Tax Administrator is authorized to enter into an agreement on behalf of
the City with the United States Secretary of the Treasury for the purpose of
withholding city income or employment taxes from the compensation of federal
employees whose regular place of federal employment is within the territorial
jurisdiction of the City.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.2501 Board of Review Established
   A Board of Review, consisting of the Director of Public Utilities, or a
person or employee in the Department of Public Utilities designated by him or
her, the Director of Law, or an Assistant Director of Law designated by him or
her and a member of Council to be elected by that body, is hereby created and
shall be maintained to hear appeals by taxpayers of decisions and
Administrative Rulings issued by the Tax Administrator regarding a municipal
income tax obligation that is subject to appeal as provided in RC 718.11, this
chapter or the Rules and Regulations. The Board shall select, each year for a
one (1) year term, one (1) of its members to serve as Chairman and one (1) to
serve as Secretary. A majority of the members of the Board shall constitute a
quorum. The Board shall adopt its own procedural rules and shall keep a record
of its transactions. Any hearing by the Board may be conducted privately and
the provisions of Section
191.2309 with reference to the confidential character of information required
to be disclosed by this chapter shall apply to such matters as may be heard
before the Board on appeal.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.2502 Board to Approve Regulations and Hear Appeals
   All Rules and Regulations and amendments or changes thereto, which are
adopted by the Tax Administrator under the authority conferred by this chapter,
must be approved by the Board of Review before the same become effective. The
Board shall hear and pass on appeals from any Administrative Ruling or decision
issued by the Tax Administrator.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.2503 Right of Appeal
   In accordance with RC 718.11 and Rules and Regulations, any person
dissatisfied with any Administrative Ruling or decision of the Tax
Administrator that is made under the authority conferred by this chapter may
appeal therefrom to the Board of Review within thirty (30) days from the
announcement of such Administrative Ruling or decision by the Tax
Administrator. The Board shall, on hearing, have jurisdiction to affirm,
reverse or modify any such ruling or decision, or any part thereof. Such appeal
shall be deemed filed when postmarked by the United States Postal Service or
the date of receipt recorded by authorized delivery service as defined in RC
5703.056. Appeals otherwise delivered to the Tax Administrator during normal
business hours shall be deemed filed on the date received.
   In accordance with the procedures set forth in RC 5717.011, for matters
relating to taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2004, the taxpayer
or Tax Administrator may appeal decisions of the Board of Review to the State
Board of Tax Appeals or a court of common pleas as otherwise provided by law.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.2701 Declaration of Legislative Intent
   If any sentence, clause, section or part of this chapter, or any tax imposed
against, or exemption from tax granted to, any taxpayer or forms of income
specified herein is found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such
unconstitutionality, illegality or invalidity shall affect only such clause,
sentence, section or part of this chapter so found and shall not affect or
impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or other
parts of this chapter. It is hereby declared to be the intention of Council
that this chapter would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or
invalid sentence, clause, section or part thereof not been included in this
chapter.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 191.2702 Collection of Tax after Termination of Chapter
   (a)   This chapter shall continue effective insofar as the levy of taxes is
concerned until repealed, and insofar as the collection of taxes levied
hereunder and actions and proceedings for collecting any tax so levied or
enforcing any provisions of this chapter are concerned, it shall continue
effective until all of the taxes levied in the aforesaid period are fully paid
and any and all suits and prosecutions for the collection of taxes or for the
punishment of violations of this chapter have been fully terminated, subject to
the limitations contained in Sections
191.1701 to
191.1703 and
191.1505 to
191.1507.
   (b)   Annual returns due for all or any part of the last effective year of
this chapter shall be due on the date provided in Sections
191.1101 and
191.1302, as though the same were continuing.
(Ord. No. 2393-66. Passed 11-28-66, eff. 11-28-66)
§ 191.99 Penalty
   (a)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of Sections
191.1505 or
191.2308 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree for each
violation. Each violation constitutes a separate offense.
   (b)   Whoever violates Section
191.2309 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree for each such
disclosure. Each disclosure shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to
the above penalty, any employee of the City who violates Section
191.2309 shall be guilty of an offense punishable by immediate dismissal.
(Ord. No. 2208-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
CHAPTER 192 – 2016 MUNICIPAL INCOME TAX
192.01   Authority to Levy Tax
192.02   Purposes of Tax
192.03   Rate and Taxable Income
192.04   Statement of Procedural History; State Mandated Changes to Municipal
Income Tax
192.05   Effective Date
192.06   Definitions
192.07   Determining Municipal Taxable Income for Individuals
192.08   Domicile
192.09   Exemption for Member or Employee of General Assembly and Certain
Judges
192.10   Collection at Source; Withholding from Qualifying Wages
192.11   Collection at Source; Occasional Entrant
192.12   Collection at Source; Casino, Sports Gaming Facility, Sports Gaming,
and VLT
192.13   Determining Municipal Taxable Income for Taxpayers Who Are Not
Individuals
192.14   Net Profit; Income Subject to Net Profit Tax; Alternative
Apportionment
192.15   Consolidated Federal Income Tax Return
192.16   Tax Credit for Businesses that Foster New Jobs in Ohio
192.17   Tax Credits to Foster Job Retention
192.18   Declaration of Estimated Tax
192.19   Cleveland Resident Subject to Income Tax in Other Municipal
Corporation
192.20   Refundable Credit for Qualifying Loss
192.21   Credit for Person Working in Joint Economic Development District or
Zone
192.22   Credit for Tax Beyond Statute for Obtaining Refund
192.23   Return and Payment of Tax
192.24   Return and Payment of Tax; Individuals Serving in Combat Zone
192.25   Use of Ohio Business Gateway; Types of Filings Authorized
192.26   Extension of Time to File
192.27   Amended Returns
192.28   Refunds
192.29   Penalty, Interest, Fees, and Charges
192.30   Audit
192.31   Rounding
192.32   Authority of Tax Administrator; Administrative Powers of the Tax
Administrator
192.33   Authority of Tax Administrator; Compromise of Claim and Payment over
Time
192.34   Authority of Tax Administrator; Right to Examine
192.35   Authority of Tax Administrator; Requiring Identifying Information
192.36   Confidentiality
192.37   Fraud
192.38   Opinion of the Tax Administrator
192.39   Assessment; Appeal Based on Presumption of Delivery
192.40   Local Board of Tax Review; Appeal to Local Board of Tax Review
192.41   Actions to Recover; Statute of Limitations
192.42   Adoption of Rules
192.43   Rentals
192.44   Unpaid Taxes Recoverable as Other Debts
192.45   Receipt and Records of Tax
192.46   Enforcement of Collection
192.47   Authority to Determine Amount of Tax Due
192.48   Investigations
192.49   Authority to Compel Production of Records
192.50   Refusal to Produce Records
192.51   Taxpayer Required to Retain Records
192.52   Authority to Contract for Central Collection Facilities
192.53   Withholding Taxes from Federal Employees
192.54   Collection after Termination of Chapter
192.55   Savings Clause
192.56   Deposit of Funds
192.57   Filing Net Profit Taxes; Election to be Subject to Provisions of
Chapter
192.58   Definitions
192.59   Applicability; Taxable Situs; Apportionment
192.591   Alternative Net Profits Apportionment for Remote Employees
192.60   Information Provided to Tax Administrators; Confidentiality
192.61   Filing of Annual Return; Remittance; Disposition of Funds
192.62   Electronic Filing
192.63   Consolidated Returns
192.64   Failure to Pay Tax
192.65   Declaration of Estimated Taxes
192.66   Additional Penalties
192.67   Assessments Against Taxpayer
192.68   Refund Applications
192.69   Amended Returns
192.70   Examination of Records and Other Documents and Persons
192.71   Credits
192.72   Reckless Violations; Penalties
192.99   Violations; Penalty
Charter reference:
   Taxpayer's suit, Charter §
90
Cross-reference:
   Division of Taxation; Administrator, CO
127.30,
127.31
Statutory reference:
   Municipal income taxes, RC Ch. 718
   Payroll deductions, RC 9.42
   Power to levy income tax, O Const Art XVIII § 3
§ 192.01 Authority to Levy Tax
   (a)   The tax on income and the withholding tax established by this chapter
are authorized by Article XVIII, Section 3 of the Ohio Constitution. The tax on
income and the withholding tax established by this chapter are deemed to be
levied in accordance with, and to be consistent with, the provisions and
limitations of RC Chapter 718. This chapter is deemed to incorporate the
provisions of RC Chapter 718.
   (b)   The tax is an annual tax levied on the income of every person
residing, earning or receiving income in the municipal corporation, and shall
be measured by municipal taxable income. The municipality shall tax income at a
uniform rate. The tax is levied on municipal taxable income, as defined herein.
(Ord. No. 1412-15. Passed 11-23-15, eff. 1-1-16)
§ 192.02 Purposes of Tax
   (a)   To provide funds for the purposes of general municipal operations,
procurement of fixed assets or permanent improvements, payment of debt charges,
the elimination of deficits in city funds and for all other lawful purposes,
there shall be, and is hereby levied a tax on qualifying wages as defined in
this chapter, on net profits, and on all other municipal taxable income, as
hereinafter provided.
   (b)   Eight-ninths (8/9) of all monies derived from the tax so levied shall
be unrestricted and may be applied to any of the purposes described in division
(a) of this section.
   (c)   One-ninth (1/9) of all monies derived from the tax so levied shall be
credited to a special revenue fund to be known as the Restricted Income Tax
Fund. Moneys credited to the Restricted Income Tax Fund may be applied to only
the following purposes:
      (1)   Elimination of any deficit balance in any fund of the City,
provided that such deficit balance existed as of December 31, 1984, or exists
at any subsequent time during a fiscal emergency period, as defined in RC
118.01; or
      (2)   Payment of the principal of or interest or any premium on any bonds
or notes issued by the City to finance the construction, purchase or
acquisition of fixed assets or permanent improvements; or
      (3)   Payment of the costs of constructing or acquiring (whether by
outright purchase, lease or lease- purchase and irrespective of whether payment
is made in installments or in a lump sum) of fixed assets of permanent
improvements.
   (d)   The tax imposed by this chapter shall be levied on the income of every
person residing in or earning or receiving income in the City and this tax
shall be measured by municipal taxable income. The City is levying this tax
under the limitations specified in RC Chapter 718 and incorporates the
provisions of that chapter within this ordinance.
(Ord. No. 1412-15. Passed 11-23-15, eff. 1-1-16)
§ 192.03 Rate and Taxable Income
   For the purposes specified in Section
192.02, on and after January 1, 1967, an annual tax of one-half of one percent
(0.5%) per annum shall be imposed upon the hereinafter specified income;
provided that on and after July 1, 1968, the rate of tax shall be a total of
one percent (1%) per annum; and that on and after March 1, 1979, the rate of
such tax shall be a total of one and five-tenths percent (1.5%) per annum; and
that on and after January 1, 1981, the rate of tax shall be two percent (2%)
per annum; and that on and after January 1, 2017, the rate of tax shall be two
and one-half percent (2.5%) per annum. Such tax shall be imposed upon all
taxable income as follows:
   (a)   On all qualifying wages, net profits, rental income and other taxable
income earned and/or received on and after January 1, 1967 by residents of the
City;
   (b)   (1)   On all qualifying wages, earned and/or received on and after
January 1, 1967, by nonresidents of the City for work done or services
performed or rendered within the City or attributable to the City; on all net
profits earned and/or received by a nonresident from the operation or conduct
of any business or profession within the City; and on all other taxable income,
including rental income, earned and/or received by a nonresident derived from
or attributable to sources, events or transactions within the City;
      (2)   For nonresidents employed at a place of business or profession
within the City, only those qualifying wages earned and/or received by such
nonresident that are specifically attributable to a place or location worked
that is outside the City will be treated as earned outside the City;
   (c)   (1)   On the portion attributable to the City of the net profits
earned and/or received on and after January 1, 1967, of all resident
associations, pass- through entities or other unincorporated business entities
treated as a pass-through entity for federal income tax purposes or professions
or other activities, derived from sales made, work done, services performed or
rendered, and business, or other activities conducted in the City and/or
derived from sales made, work done, services performed or rendered and business
or other activities attributable to the City;
      (2)   On the portion of the distributive share of the net profits earned
and/or received on and after January 1, 1967, of a resident partner or owner of
a resident association, pass-through entity or other unincorporated business
entity treated as a pass- through entity for federal income tax purposes not
attributable to the City and upon which the City’s income tax has not been
imposed and levied;
   (d)   (1)   On the portion attributable to the City of the net profits
earned and/or received on and after January 1, 1967, of all nonresident
associations, pass- through entities or other unincorporated business entities
treated as a pass-through entity for federal income tax purposes, professions
or other activities, derived from sales made, work done, services performed or
rendered, and business, or other activities conducted in the City and/or
derived from sales made, work done, services performed or rendered and business
or other activities attributable to the City, whether or not such association,
pass-through entity or other unincorporated business entity treated as a pass-
through entity for federal income tax purposes has an office or place of
business in the City;
      (2)   On the portion of the distributive share of the net profits earned
and/or received on and after January 1, 1967, of a resident partner or owner of
a nonresident association, pass-through entity or other unincorporated business
entity treated as a pass-through entity for federal income tax purposes not
attributable to the City and upon which the City’s income tax has not been
imposed and levied from wherever such business is located;
   (e)   On the portion attributable to the City of the net profits earned and/
or received on and after January 1, 1967, of all corporations and all other
entities and business activities not defined herein as associations, pass-
through entity or unincorporated business entity treated as a pass-through
entity for federal income tax purposes derived from sales made, work done,
services performed or rendered, and business, or other activities conducted in
the City, and/or derived from sales made, work done, services performed or
rendered, and business, or other activities attributable to the City, whether
or not such corporations, entities or business activities have an office or
place of business in the City;
   (f)   On the net profits of an electric company, combined company or
telephone company apportioned and attributable to the City in accordance with
RC 718.01(F)(6) and RC Chapter 5745;
   (g)   On all income derived from prizes, awards, gaming, wagering, lotteries
or other similar games of chance by a resident from whatever source and from
anywhere derived and by a nonresident from whatever source when the prize,
award, gaming, wagering, lottery or other similar game of chance takes place in
the City. For purposes of this statute, the purchase of a lottery ticket or
similar instrument shall be deemed to occur in the City when said instrument is
purchased in the City;
   (h)   On all income earned and/or received from covenants not to compete or
similar agreements and on all income attributable to cancellation of
indebtedness to the extent reported on the taxpayer’s federal income tax
return;
   (i)   On all the guardian, executor, conservator, trustee or administrator
fees earned and/or received by a taxpayer in connection with the operation or
conduct of a business or profession;
   (j)   On all other compensation, net profits and income earned and/or
received by the taxpayer that is not specifically exempted from the tax imposed
by this chapter and RC Chapter 718;
   (k)   (1)   For taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2004, the net
profits from a business or profession shall be taxed only to the extent of the
taxpayer’s adjusted federal taxable income except that nothing shall be
construed as limiting the ability of the Tax Administrator to administer,
audit, or enforce the provisions of this chapter including making all necessary
adjustments and allocations to adjusted federal taxable income to produce a
fair and proper allocation of net profits to the City;
      (2)   Division (k)(1) of this section shall not apply to any taxpayer
required to file a return under RC 5745.03 or to the net profits from a sole
proprietorship;
   (l)   For taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2004, in the case
of a taxpayer who has a net profit from a business or profession that is
operated as a sole proprietorship, or in the case of a taxpayer who has a net
profit from a business and the taxpayer is an individual, the City shall not
tax or use as the base for determining the amount of the net profit that shall
be considered as having a taxable situs in the City, an amount other than the
net profit required to be reported on Internal Revenue Service Schedules C or F
from such sole proprietorship for the taxable year; and
   For taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2004, in the case of a
taxpayer who has a net profit from rental activity required to be reported on
Internal Revenue Service Schedule E, the City shall not tax or use as the base
for determining the amount of the net profit that shall be considered as having
a taxable situs in the City, an amount other than the net profit from rental
activities required to be reported by the taxpayer on Schedule E for the
taxable year.
(Ord. No. 182-16. Passed 7-13-16, eff. 7-17-16*)
*Note: The tax rate effective January 1, 2017, was approved by the electorate
on November 8, 2016.
§ 192.04 Statement of Procedural History; State Mandated Changes to Municipal
Income Tax
   (a)   Significant and wide-ranging amendments to RC Chapter 718 were enacted
by Am. Sub. H.B. 5, passed by the 130th General Assembly, and signed by
Governor Kasich on December 19, 2014, and H.B. 5 required municipal
corporations to conform to and adopt the provisions of RC Chapter 718 in order
to have the authority to impose, enforce, administer and collect a municipal
income tax.
   (b)   As mandated by H.B. 5, municipal income tax Ordinance No. 1412-15,
effective January 1, 2016, comprehensively amends
Chapter 192 under the provisions of RC Chapter 718 to allow the municipality to
continue the income tax and withholding tax administration and collection
efforts on behalf of the municipality.
(Ord. No. 1412-15. Passed 11-23-15, eff. 1-1-16)
§ 192.05 Effective Date
   (a)   
Chapter 192, effective January 1, 2016, and corresponding changes to RC Chapter
718, apply to municipal taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2016.
All provisions of this chapter apply to taxable years beginning 2016 and
succeeding taxable years.
   (b)   For municipal taxable years beginning before January 1, 2016, the
municipality shall continue to administer, audit, and enforce the income tax of
the municipality under
Chapter 191 and RC Chapter 718 and ordinances and resolutions of the
municipality as that chapter and those ordinances and resolutions existed
before January 1, 2016.
(Ord. No. 1412-15. Passed 11-23-15, eff. 1-1-16)
§ 192.06 Definitions
   Any term used in this chapter that is not otherwise defined in this chapter
has the same meaning as when used in a comparable context in laws of the United
States relating to federal income taxation, RC Chapter 718, or in RC Title
LVII, unless a different meaning is clearly required. If a term used in this
chapter that is not otherwise defined in this chapter is used in a comparable
context in both the laws of the United States relating to federal income tax
and in RC Title LVII or RC Chapter 718 and the use is not consistent, then the
use of the term in the laws of the United States relating to federal income tax
shall control over the use of the term in RC Title LVII.
   For purposes of this section, the singular shall include the plural, and the
masculine shall include the feminine and the gender-neutral.
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   “Adjusted federal taxable income” shall be used as defined in RC
Chapter 718.
   (b)   (1)   “Assessment” means any of the following:
         A.   A written finding by the Tax Administrator that a person has
underpaid municipal income tax, or owes penalty and interest, or any
combination of tax, penalty, or interest, to the municipal corporation;
         B.   A full or partial denial of a refund request issued under
division (b)(2) of Section
192.14 of this chapter;
         C.   A Tax Administrator’s denial of a taxpayer’s request for use of
an alternative apportionment method, issued under division (b)(2) of Section
192.14 of this chapter;
         D.   A Tax Administrator’s requirement for a taxpayer to use an
alternative apportionment method, issued under division (b)(3) of Section
192.14 of this chapter; or
         E.   For purposes of division (b)(1) of this section, an assessment
shall commence the person’s time limitation for making an appeal to the Local
Board of Tax Review under Section
192.40 of this chapter, and shall have “ASSESSMENT” written in all capital
letters at the top of such finding.
      (2)   “Assessment” does not include notice(s) denying a request for
refund issued under division (b)(3) of Section
192.28 of this chapter, a billing statement notifying a taxpayer of current or
past-due balances owed to the municipal corporation, a Tax Administrator’s
request for additional information, a notification to the taxpayer of
mathematical errors, or a Tax Administrator’s other written correspondence to a
person or taxpayer that does not meet the criteria prescribed by division (b)
(1) of this section.
   (c)   “Audit” means the examination of a person or the inspection of the
books, records, memoranda, or accounts of a person, ordered to appear before
the Tax Administrator, for the purpose of determining liability for a municipal
income tax
   (d)   “Board of Review” has same meaning as “Local Board of Tax Review”.
   (e)   “Calendar quarter” means the three (3) month period ending on the last
day of March, June, September, or December.
   (f)   “Casino operator” and “casino facility” have the same meanings as in
RC 3772.01.
   (g)   “Certified mail”, “express mail”, “United States mail”, “postal
service”, and similar terms include any delivery service authorized under RC
5703.056.
   (h)   “Compensation” means any form of remuneration paid to an employee for
personal services.
   (i)   “Disregarded entity” means a single member limited liability company,
a qualifying subchapter S subsidiary, or another entity if the company,
subsidiary, or entity is a disregarded entity for federal income tax purposes.
   (j)   “Domicile” means the true, fixed and permanent home of the taxpayer to
which, whenever absent, the taxpayer intends to return.
   (k)   “Exempt income” means all of the following:
      (1)   The military pay or allowances of members of the armed forces of
the United States or members of their reserve components, including the
national guard of any state;
      (2)   A.   Except as provided in division (k)(2)B. of this section,
intangible income;
         B.   A municipal corporation that taxed any type of intangible income
on March 29, 1988, to Section 3 of S.B. 238 of the 116th General Assembly, may
continue to tax that type of income if a majority of the electors of the
municipal corporation voting on the question of whether to permit the taxation
of that type of intangible income after 1988 voted in favor thereof at an
election held on November 8, 1988.
      (3)   Social security benefits, railroad retirement benefits,
unemployment compensation, pensions, retirement benefit payments, payments from
annuities, and similar payments made to an employee or to the beneficiary of an
employee under a retirement program or plan, long term disability payments
received from private industry or local, state, or federal governments or from
charitable, religious or educational organizations, and the proceeds of
sickness, accident, or liability insurance policies. As used in division (k)(3)
of this section, “unemployment compensation” does not include supplemental
unemployment compensation described in Section 3402(o)(2) of the Internal
Revenue Code;
      (4)   The income of religious, fraternal, charitable, scientific,
literary, or educational institutions to the extent such income is derived from
tax-exempt real estate, tax-exempt tangible or intangible property, or tax-
exempt activities;
      (5)   Compensation paid under RC 3501.28 or 3501.36 to a person serving
as a precinct election official to the extent that such compensation does not
exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for the taxable year. Such compensation
in excess of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for the taxable year may be
subject to taxation by a municipal corporation. A municipal corporation shall
not require the payer of such compensation to withhold any tax from that
compensation;
      (6)   Dues, contributions, and similar payments received by charitable,
religious, educational, or literary organizations or labor unions, lodges, and
similar organizations;
      (7)   Alimony and child support received;
      (8)   Awards for personal injuries or for damages to property from
insurance proceeds or otherwise, excluding compensation paid for lost salaries
or wages or awards for punitive damages;
      (9)   Income of a public utility when that public utility is subject to
the tax levied under RC 5727.24 or 5727.30. Division (k)(9) of this section
does not apply for purposes of RC Chapter 5745;
      (10)   Gains from involuntary conversions, interest on federal
obligations, items of income subject to a tax levied by the state and that a
municipal corporation is specifically prohibited by law from taxing, and income
of a decedent’s estate during the period of administration except such income
from the operation of a trade or business;
      (11)   Compensation or allowances excluded from federal gross income
under Section 107 of the Internal Revenue Code;
      (12)   Employee compensation that is not qualifying wages as defined in
division (hh) of this section;
      (13)   Compensation paid to a person employed within the boundaries of a
United States air force base under the jurisdiction of the United States air
force that is used for the housing of members of the United States air force
and is a center for air force operations, unless the person is subject to
taxation because of residence or domicile. If the compensation is subject to
taxation because of residence or domicile, tax on such income shall be payable
only to the municipal corporation of residence or domicile;
      (14)   Intentionally left blank;
      (15)   All of the municipal taxable income earned by individuals under
eighteen (18) years of age;
      (16)   A.   Except as provided in divisions (k)(16)B., C., and D. of this
section, qualifying wages described in division (b)(1) or (e) of Section
192.11 of this chapter to the extent the qualifying wages are not subject to
withholding for the municipality under either of those divisions.
         B.   The exemption provided in division (k)(16)A. of this section does
not apply with respect to the municipal corporation in which the employee
resided at the time the employee earned the qualifying wages.
         C.   The exemption provided in division (k)(16)A. of this section does
not apply to qualifying wages that an employer elects to withhold under
division (d)(2) of Section
192.11 of this chapter.
         D.   The exemption provided in division (k)(16)A. of this section does
not apply to qualifying wages if both of the following conditions apply:
            1.   For qualifying wages described in division (b)(1) of Section
192.11 of this chapter, the employee’s employer withholds and remits tax on the
qualifying wages to the municipal corporation in which the employee’s principal
place of work is situated, or, for qualifying wages described in division (e)
of Section
192.11 of this chapter, the employee’s employer withholds and remits tax on the
qualifying wages to the municipal corporation in which the employer’s fixed
location is located;
            2.   The employee receives a refund of the tax described in
division (k)(16)D.1. of this section on the basis of the employee not
performing services in that municipal corporation.
      (17)   A.   Except as provided in division (k)(17)B. or C. of this
section, compensation that is not qualifying wages paid to a nonresident
individual for personal services performed in the municipality on not more than
twenty (20) days in a taxable year.
         B.   The exemption provided in division (k)(17)A. of this section does
not apply under either of the following circumstances:
            1.   The individual’s base of operation is located in the
municipality.
            2.   The individual is a professional athlete, professional
entertainer, or public figure, and the compensation is paid for the performance
of services in the individual’s capacity as a professional athlete,
professional entertainer, or public figure. For purposes of division (k)
(17)B.2. of this section, “professional athlete”, “professional entertainer”,
and “public figure” have the same meanings as in Section
192.11 of this chapter.
         C.   Compensation to which division (k)(17) of this section applies
shall be treated as earned or received at the individual’s base of operation.
If the individual does not have a base of operation, the compensation shall be
treated as earned or received where the individual is domiciled.
         D.   For purposes of division (k)(17) of this section, “base of
operation” means the location where an individual owns or rents an office,
storefront, or similar facility to which the individual regularly reports and
at which the individual regularly performs personal services for compensation.
      (18)   Compensation paid to a person for personal services performed for
a political subdivision on property owned by the political subdivision,
regardless of whether the compensation is received by an employee of the
subdivision or another person performing services for the subdivision under a
contract with the subdivision, if the property on which services are performed
is annexed to a municipal corporation under RC 709.023 on or after March 27,
2013, unless the person is subject to such taxation because of residence. If
the compensation is subject to taxation because of residence, municipal income
tax shall be payable only to the municipal corporation of residence;
   (19)   Income the taxation of which is prohibited by the constitution or
laws of the United States.
   Any item of income that is exempt income of a pass-through entity under
division (k) of this section is exempt income of each owner of the pass-through
entity to the extent of that owner’s distributive or proportionate share of
that item of the entity’s income.
   (l)   “Form 2106” means Internal Revenue Service Form 2106 filed by a
taxpayer under the Internal Revenue Code.
   (m)   “Generic form” means an electronic or paper form that is not
prescribed by a particular municipal corporation and that is designed for
reporting taxes withheld by an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer,
estimated municipal income taxes, or annual municipal income tax liability,
including a request for refund.
   (n)   “Income” means the following:
      (1)   A.   For residents, all income, salaries, qualifying wages,
commissions, and other compensation from whatever source earned or received by
the resident, including the resident’s distributive share of the net profit of
pass-through entities owned directly or indirectly by the resident and any net
profit of the resident, except as provided in division (w)(4) of this section.
         B.   For the purposes of division (n)(1)A. of this section:
            1.   Any net operating loss of the resident incurred in the taxable
year and the resident’s distributive share of any net operating loss generated
in the same taxable year and attributable to the resident’s ownership interest
in a pass-through entity shall be allowed as a deduction, for that taxable year
and the following five (5) taxable years, against any other net profit of the
resident or the resident’s distributive share of any net profit attributable to
the resident’s ownership interest in a pass-through entity until fully
utilized, subject to division (n)(1)D. of this section;
            2.   The resident’s distributive share of the net profit of each
pass-through entity owned directly or indirectly by the resident shall be
calculated without regard to any net operating loss that is carried forward by
that entity from a prior taxable year and applied to reduce the entity’s net
profit for the current taxable year.
         C.   Division (n)(1)B. of this section does not apply with respect to
any net profit or net operating loss attributable to an ownership interest in
an S corporation unless shareholders’ distributive shares of net profits from S
corporations are subject to tax in the municipal corporation as provided in
division (n)(5) of this section.
         D.   Any amount of a net operating loss used to reduce a taxpayer’s
net profit for a taxable year shall reduce the amount of net operating loss
that may be carried forward to any subsequent year for use by that taxpayer. In
no event shall the cumulative deductions for all taxable years with respect to
a taxpayer’s net operating loss exceed the original amount of that net
operating loss available to that taxpayer.
      (2)   In the case of nonresidents, all income, salaries, qualifying
wages, commissions, and other compensation from whatever source earned or
received by the nonresident for work done, services performed or rendered, or
activities conducted in the municipality, including any net profit of the
nonresident, but excluding the nonresident’s distributive share of the net
profit or loss of only pass-through entities owned directly or indirectly by
the nonresident.
      (3)   For taxpayers that are not individuals, net profit of the taxpayer;
      (4)   Lottery, sweepstakes, gambling and sports winnings, winnings from
games of chance, and prizes and awards won by residents in any jurisdiction and
by nonresidents when such winnings result from a purchase or activity conducted
in the City of Cleveland. If the taxpayer is a professional gambler for federal
income tax purposes, the taxpayer may deduct related wagering losses and
expenses to the extent authorized under the Internal Revenue Code and claimed
against such winnings. Credit for tax withheld or paid to another municipal
corporation on such winnings paid to the municipal corporation where winnings
occur is limited to the credit as specified in Section
192.19 of this chapter.
      (5)   For residents, an S corporation shareholder’s distributive share of
net profits of the S corporation to the extent the distributive share would be
allocated to this state under divisions (B)(1) and (B)(2) of RC 5733.05 if the
S corporation were a corporation subject to taxes imposed under RC Chapter
5733, and the tax shall apply to the distributive share of a shareholder of an
S corporation in the hands of the shareholder of the S corporation.
   (o)   “Intangible income” is used as it is defined in RC Chapter 718.
   (p)   “Internal Revenue Code” means the “Internal Revenue Code of 1986,” 100
Sta. 2085, 26 U.S.C.A. 1, as amended.
   (q)   “Limited liability company” means a limited liability company formed
under RC Chapter 1705 or under the laws of another state.
   (r)   “Local Board of Tax Review” and “Board of Tax Review” means the entity
created under Section
192.18 of this chapter.
   (s)   “Municipal corporation” means, in general terms, a status conferred
upon a local government unit, by state law giving the unit certain autonomous
operating authority such as the power of taxation, power of eminent domain,
police power and regulatory power, and includes a joint economic development
district or joint economic development zone that levies an income tax under RC
715.691, 715.70, 715.71, or 715.74.
   (t)   (1)   “Municipal taxable income” means the following:
         A.   For a person other than an individual, income reduced by exempt
income to the extent otherwise included in income and then, as applicable,
apportioned or sitused to the municipality under Section
192.14 of this chapter, and further reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss
carryforward available to the person for the municipality.
         B.   1.   For an individual who is a resident of a municipality other
than a qualified municipal corporation, income reduced by exempt income to the
extent otherwise included in income, then reduced as provided in division (t)
(2) of this section, and further reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss
carryforward available to the individual for the municipality.
            2.   For an individual who is a resident of a qualified municipal
corporation, Ohio adjusted gross income reduced by income exempted, and
increased by deductions excluded, by the qualified municipal corporation from
the qualified municipal corporation’s tax on or before December 31, 2013. If a
qualified municipal corporation, on or before December 31, 2013, exempts income
earned by individuals who are not residents of the qualified municipal
corporation and net profit of persons that are not wholly located within the
qualified municipal corporation, such individual or person shall have no
municipal taxable income for the purposes of the tax levied by the qualified
municipal corporation and may be exempted by the qualified municipal
corporation from the requirements of RC 718.03.
         C.   For an individual who is a nonresident of the municipality,
income reduced by exempt income to the extent otherwise included in income and
then, as applicable, apportioned or sitused to the municipality under Section
192.14 of this chapter, then reduced as provided in division (t)(2) of this
section, and further reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward
available to the individual for the municipality.
      (2)   In computing the municipal taxable income of a taxpayer who is an
individual, the taxpayer may subtract, as provided in division (t)(1)B.1. or C.
of this section, the amount of the individual’s employee business expenses
reported on the individual’s Form 2106 that the individual deducted for federal
income tax purposes for the taxable year, subject to the limitation imposed by
Section 67 of the Internal Revenue Code. For the municipal corporation in which
the taxpayer is a resident, the taxpayer may deduct all such expenses allowed
for federal income tax purposes. For a municipal corporation in which the
taxpayer is not a resident, the taxpayer may deduct such expenses only to the
extent the expenses are related to the taxpayer’s performance of personal
services in that nonresident municipal corporation.
   (u)   “Municipality” means the City of Cleveland.
   (v)   “Net operating loss” means a loss incurred by a person in the
operation of a trade or business. “Net operating loss” does not include
unutilized losses resulting from basis limitations, at-risk limitations, or
passive activity loss limitations.
   (w)   (1)   “Net profit” for a person other than an individual means
adjusted federal taxable income.
      (2)   “Net profit” for a person who is an individual means the
individual’s net profit required to be reported on Schedule C, Schedule E, or
Schedule F reduced by any net operating loss carried forward. For the purposes
of this division, the net operating loss carried forward shall be calculated
and deducted in the same manner as provided in RC Chapter 718.
      (3)   For the purposes of this chapter, and notwithstanding division (w)
(1) of this section, net profit of a disregarded entity shall not be taxable as
against that disregarded entity, but shall instead be included in the net
profit of the owner of the disregarded entity.
      (4)   A.   For purposes of this chapter, “publicly traded partnership”
means any partnership, an interest in which is regularly traded on an
established securities market. A “publicly traded partnership” may have any
number of partners.
         B.   For the purposes of this chapter, and not withstanding any other
provision of this chapter, the net profit of a publicly traded partnership that
makes the election described in division (w)(4) of this section shall be taxed
as if the partnership were a C corporation, and shall not be treated as the net
profit or income of any owner of the partnership.
         C.   A publicly traded partnership that is treated as a partnership
for federal income tax purposes and that is subject to tax on its net profits
in one or more municipal corporations in this state may elect to be treated as
a C corporation for municipal income tax purposes. The publicly traded
partnership shall make the election in every municipal corporation in which the
partnership is subject to taxation on its net profits. The election shall be
made on the annual tax return filed in each such municipal corporation. Once
the election is made, the election is binding for a five (5) year period
beginning with the first taxable year of the initial election. The election
continues to be binding for each subsequent five (5) year period unless the
taxpayer elects to discontinue filing municipal income tax returns as a C
corporation for municipal purposes under division (w)(4)D. of this section.
         D.   An election to discontinue filing as a C corporation must be made
in the first year following the last year of a five (5) year election period in
effect under division (w)(4)C. of this section. The election to discontinue
filing as a C corporation is binding for a five (5) year period beginning with
the first taxable year of the election and continues to be binding for each
subsequent five (5) year period unless the taxpayer elects to discontinue
filing municipal income tax returns as a partnership for municipal purposes. An
election to discontinue filing as a partnership must be made in the first year
following the last year of a five (5) year election period.
         E.   The publicly traded partnership shall not be required to file the
election with any municipal corporation in which the partnership is not subject
to taxation on its net profits, but division (w)(4) of this section applies to
all municipal corporations in which an individual owner of the partnership
resides.
         F.   The individual owners of the partnership not filing as a C
corporation shall be required to file with their municipal corporation of
residence, and report partnership distribution of net profit.
   (x)   “Nonresident” means an individual that is not a resident of the
municipality.
   (y)   “Ohio Business Gateway” means the online computer network system,
created under RC 125.30, that allows persons to electronically file business
reply forms with state agencies and includes any successor electronic filing
and payment system.
   (z)   “Other payer” means any person, other than an individual’s employer or
the employer’s agent, which pays an individual any amount included in the
federal gross income of the individual. “Other payer” includes casino operators
and video lottery terminal sales agents.
   (aa)   “Pass-through entity” means a partnership not treated as an
association taxable as a C corporation for federal income tax purposes, a
limited liability company not treated as an association taxable as a C
corporation for federal income tax purposes, an S corporation, or any other
class of entity from which the income or profits of the entity are given pass-
through treatment for federal income tax purposes. “Pass-through entity” does
not include a trust, estate, grantor of a grantor trust, or disregarded entity.
   (bb)   “Pension” means a retirement benefit plan, as defined by RC Chapter
718 and Central Collection Agency (CCA) Rules and Regulations.
   (cc)   “Person” includes individuals, firms, companies, joint stock
companies, business trusts, estates, trusts, partnerships, limited liability
partnerships, limited liability companies, associations, C corporations, S
corporations, governmental entities, and any other entity.
   (dd)   “Postal service” means the United States Postal Service, or private
delivery service delivering documents and packages within an agreed upon
delivery schedule, or any other carrier service delivering the item.
   (ee)   “Postmark date,” “date of postmark,” and similar terms include the
date recorded and marked by a delivery service and recorded electronically to a
database kept in the regular course if its business and marked on the cover in
which the payment or document is enclosed, the date on which the payment or
document was given to the delivery service for delivery.
   (ff)   (1)   “Pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward” means any net
operating loss incurred in a taxable year beginning before January 1, 2017, to
the extent such loss was permitted, by a resolution or ordinance of the
municipality that was adopted by the municipality before January 1, 2016, to be
carried forward and utilized to offset income or net profit generated in such
municipality in future taxable years.
      (2)   For the purpose of calculating municipal taxable income, any pre-
2017 net operating loss carryforward may be carried forward to any taxable
year, including taxable years beginning in 2017 or thereafter, for the number
of taxable years provided in the resolution or ordinance or until fully
utilized, whichever is earlier.
   (gg)   “Qualified municipal corporation” means a municipal corporation that,
by resolution or ordinance adopted on or before December 31, 2011, adopted Ohio
adjusted gross income, as defined by RC 5747.01, as the income subject to tax
for the purposes of imposing a municipal income tax.
   (hh)   “Qualifying wages” means wages, as defined in Section 3121(a) of the
Internal Revenue Code, without regard to any wage limitations, adjusted as
follows:
      (1)   Deduct the following amounts:
         A.   Any amount included in wages if the amount constitutes
compensation attributable to a plan or program described in Section 125 of the
Internal Revenue Code.
         B.   Any amount included in wages if the amount constitutes payment on
account of a disability related to sickness or an accident paid by a party
unrelated to the employer, agent of an employer, or other payer.
         C.   Any amount included in wages that is exempt income.
      (2)   Add the following amounts:
         A.   Any amount not included in wages solely because the employee was
employed by the employer before April 1, 1986.
         B.   Any amount not included in wages because the amount arises from
the sale, exchange, or other disposition of a stock option, the exercise of a
stock option, or the sale, exchange, or other disposition of stock purchased
under a stock option. Division (hh)(2)B. of this section applies only to those
amounts constituting ordinary income.
         C.   Any amount not included in wages if the amount is an amount
described in Section 401(k), 403(b), or 457 of the Internal Revenue Code.
Division (hh)(2)C. of this section applies only to employee contributions and
employee deferrals.
         D.   Any amount that is supplemental unemployment compensation
benefits described in Section 3402(o)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code and not
included in wages.
         E.   Any amount received that is treated as self-employment income for
federal tax purposes under Section 1402(a)(8) of the Internal Revenue Code.
         F.   Any amount not included in wages if all of the following apply:
            1.   For the taxable year the amount is employee compensation that
is earned outside of the United States and that either is included in the
taxpayer’s gross income for federal income tax purposes or would have been
included in the taxpayer’s gross income for such purposes if the taxpayer did
not elect to exclude the income under Section 911 of the Internal Revenue Code;
            2.   For no preceding taxable year did the amount constitute wages
as defined in Section 3121(a) of the Internal Revenue Code;
            3.   For no succeeding taxable year will the amount constitute
wages; and
            4.   For any taxable year the amount has not otherwise been added
to wages under either division (hh)(2) of this section or RC 718.03, as that
section existed before the effective date of H.B. 5 of the 130th general
assembly, March 23, 2015.
   (ii)   “Qualifying remote employee or owner”; “Qualifying remote work
location”; “Reporting location”; and “Qualifying reporting location” shall have
the same meaning as set forth in RC Chapter 718.
   (jj)   “Related entity” means any of the following:
      (1)   An individual stockholder, or a member of the stockholder’s family
enumerated in Section 318 of the Internal Revenue Code, if the stockholder and
the members of the stockholder’s family own directly, indirectly, beneficially,
or constructively, in the aggregate, at least fifty percent (50%) of the value
of the taxpayer’s outstanding stock;
      (2)   A stockholder, or a stockholder’s partnership, estate, trust, or
corporation, if the stockholder and the stockholder’s partnerships, estates,
trusts, or corporations own directly, indirectly, beneficially, or
constructively, in the aggregate, at least fifty percent (50%) of the value of
the taxpayer’s outstanding stock;
      (3)   A corporation, or a party related to the corporation in a manner
that would require an attribution of stock from the corporation to the party or
from the party to the corporation under division (jj)(4) of this section,
provided the taxpayer owns directly, indirectly, beneficially, or
constructively, at least fifty percent (50%) of the value of the corporation’s
outstanding stock;
      (4)   The attribution rules described in Section 318 of the Internal
Revenue Code apply for the purpose of determining whether the ownership
requirements in divisions (jj)(1) to (3) of this section have been met.
   (kk)   “Related member” means a person that, with respect to the taxpayer
during all or any portion of the taxable year, is either a related entity, a
component member as defined in Section 1563(b) of the Internal Revenue Code, or
a person to or from whom there is attribution of stock ownership under Section
1563(e) of the Internal Revenue Code except, for purposes of determining
whether a person is a related member under this division, “twenty percent
(20%)” shall be substituted for “5 percent” wherever “5 percent” appears in
Section 1563(e) of the Internal Revenue Code.
   (ll)   “Resident” means an individual who is domiciled in the municipality
as determined under Section
192.08 of this chapter.
   (mm)   “S corporation” means a person that has made an election under
subchapter S of Chapter 1 of Subtitle A of the Internal Revenue Code for its
taxable year.
   (nn)   “Schedule C” means Internal Revenue Service Schedule C (Form 1040)
filed by a taxpayer under the Internal Revenue Code.
   (oo)   “Schedule E” means Internal Revenue Service Schedule E (Form 1040)
filed by a taxpayer under the Internal Revenue Code.
   (pp)   “Schedule F” means Internal Revenue Service Schedule F (Form 1040)
filed by a taxpayer under the Internal Revenue Code.
   (qq)   “Single member limited liability company” means a limited liability
company that has one (1) direct member.
   (rr)   “Small employer” means any employer that had total revenue of less
than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) during the preceding taxable
year. For purposes of this division, “total revenue” means receipts of any type
or kind, including, but not limited to, sales receipts; payments; rents;
profits; gains, dividends, and other investment income; commissions; premiums;
money; property; grants; contributions; donations; gifts; program service
revenue; patient service revenue; premiums; fees, including premium fees and
service fees; tuition payments; unrelated business revenue; reimbursements; any
type of payment from a governmental unit, including grants and other
allocations; and any other similar receipts reported for federal income tax
purposes or under generally accepted accounting principles. “Small employer”
does not include the federal government; any state government, including any
state agency or instrumentality; any political subdivision; or any entity
treated as a government for financial accounting and reporting purposes.
   (ss)   “Tax administrator” means the Commissioner of the Division of
Taxation charged with direct responsibility for administration of an income tax
levied by the municipality under this chapter.
   (tt)   “Tax return preparer” means any individual described in Section 7701
(a)(36) of the Internal Revenue Code and 26 C.F.R. 301.7701-15 .
   (uu)   “Taxable year” means the corresponding tax reporting period as
prescribed for the taxpayer under the Internal Revenue Code.
   (vv)   (1)   “Taxpayer” means a person subject to a tax levied on income by
a municipal corporation in accordance with this chapter. “Taxpayer” does not
include a grantor trust or, except as provided in division (vv)(2)A. of this
section, a disregarded entity.
      (2)   A.   A single member limited liability company that is a
disregarded entity for federal tax purposes may be a separate taxpayer from its
single member in all Ohio municipal corporations in which it either filed as a
separate taxpayer or did not file for its taxable year ending in 2003, if all
of the following conditions are met:
            1.   The limited liability company’s single member is also a
limited liability company.
            2.   The limited liability company and its single member were
formed and doing business in one (1) or more Ohio municipal corporations for at
least five (5) years before January 1, 2004.
            3.   Not later than December 31, 2004, the limited liability
company and its single member each made an election to be treated as a separate
taxpayer under division (L) of RC 718.01 as this section existed on December
31, 2004.
            4.   The limited liability company was not formed for the purpose
of evading or reducing Ohio municipal corporation income tax liability of the
limited liability company or its single member.
            5.   The Ohio municipal corporation that was the primary place of
business of the sole member of the limited liability company consented to the
election.
         B.   For purposes of division (vv)(2)A.5. of this section, a municipal
corporation was the primary place of business of a limited liability company
if, for the limited liability company’s taxable year ending in 2003, its income
tax liability was greater in that municipal corporation than in any other
municipal corporation in Ohio, and that tax liability to that municipal
corporation for its taxable year ending in 2003 was at least four hundred
thousand dollars ($400,000.00).
   (ww)   “Taxpayers’ rights and responsibilities” is used as defined in RC
Chapter 718.
   (xx)   “Video lottery terminal” has the same meaning as in RC 3770.21.
   (yy)   “Video lottery terminal sales agent” means a lottery sales agent
licensed under RC Chapter 3770 to conduct video lottery terminals on behalf of
the state under RC 3770.21.
(Ord. No. 1344-2023. Passed 11-27-23, eff. 11-28-23)
§ 192.07 Determining Municipal Taxable Income for Individuals
   (a)   “Municipal taxable income” for a resident of the municipality is
calculated as follows:
      (1)   “Income” reduced by “exempt income” to the extent such exempt
income is otherwise included in income, reduced by allowable employee business
expense deduction as found in division (t)(2) of Section
192.06 of this chapter, further reduced by any “pre-2017 net operating loss
carryforward” equals “municipal taxable income”.
         A.   “Income” is defined in division (n) of Section
192.06 of this chapter.
         B.   “Qualifying wages” is defined in division (hh) of Section
192.06 of this chapter.
         C.   “Net profit” is included in “income”, and is defined in division
(w) of Section
192.06 of this chapter. This section also provides that the net operating loss
carryforward shall be calculated and deducted in the same manner as provided in
RC Chapter 718. Treatment of net profits received by an individual taxpayer
from rental real estate is provided in division (e) of Section
192.14.
         D.   Division (n) of Section
192.06 provides the following: offsetting and net operating loss carryforward
treatment in (n)(1)B.1.; resident’s distributive share of net profit from pass
through entity treatment in (n)(1)B.2.; treatment of S corporation distributive
share of net profit in the hands of the shareholder in (n)(1)C.; restriction of
amount of loss permitted to be carried forward for use by taxpayer in a
subsequent taxable year in (n)(1)D.
         E.   “Pass through entity” is defined in division (aa) of Section
192.06 of this chapter.
      (2)   “Exempt income” is defined in division (k) of Section
192.06 of this chapter.
      (3)   Allowable employee business expense deduction is described in
division (t)(2) of Section
192.06 of this chapter, and is subject to the limitations provided in that
section.
      (4)   “Pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward” is defined in division
(ff) of Section
192.06 of this chapter.
   (b)   “Municipal taxable income” for a nonresident of the municipality is
calculated as follows:
      (1)   “Income” reduced by “exempt income” to the extent such exempt
income is otherwise included in income, as applicable, apportioned or sitused
to the municipality as provided in Section
192.14 of this chapter, reduced by allowable employee business expense
deduction as found in (t)(2) of Section
192.06 of this chapter, further reduced by any “pre-2017 net operating loss
carryforward” equals “municipal taxable income”.
         A.   “Income” is defined in division (n) of Section
192.06 of this chapter.
         B.   “Qualifying Wages” is defined in division (hh) of Section
192.06 of this chapter.
         C.   “Net profit” is included in “income”, and is defined in division
(w) of Section
192.06 of this chapter. This section also provides that the net operating loss
carryforward shall be calculated and deducted in the same manner as provided in
RC Chapter 718. “Net profit” for a nonresident individual includes any net
profit of the nonresident, but excludes the distributive share of net profit or
loss of only pass through entity owned directly or indirectly by the
nonresident.
         D.   “Pass through entity” is defined in division (aa) of Section
192.06 of this chapter.
      (2)   “Exempt income” is defined in division (k) of Section
192.06 of this chapter.
      (3)   “Apportioned or sitused to the municipality as provided in Section
192.14 of this chapter” includes the apportionment of net profit income
attributable to work done or services performed in the municipality. Treatment
of net profits received by an individual taxpayer from rental real estate is
provided in division (e) of Section
192.14.
      (4)   “Allowable employee business expense deduction” as described in
division (t)(2) of Section
192.06 of this chapter, is subject to the limitations provided in that section.
For a nonresident of the municipality, the deduction is limited to the extent
the expenses are related to the performance of personal services by the
nonresident in the municipality.
      (5)   “Pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward” is defined in division
(ff) of Section
192.06 of this chapter.
   (c)   For the purposes specified in Section
192.02, on and after January 1, 1967, an annual tax of one-half of one percent
(0.5%) per annum shall be imposed upon all municipal taxable income; provided
that on and after July 1, 1968, the rate of tax shall be a total of one percent
(1%) per annum; and that on and after March 1, 1979, the rate of such tax shall
be a total of one and five-tenths percent (1.5%) per annum; and that on and
after January 1, 1981, the rate of tax shall be two percent (2%) per annum; and
that on or after January 1, 2017, the rate of tax shall be two and one-half
percent (2.5%) per annum. Such tax shall be imposed upon all municipal taxable
income.
(Ord. No. 1262-2022. Passed 12-5-22, eff. 12-7-22)
§ 192.08 Domicile
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Domicile” means the true, fixed and permanent home of the taxpayer
to which whenever absent, the taxpayer intends to return.
      (2)   An individual is presumed to be domiciled in the municipality for
all or part of a taxable year if the individual was domiciled in the
municipality on the last day of the immediately preceding taxable year or if
the Tax Administrator reasonably concludes that the individual is domiciled in
the municipality for all or part of the taxable year.
      (3)   An individual may rebut the presumption of domicile described in
division (a)(1) of this section if the individual establishes by a
preponderance of the evidence that the individual was not domiciled in the
municipality for all or part of the taxable year.
   (b)   For the purpose of determining whether an individual is domiciled in
the municipality for all or part of a taxable year, factors that may be
considered include, but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   The individual’s domicile in other taxable years;
      (2)   The location at which the individual is registered to vote;
      (3)   The address on the individual’s driver’s license;
      (4)   The location of real estate for which the individual claimed a
property tax exemption or reduction allowed on the basis of the individual’s
residence or domicile;
      (5)   The location and value of abodes owned or leased by the individual;
      (6)   Declarations, written or oral, made by the individual regarding the
individual’s residency;
      (7)   The primary location at which the individual is employed;
      (8)   The location of educational institutions attended by the
individual’s dependents as defined in Section 152 of the Internal Revenue Code,
to the extent that tuition paid to such educational institution is based on the
residency of the individual or the individual’s spouse in the municipal
corporation or state where the educational institution is located;
      (9)   The number of contact periods the individual has with the
municipality. For the purposes of this division, an individual has one (1)
“contact period” with the municipality if the individual is away overnight from
the individual’s abode located outside of the municipality and while away
overnight from that abode spends at least some portion, however minimal, of
each of two (2) consecutive days in the municipality. For purposes of this
section, the state’s contact period test or bright-line test and resulting
determination have no bearing on municipal residency or domicile.
   (c)   All applicable factors are provided in RC 718.012.
(Ord. No. 1412-15. Passed 11-23-15, eff. 1-1-16)
§ 192.09 Exemption for Member or Employee of General Assembly and Certain
Judges
   (a)   Only the municipal corporation of residence shall be permitted to levy
a tax on the income of any member or employee of the Ohio General Assembly,
including the Lieutenant Governor, whose income is received as a result of
services rendered as such member or employee and is paid from appropriated
funds of this state.
   (b)   Only the municipal corporation of residence and the city of Columbus
shall levy a tax on the income of the Chief Justice or a Justice of the Supreme
Court received as a result of services rendered as the Chief Justice or
Justice. Only the municipal corporation of residence shall levy a tax on the
income of a judge sitting by assignment of the Chief Justice or on the income
of a district court of appeals judge sitting in multiple locations within the
district, received as a result of services rendered as a judge.
(Ord. No. 1412-15. Passed 11-23-15, eff. 1-1-16)
§ 192.10 Collection at Source; Withholding from Qualifying Wages
   (a)   (1)   Each employer, agent of an employer, or other payer located or
doing business in the municipality shall withhold from each employee an amount
equal to the qualifying wages of the employee earned by the employee in the
municipality multiplied by the applicable rate of the municipality’s income
tax, except for qualifying wages for which withholding is not required under
Section
192.11 of this chapter or division (d) or (f) of this section. An employer,
agent of an employer, or other payer shall deduct and withhold the tax from
qualifying wages on the date that the employer, agent, or other payer directly,
indirectly, or constructively pays the qualifying wages to, or credits the
qualifying wages to the benefit of, the employee.
      (2)   In addition to withholding the amounts required under division (a)
(1) of this section, an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer may also
deduct and withhold, on the request of an employee, taxes for the municipal
corporation in which the employee is a resident.
   (b)   (1)   An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer shall remit to
the Tax Administrator of the municipality the greater of the income taxes
deducted and withheld or the income taxes required to be deducted and withheld
by the employer, agent, or other payer, along with any report required by the
Tax Administrator to accompany such payment, according to the following
schedule:
         A.   Any employer, agent of an employer, or other payer not required
to make payments under division (b)(1)B. or (b)(1)C. of this section of taxes
required to be deducted and withheld shall make quarterly payments to and
received by the Tax Administrator not later than the fifteenth (15th) day of
the month following the end of each calendar quarter.
         B.   Taxes required to be deducted and withheld shall be remitted
monthly to the Tax Administrator if the total taxes deducted and withheld or
required to be deducted and withheld by the employer, agent, or other payer on
behalf of the municipal corporation in the preceding calendar year exceeded two
thousand three hundred ninety-nine dollars ($2,399.00), or if the total amount
of taxes deducted and withheld or required to be deducted and withheld on
behalf of the municipality in any month of the preceding calendar quarter
exceeded two hundred dollars ($200.00). Payment under division (b)(1)C. of this
section shall be made so that the payment is received by the Tax Administrator
not later than fifteen (15) days after the last day of each month.
         C.   Taxes required to be deducted and withheld may be remitted
monthly to the Tax Administrator if the total taxes deducted and withheld or
required to be deducted on behalf of the municipality in the preceding calendar
year exceeded eleven thousand nine hundred ninety-nine dollars ($11,999.00), or
if the total amount of taxes deducted and withheld or required to be deducted
and withheld on behalf of the municipality in any month of the preceding
calendar year exceeded one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). The payment under
division (b)(1)C. of this section shall be made so that the payment is received
by the Tax Administrator not later than as provided in RC Chapter 718.
         D.   An employer, agent of an employer or other payer may be required
to make payment by electronic funds transfer to the Tax Administrator of all
taxes deducted and withheld on behalf of the employee for remittance to the
municipality if the employer, agent of an employer, or other payer is required
to make payments electronically for the purpose of paying federal taxes
withheld on payments to employees under Section 6302 of the Internal Revenue
Code, 26 C.F.R. 31.6302-1, or any other federal statute or regulation. The
payment of tax by electronic funds transfer under this division does not affect
an employer, agent, or other payer’s obligation to file any return as required
under this section. Once the threshold for remitting payment electronically for
federal purposes has been met, any accrued municipal income tax withheld from
employee qualifying wages earned within the municipality shall be remitted to
the municipality at the same time that the federal tax withholding payment is
due.
   (c)   An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer shall make and file
a return showing the amount of tax withheld by the employer, agent, or other
payer from the qualifying wages of each employee and remitted to the Tax
Administrator. A return filed by an employer, agent, or other payer under this
division shall be accepted by the municipality as the return required of an
employee whose sole income subject to the tax under this chapter is the
qualifying wages reported by the employee’s employer, agent of an employer, or
other payer, unless the municipality requires all resident individual taxpayers
to file a tax return under Section
192.23 of this chapter,
   (d)   An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer is not required to
withhold municipal income tax with respect to an individual’s disqualifying
disposition of an incentive stock option if, at the time of the disqualifying
disposition, the individual is not an employee of either the corporation with
respect to whose stock the option has been issued or of such corporation’s
successor entity.
   (e)   (1)   An employee is not relieved from liability for a tax by the
failure of the employer, agent of an employer, or other payer to withhold the
tax as required under this chapter or by the employer’s, agent’s, or other
payer’s exemption from the requirement to withhold the tax.
      (2)   The failure of an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer to
remit to the municipality the tax withheld relieves the employee from liability
for that tax unless the employee colluded with the employer, agent, or other
payer in connection with the failure to remit the tax withheld.
   (f)   Compensation deferred before June 26, 2003, is not subject to any
municipal corporation income tax or municipal income tax withholding
requirement to the extent the deferred compensation does not constitute
qualifying wages at the time the deferred compensation is paid or distributed.
   (g)   Each employer, agent of an employer, or other payer required to
withhold taxes is liable for the payment of that amount required to be
withheld, whether or not such taxes have been withheld, and such amount shall
be deemed to be held in trust for the municipality until such time as the
withheld amount is remitted to the Tax Administrator.
   (h)   On or before the last day of February of each year, an employer shall
file a Withholding Reconciliation Return with the Tax Administrator listing the
names, addresses, and social security numbers of all employees from whose
qualifying wages tax was withheld or should have been withheld for the
municipality during the preceding calendar year, the amount of tax withheld, if
any, from each such employee’s qualifying wage, the total amount of qualifying
wages paid to such employee during the preceding calendar year, the name of
every other municipal corporation for which tax was withheld or should have
been withheld from such employee during the preceding calendar year, any other
information required for federal income tax reporting purposes on Internal
Revenue Service Form W-2 or its equivalent form with respect to such employee,
and other information as may be required by the Tax Administrator.
   (i)   The officer or the employee of the employer, agent of an employer, or
other payer with control or direct supervision of or charged with the
responsibility for withholding the tax or filing the reports and making
payments as required by this section, shall be personally liable for a failure
to file a report or pay the tax due as required by this section. The
dissolution of an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer does not
discharge the officer’s or employee’s liability for a failure of the employer,
agent of an employer, or other payer to file returns or pay any tax due.
   (j)   An employer is required to deduct and withhold municipal income tax on
tips and gratuities received by the employer’s employees and constituting
qualifying wages only to the extent that the tips and gratuities are under the
employer’s control. For the purposes of this division, a tip or gratuity is
under the employer’s control if the tip or gratuity is paid by the customer to
the employer for subsequent remittance to the employee, or if the customer pays
the tip or gratuity by credit card, debit card, or other electronic means.
   (k)   A Tax Administrator shall consider any tax withheld by an employer at
the request of an employee when such tax is not otherwise required to be
withheld by this chapter to be tax required to be withheld and remitted for the
purposes of this section.
(Ord. No. 1412-15. Passed 11-23-15, eff. 1-1-16)
§ 192.11 Collection at Source; Occasional Entrant
   (a)   The following terms as used in this section:
      (1)   “Employer” includes a person that is a related member to or of an
employer.
      (2)   “Professional athlete” means an athlete who performs services in a
professional athletic event for wages or other remuneration.
      (3)   “Professional entertainer” means a person who performs services in
the professional performing arts for wages or other remuneration on a per-event
basis.
      (4)   “Public figure” means a person of prominence who performs services
at discrete events, such as speeches, public appearances, or similar events,
for wages or other remuneration on a per-event basis.
      (5)   “Fixed location” means a permanent place of doing business in this
state, such as an office, warehouse, storefront, or similar location owned or
controlled by an employer.
      (6)   “Worksite location” means a construction site or other temporary
worksite in this state at which the employer provides services for more than
twenty (20) days during the calendar year. “Worksite location” does not include
the home of an employee.
      (7)   “Principal place of work” means the fixed location to which an
employee is required to report for employment duties on a regular and ordinary
basis and excludes the terms identified in Section
192.06(ii). If the employee is not required to report for employment duties on
a regular and ordinary basis to a fixed location, “principal place of work”
means the worksite location in this state to which the employee is required to
report for employment duties on a regular and ordinary basis. If the employee
is not required to report for employment duties on a regular and ordinary basis
to a fixed location or worksite location, “principal place of work” means the
location in this state at which the employee spends the greatest number of days
in a calendar year performing services for or on behalf of the employee’s
employer.
   If there is not a single municipal corporation in which the employee spent
the “greatest number of days in a calendar year” performing services for or on
behalf of the employer, but instead there are two (2) or more municipal
corporations in which the employee spent an identical number of days that is
greater than the number of days the employee spent in any other municipal
corporation, the employer shall allocate any of the employee’s qualifying wages
subject to division (b)(1)A. of this section among those two (2) or more
municipal corporations. The allocation shall be made using any fair and
reasonable method, including, but not limited to, an equal allocation among
such municipal corporations or an allocation based upon the time spent or sales
made by the employee in each such municipal corporation. A municipal
corporation to which qualifying wages are allocated under this division shall
be the employee’s “principal place of work” with respect to those qualifying
wages for the purposes of this section.
   For the purposes of this division, the location at which an employee spends
a particular day shall be deemed under division (b)(2) of this section, except
that “location” shall be substituted for “municipal corporation” wherever
“municipal corporation” appears in that division.
   (b)   (1)   Subject to divisions (c), (e), (f), and (g) of this section, an
employer is not required to withhold municipal income tax on qualifying wages
paid to an employee for the performance of personal services in a municipal
corporation that imposes such a tax if the employee performed such services in
the municipal corporation on twenty or fewer days in a calendar year, unless
one (1) of the following conditions applies:
         A.   The employee’s principal place of work is located in the
municipality.
         B.   The employee performed services at one or more presumed worksite
locations in the municipality. For the purposes of this division, “presumed
worksite location” means a construction site or other temporary worksite in
this state at which the employer provides services that can reasonably be
expected by the employer to last more than twenty (20) days in a calendar year.
Services can “reasonably be expected by the employer to last more than twenty
(20) days” if either of the following applies at the time the services
commence:
            1.   The nature of the services are such that it will require more
than twenty (20) days of actual services to complete the services;
            2.   The agreement between the employer and its customer to perform
services at a location requires the employer to perform actual services at the
location for more than twenty (20) days.
         C.   The employee is a resident of the municipality and has requested
that the employer withhold tax from the employee’s qualifying wages as provided
in Section
192.10 of this chapter.
            D.   The employee is a professional athlete, professional
entertainer, or public figure, and the qualifying wages are paid for the
performance of services in the employee’s capacity as a professional athlete,
professional entertainer, or public figure within the municipality.
      (2)   For the purposes of division (b)(1) of this section, an employee
shall be considered to have spent a day performing services in a municipal
corporation only if the employee spent more time performing services for or on
behalf of the employer in that municipal corporation than in any other
municipal corporation on that day. For the purposes of determining the amount
of time an employee spent in a particular location, the time spent performing
one (1) or more of the following activities shall be considered to have been
spent at the employee’s principal place of work:
         A.   Traveling to the location at which the employee will first
perform services for the employer for the day;
         B.   Traveling from a location at which the employee was performing
services for the employer to any other location;
         C.   Traveling from any location to another location in order to pick
up or load, for the purpose of transportation or delivery, property that has
been purchased, sold, assembled, fabricated, repaired, refurbished, processed,
remanufactured, or improved by the employee’s employer;
         D.   Transporting or delivering property described in division (b)
(2)C. of this section, provided that, upon delivery of the property, the
employee does not temporarily or permanently affix the property to real estate
owned, used, or controlled by a person other than the employee’s employer;
         E.   Traveling from the location at which the employee makes the
employee’s final delivery or pick-up for the day to either the employee’s
principal place of work or a location at which the employee will not perform
services for the employer.
   (c)   If the principal place of work of an employee is located in a
municipal corporation that imposes an income tax under this chapter, the
exception from withholding requirements described in division (b)(1) of this
section shall apply only if, with respect to the employee’s qualifying wages
described in that division, the employer withholds and remits tax on such
qualifying wages to the municipal corporation in which the employee’s principal
place of work is located.
   (d)   (1)   Except as provided in division (d)(2) of this section, if,
during a calendar year, the number of days an employee spends performing
personal services in a municipal corporation exceeds the twenty (20) day
threshold described in division (b)(1) of this section, the employer shall
withhold and remit tax to that municipal corporation for any subsequent days in
that calendar year on which the employer pays qualifying wages to the employee
for personal services performed in that municipal corporation.
      (2)   An employer required to begin withholding tax for a municipal
corporation under division (d)(1) of this section may elect to withhold tax for
that municipal corporation for the first twenty (20) days on which the employer
paid qualifying wages to the employee for personal services performed in that
municipal corporation.
      (3)   If an employer makes the election described in division (d)(2) of
this section, the taxes withheld and paid by such an employer during those
first twenty (20) days to the municipal corporation in which the employee’s
principal place of work is located are refundable to the employee.
   (e)   Without regard to the number of days in a calendar year on which an
employee performs personal services in any municipal corporation, an employer
shall withhold municipal income tax on all of the employee’s qualifying wages
for a taxable year and remit that tax only to the municipal corporation in
which the employer’s fixed location is located if the employer qualifies as a
small employer as defined in Section
192.06 of this chapter. To determine whether an employer qualifies as a small
employer for a taxable year, a Tax Administrator may require the employer to
provide the Tax Administrator with the employer’s federal income tax return for
the preceding taxable year.
   (f)   Divisions (b)(1) and (d) of this section shall not apply to the extent
that a Tax Administrator and an employer enter into an agreement regarding the
manner in which the employer shall comply with the requirements of Section
192.10 of this chapter.
   (g)   In the case of a person performing personal services at a petroleum
refinery located in a municipal corporation that imposes a tax on income, an
employer is not required to withhold municipal income tax on the qualifying
wages of such a person if the person performs those services on twelve (12) or
fewer days in a calendar year, unless the principal place of work of the
employer is located in another municipal corporation in this state that imposes
a tax applying to compensation paid to the person for services performed on
those days and the person is not liable to that other municipal corporation for
tax on the compensation paid for such services. For the purposes of this
division, a petroleum refinery is a facility with a standard industrial
classification code facility classification of 2911, petroleum refining.
   Notwithstanding division (d) of this section, if, during a calendar year,
the number of days an individual performs personal services at a petroleum
refinery exceeds twelve (12), the employer shall withhold tax for the municipal
corporation for the first twelve (12) days for which the employer paid
qualifying wages to the individual and for all subsequent days in the calendar
year on which the individual performed services at the refinery.
(Ord. No. 1344-2023. Passed 11-27-23, eff. 11-28-23)
§ 192.12 Collection at Source; Casino, Sports Gaming Facility, Sports Gaming,
and VLT
   (a)   A casino facility or a casino operator, as defined in Section 6(C)(9)
of Article XV, Ohio Constitution, and RC 3772.01, respectively, or a sports
gaming facility or type B sports gaming proprietor, as defined by RC 3775.01,
or a lottery sales agent conducting video lottery terminal sales on behalf of
the state is required to withhold and remit municipal income tax with respect
to amounts other than qualifying wages as provided in this section.
   (b)   If a person’s winnings at a casino facility are an amount for which
reporting to the internal revenue service of the amount is required by Section
6041 of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended, the casino operator shall deduct
and withhold municipal income tax from the person’s winnings at the rate of the
tax imposed by the municipal corporation in which the casino facility is
located.
   (c)   Amounts deducted and withheld by a casino operator are held in trust
for the benefit of the municipal corporation to which the tax is owed.
      (1)   On or before the tenth day of each month, the casino operator shall
file a return electronically with the Tax Administrator of the municipality,
providing the name, address, and social security number of the person from
whose winnings amounts were deducted and withheld, the amount of each such
deduction and withholding during the preceding calendar month, the amount of
the winnings from which each such amount was withheld, the type of casino
gaming that resulted in such winnings, and any other information required by
the Tax Administrator. With this return, the casino operator shall remit
electronically to the municipality all amounts deducted and withheld during the
preceding month.
      (2)   Annually, on or before the thirty-first (31st) day of January, a
casino operator shall file an annual return electronically with the Tax
Administrator of the municipal corporation in which the casino facility is
located, indicating the total amount deducted and withheld during the preceding
calendar year. The casino operator shall remit electronically with the annual
return any amount that was deducted and withheld and that was not previously
remitted. If the name, address, or social security number of a person or the
amount deducted and withheld with respect to that person was omitted on a
monthly return for that reporting period, that information shall be indicated
on the annual return.
      (3)   Annually, on or before the thirty-first (31st) day of January, a
casino operator shall issue an information return to each person with respect
to whom an amount has been deducted and withheld during the preceding calendar
year. The information return shall show the total amount of municipal income
tax deducted from the person’s winnings during the preceding year. The casino
operator shall provide to the Tax Administrator a copy of each information
return issued under this division. The administrator may require that such
copies be transmitted electronically.
      (4)   A casino operator that fails to file a return and remit the amounts
deducted and withheld shall be personally liable for the amount withheld and
not remitted. Such personal liability extends to any penalty and interest
imposed for the late filing of a return or the late payment of tax deducted and
withheld.
      (5)   If a casino operator sells the casino facility or otherwise quits
the casino business, the amounts deducted and withheld along with any penalties
and interest thereon are immediately due and payable. The successor shall
withhold an amount of the purchase money that is sufficient to cover the
amounts deducted and withheld along with any penalties and interest thereon
until the predecessor casino operator produces either of the following:
         A.   A receipt from the Tax Administrator showing that the amounts
deducted and withheld and penalties and interest thereon have been paid;
         B.   A certificate from the Tax Administrator indicating that no
amounts are due.
   If the successor fails to withhold purchase money, the successor is
personally liable for the payment of the amounts deducted and withheld and
penalties and interest thereon.
      (6)   The failure of a casino operator to deduct and withhold the
required amount from a person’s winnings does not relieve that person from
liability for the municipal income tax with respect to those winnings.
   (d)   If a person’s prize award from a video lottery terminal is an amount
for which reporting to the internal revenue service is required by Section 6041
of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended, the video lottery sales agent shall
deduct and withhold municipal income tax from the person’s prize award at the
rate of the tax imposed by the municipal corporation in which the video lottery
terminal facility is located.
   (e)   Amounts deducted and withheld by a video lottery sales agent are held
in trust for the benefit of the municipal corporation to which the tax is owed.
      (1)   The video lottery sales agent shall issue to a person from whose
prize award an amount has been deducted and withheld a receipt for the amount
deducted and withheld, and shall obtain from the person receiving a prize award
the person’s name, address, and social security number in order to facilitate
the preparation of returns required by this section.
      (2)   On or before the tenth (10th) day of each month, the video lottery
sales agent shall file a return electronically with the Tax Administrator of
the municipality providing the names, addresses, and social security numbers of
the persons from whose prize awards amounts were deducted and withheld, the
amount of each such deduction and withholding during the preceding calendar
month, the amount of the prize award from which each such amount was withheld,
and any other information required by the Tax Administrator. With the return,
the video lottery sales agent shall remit electronically to the Tax
Administrator all amounts deducted and withheld during the preceding month.
      (3)   A video lottery sales agent shall maintain a record of all receipts
issued under division (e) of this section and shall make those records
available to the Tax Administrator upon request. Such records shall be
maintained under RC 5747.17 and any rules adopted under that section.
      (4)   Annually, on or before the thirty-first (31st) day of January, each
video lottery terminal sales agent shall file an annual return electronically
with the Tax Administrator indicating the total amount deducted and withheld
during the preceding calendar year. The video lottery sales agent shall remit
electronically with the annual return any amount that was deducted and withheld
and that was not previously remitted. If the name, address, or social security
number of a person or the amount deducted and withheld with respect to that
person was omitted on a monthly return for that reporting period, that
information shall be indicated on the annual return.
      (5)   Annually, on or before the thirty-first (31st) day of January, a
video lottery sales agent shall issue an information return to each person with
respect to whom an amount has been deducted and withheld during the preceding
calendar year. The information return shall show the total amount of municipal
income tax deducted and withheld from the person’s prize award by the video
lottery sales agent during the preceding year. A video lottery sales agent
shall provide to the Tax Administrator a copy of each information return issued
under this division. The Tax Administrator may require that such copies be
transmitted electronically.
      (6)   A video lottery sales agent who fails to file a return and remit
the amounts deducted and withheld is personally liable for the amount deducted
and withheld and not remitted. Such personal liability extends to any penalty
and interest imposed for the late filing of a return or the late payment of tax
deducted and withheld.
   (f)   If a video lottery sales agent ceases to operate video lottery
terminals, the amounts deducted and withheld along with any penalties and
interest thereon are immediately due and payable. The successor of the video
lottery sales agent that purchases the video lottery terminals from the agent
shall withhold an amount from the purchase money that is sufficient to cover
the amounts deducted and withheld and any penalties and interest thereon until
the predecessor video lottery sales agent operator produces either of the
following:
      (1)   A receipt from the Tax Administrator showing that the amounts
deducted and withheld and penalties and interest thereon have been paid; or
      (2)   A certificate from the Tax Administrator indicating that no amounts
are due.
   If the successor fails to withhold purchase money, the successor is
personally liable for the payment of the amounts deducted and withheld and
penalties and interest thereon.
   (g)   The failure of a video lottery sales agent to deduct and withhold the
required amount from a person’s prize award does not relieve that person from
liability for the municipal income tax with respect to that prize award.
   (h)   If a person's winnings at a sports gaming facility or sports gaming
proprietorship are an amount for which reporting to the internal revenue
service of the amount is required by Section 6041 of the Internal Revenue Code,
as amended, the sports gaming facility operator or proprietor shall deduct and
withhold municipal income tax from the person's winnings at the rate of the tax
imposed by the municipal corporation in which the sports gaming facility or
sports gaming proprietorship is located.
   (i)   Amounts deducted and withheld by a sports gaming facility operator or
proprietor are held in trust for the benefit of the municipal corporation to
which the tax is owed.
      (1)   On or before the tenth day of each month, the sports gaming
facility operator or proprietor shall file a return electronically with the Tax
Administrator of the municipality, providing the name, address, and social
security number of the person from whose winnings amounts were deducted and
withheld, the amount of each such deduction and withholding during the
preceding calendar month, the amount of the winnings from which each such
amount was withheld, the type of sports gaming that resulted in such winnings,
and any other information required by the Tax Administrator. With this return,
the sports gaming facility operator or proprietor shall remit electronically to
the municipality all amounts deducted and withheld during the preceding month.
      (2)   Annually, on or before the thirty-first (31st) day of January, a
sports gaming facility operator or proprietor shall file an annual return
electronically with the Tax Administrator of the municipal corporation in which
the sports gaming facility or sports gaming proprietorship is located,
indicating the total amount deducted and withheld during the preceding calendar
year. The sports gaming facility operator or proprietor shall remit
electronically with the annual return any amount that was deducted and withheld
and that was not previously remitted. If the name, address, or social security
number of a person or the amount deducted and withheld with respect to that
person was omitted on a monthly return for that reporting period, that
information shall be indicated on the annual return.
      (3)   Annually, on or before the thirty-first (31st) day of January, a
sports gaming facility operator or proprietor shall issue an information return
to each person with respect to whom an amount has been deducted and withheld
during the preceding calendar year. The information return shall show the total
amount of municipal income tax deducted from the person's winnings during the
preceding year. The sports gaming facility operator or proprietor shall provide
to the Tax Administrator a copy of each information return issued under this
division. The administrator may require that such copies be transmitted
electronically.
      (4)   A sports gaming facility operator or proprietor that fails to file
a return and remit the amounts deducted and withheld shall be personally liable
for the amount withheld and not remitted. Such personal liability extends to
any penalty and interest imposed for the late filing of a return or the late
payment of tax deducted and withheld.
      (5)   If a sports gaming facility operator or proprietor sells the sports
gaming facility or sports gaming proprietorship or otherwise quits the sports
gaming business, the amounts deducted and withheld along with any penalties and
interest thereon are immediately due and payable. The successor shall withhold
an amount of the purchase money that is sufficient to cover the amounts
deducted and withheld along with any penalties and interest thereon until the
predecessor sports gaming facility operator or proprietor produces either of
the following:
         A.   A receipt from the Tax Administrator showing that the amounts
deducted and withheld and penalties and interest thereon have been paid;
         B.   A certificate from the Tax Administrator indicating that no
amounts are due.
      If the successor fails to withhold purchase money, the successor is
personally liable for the payment of the amounts deducted and withheld and
penalties and interest thereon.
      (6)   The failure of a sports gaming facility operator or proprietor to
deduct and withhold the required amount from a person's winnings does not
relieve that person from liability for the municipal income tax with respect to
those winnings.
   (j)   If a casino operator, sports gaming or lottery sales agent files a
return late, fails to file a return, remits amounts deducted and withheld late,
or fails to remit amounts deducted and withheld as required under this section,
the Tax Administrator of a municipal corporation may impose the following
applicable penalty:
      (1)   For the late remittance of, or failure to remit, tax deducted and
withheld under this section, a penalty equal to fifty percent (50%) of the tax
deducted and withheld;
      (2)   For the failure to file, or the late filing of, a monthly or annual
return, a penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each return not filed
or filed late. Interest shall accrue on past due amounts deducted and withheld
at the rate prescribed in RC 5703.47.
   (k)   Amounts deducted and withheld on behalf of a municipal corporation
shall be allowed as a credit against payment of the tax imposed by the
municipal corporation and shall be treated as taxes paid for purposes of
Section
192.18 of this chapter. This division applies only to the person for whom the
amount is deducted and withheld.
   (l)   The Tax Administrator shall prescribe the forms of the receipts and
returns required under this section.
(Ord. No. 1262-2022. Passed 12-5-22, eff. 12-7-22)
§ 192.13 Determining Municipal Taxable Income for Taxpayers Who Are Not
Individuals
   “Municipal taxable income” for a taxpayer who is not an individual is
calculated as follows:
   (a)   “Income” reduced by “exempt income” to the extent otherwise included
in income, multiplied by apportionment, further reduced by any “pre-2017 net
operating loss carryforward” equals “municipal taxable income”.
      (1)   “Income” for a taxpayer that is not an individual means the “net
profit” of the taxpayer.
         A.   “Net profit” for a person other than an individual is defined in
division (w) of Section
192.06 of this chapter.
         B.   “Adjusted federal taxable income” is defined in division (a) of
Section
192.06 of this chapter.
      (2)   “Exempt income” is defined in division (k) of Section
192.06 of this chapter.
      (3)   “Apportionment” means the apportionment as determined by Section
192.14 of this chapter.
      (4)   “Pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward” is defined in division
(ff) of Section
192.06 of this chapter.
   (b)   For the purposes specified in Section
192.02, on and after January 1, 1967, an annual tax of one-half of one percent
(0.5%) per annum shall be imposed upon all municipal taxable income; provided
that on an after July 1, 1968, the rate of tax shall be a total of one percent
(1%) per annum; and that on and after March 1, 1979, the rate of such tax shall
be a total of one and five-tenths percent (1.5%) per annum; and that on and
after January 1, 1981, the rate of tax shall be two percent (2%) per annum; and
that on or after January 1, 2017, the rate of tax shall be two and one-half
percent (2.5%) per annum. Such tax shall be imposed upon all municipal taxable
income.
(Ord. No. 1262-2022. Passed 12-5-22, eff. 12-7-22)
§ 192.14 Net Profit; Income Subject to Net Profit Tax; Alternative
Apportionment
   This section applies to any taxpayer engaged in a business or profession in
the municipality unless the taxpayer is an individual who resides in the
municipality or the taxpayer is an electric company, combined company, or
telephone company that is subject to and required to file reports under RC
Chapter 5745.
   (a)   Net profit from a business or profession conducted both within and
without the boundaries of the municipality shall be considered as having a
taxable situs in the municipality for purposes of municipal income taxation in
the same proportion as the average ratio of the following:
      (1)   The average original cost of the real property and tangible
personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the business or profession
in the municipality during the taxable period to the average original cost of
all of the real and tangible personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in
the business or profession during the same period, wherever situated.
   As used in the preceding paragraph, tangible personal or real property shall
include property rented or leased by the taxpayer and the value of such
property shall be determined by multiplying the annual rental thereon by eight;
      (2)   Wages, salaries, and other compensation paid during the taxable
period to individuals employed in the business or profession for services
performed in the municipality to wages, salaries, and other compensation paid
during the same period to individuals employed in the business or profession,
wherever the individual’s services are performed, excluding compensation from
which taxes are not required to be withheld under Section
192.11 of this chapter;
      (3)   Total gross receipts of the business or profession from sales and
rentals made and services performed during the taxable period in the
municipality to total gross receipts of the business or profession during the
same period from sales, rentals, and services, wherever made or performed.
   (b)   (1)   If the apportionment factors described in division (a) of this
section do not fairly represent the extent of a taxpayer’s business activity in
the municipality, the taxpayer may request, or the Tax Administrator of the
municipality may require, that the taxpayer use, with respect to all or any
portion of the income of the taxpayer, an alternative apportionment method
involving one or more of the following:
         A.   Separate accounting;
         B.   The exclusion of one or more of the factors;
         C.   The inclusion of one or more additional factors that would
provide for a more fair apportionment of the income of the taxpayer to the
municipality;
         D.   A modification of one or more of the factors.
      (2)   A taxpayer request to use an alternative apportionment method shall
be in writing and shall accompany a tax return, timely filed appeal of an
assessment, or timely filed amended tax return. The taxpayer may use the
requested alternative method unless the Tax Administrator denies the request in
an assessment issued within the period prescribed by division (a) of Section
192.41 of this chapter.
      (3)   A Tax Administrator may require a taxpayer to use an alternative
apportionment method as described in division (b)(1) of this section only by
issuing an assessment to the taxpayer within the period prescribed by division
(a) of Section
192.41 of this chapter.
      (4)   Nothing in division (b) of this section nullifies or otherwise
affects any alternative apportionment arrangement approved by a Tax
Administrator and taxpayer before January 1, 2016.
   (c)   As used in division (a)(2) of this section, “wages, salaries, and
other compensation” includes only wages, salaries, or other compensation paid
to an employee for services performed at any of the following locations:
      (1)   A location that is owned, controlled, or used by, rented to, or
under the possession of one of the following:
         A.   The employer;
         B.   A vendor, customer, client, or patient of the employer, or a
related member of such a vendor, customer, client, or patient;
         C.   A vendor, customer, client, or patient of a person described in
division (c)(1)B. of this section, or a related member of such a vendor,
customer, client, or patient.
      (2)   Any location at which a trial, appeal, hearing, investigation,
inquiry, review, court-martial, or similar administrative, judicial, or
legislative matter or proceeding is being conducted, provided that the
compensation is paid for services performed for, or on behalf of, the employer
or that the employee’s presence at the location directly or indirectly benefits
the employer;
      (3)   Any other location, if the Tax Administrator determines that the
employer directed the employee to perform the services at the other location in
lieu of a location described in division (c)(1) or (c)(2) of this section
solely in order to avoid or reduce the employer’s municipal income tax
liability. If a Tax Administrator makes such a determination, the employer may
dispute the determination by establishing, by a preponderance of the evidence,
that the Tax Administrator’s determination was unreasonable.
   (d)   For the purposes of division (a)(3) of this section, receipts from
sales and rentals made and services performed shall be sitused to a municipal
corporation as follows:
      (1)   Gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property shall be
sitused to the municipal corporation in which the sale originated. For the
purposes of this division, a sale of property originates in a municipal
corporation if, regardless of where title passes, the property meets any of the
following criteria:
         A.   The property is shipped to or delivered within the municipal
corporation from a stock of goods located within the municipal corporation.
         B.   The property is delivered within the municipal corporation from a
location outside the municipal corporation, provided the taxpayer is regularly
engaged through its own employees in the solicitation or promotion of sales
within such municipal corporation and the sales result from such solicitation
or promotion.
         C.   The property is shipped from a place within the municipal
corporation to purchasers outside the municipal corporation, provided that the
taxpayer is not, through its own employees, regularly engaged in the
solicitation or promotion of sales at the place where delivery is made.
      (2)   Gross receipts from the sale of services shall be sitused to the
municipal corporation to the extent that such services are performed in the
municipal corporation.
      (3)   To the extent included in income, gross receipts from the sale of
real property located in the municipal corporation shall be sitused to the
municipal corporation.
      (4)   To the extent included in income, gross receipts from rents and
royalties from real property located in the municipal corporation shall be
sitused to the municipal corporation.
      (5)   Gross receipts from rents and royalties from tangible personal
property shall be sitused to the municipal corporation based upon the extent to
which the tangible personal property is used in the municipal corporation.
   (e)   The net profit received by an individual taxpayer from the rental of
real estate owned directly by the individual or by a disregarded entity owned
by the individual shall be subject to tax only by the municipal corporation in
which the property generating the net profit is located and the municipal
corporation in which the individual taxpayer that receives the net profit
resides.
   A municipal corporation shall allow such taxpayers to elect to use separate
accounting for the purpose of calculating net profit sitused under this
division to the municipal corporation in which the property is located.
   (f)   (1)   Except as provided in division (f)(2) of this section,
commissions received by a real estate agent or broker relating to the sale,
purchase, or lease of real estate shall be sitused to the municipal corporation
in which the real estate is located. Net profit reported by the real estate
agent or broker shall be allocated to a municipal corporation based upon the
ratio of the commissions the agent or broker received from the sale, purchase,
or lease of real estate located in the municipal corporation to the commissions
received from the sale, purchase, or lease of real estate everywhere in the
taxable year.
      (2)   An individual who is a resident of a municipal corporation that
imposes a municipal income tax shall report the individual’s net profit from
all real estate activity on the individual’s annual tax return for that
municipal corporation. The individual may claim a credit for taxes the
individual paid on such net profit to another municipal corporation to the
extent that such credit is allowed under Section
192.19 of this chapter.
   (g)   If, in computing a taxpayer’s adjusted federal taxable income, the
taxpayer deducted any amount with respect to a stock option granted to an
employee, and if the employee is not required to include in the employee’s
income any such amount or a portion thereof because it is exempted from
taxation under divisions (k)(12) of Section
192.06 of this chapter, by a municipal corporation to which the taxpayer has
apportioned a portion of its net profit, the taxpayer shall add the amount that
is exempt from taxation to the taxpayer’s net profit that was apportioned to
that municipal corporation. In no case shall a taxpayer be required to add to
its net profit that was apportioned to that municipal corporation any amount
other than the amount upon which the employee would be required to pay tax were
the amount related to the stock option not exempted from taxation.
   This division applies solely for the purpose of making an adjustment to the
amount of a taxpayer’s net profit that was apportioned to a municipal
corporation under this section.
   (h)   When calculating the ratios described in division (a) of this section
for the purposes of that division or division (b) of this section, the owner of
a disregarded entity shall include in the owner’s ratios the property, payroll,
and gross receipts of such disregarded entity.
(Ord. No. 1412-15. Passed 11-23-15, eff. 1-1-16)
§ 192.15 Consolidated Federal Income Tax Return
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Affiliated group of corporations” means an affiliated group as
defined in Section 1504 of the Internal Revenue Code, except that, if such a
group includes at least one incumbent local exchange carrier that is primarily
engaged in the business of providing local exchange telephone service in this
state, the affiliated group shall not include any incumbent local exchange
carrier that would otherwise be included in the group.
      (2)   “Consolidated federal income tax return” means a consolidated
return filed for federal income tax purposes under Section 1501 of the Internal
Revenue Code.
      (3)   “Consolidated federal taxable income” means the consolidated
taxable income of an affiliated group of corporations, as computed for the
purposes of filing a consolidated federal income tax return, before
consideration of net operating losses or special deductions. “Consolidated
federal taxable income” does not include income or loss of an incumbent local
exchange carrier that is excluded from the affiliated group under division (a)
(1) of this section.
      (4)   “Incumbent local exchange carrier” has the same meaning as in RC
4927.01.
      (5)   “Local exchange telephone service” has the same meaning as in RC
5727.01.
   (b)   (1)   For taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2016, a
taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of corporations may elect to
file a consolidated municipal income tax return for a taxable year if at least
one (1) member of the affiliated group of corporations is subject to the
municipal income tax in that taxable year and if the affiliated group of
corporations filed a consolidated federal income tax return with respect to
that taxable year.
         A.   The election is binding for a five (5) year period beginning with
the first taxable year of the initial election unless a change in the reporting
method is required under federal law.
         B.   The election continues to be binding for each subsequent five (5)
year period unless the taxpayer elects to discontinue filing consolidated
municipal income tax returns under division (b)(2) of this section; or
         C.   A taxpayer receives permission from the Tax Administrator. The
Tax Administrator shall approve such a request for good cause shown.
      (2)   An election to discontinue filing consolidated municipal income tax
returns under this section must be made in the first year following the last
year of a five (5) year consolidated municipal income tax return election
period in effect under division (b)(1) of this section. The election to
discontinue filing a consolidated municipal income tax return is binding for a
five (5) year period beginning with the first taxable year of the election.
      (3)   An election made under division (b)(1) or (b)(2) of this section is
binding on all members of the affiliated group of corporations subject to a
municipal income tax.
   (c)   A taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of corporations
that filed a consolidated federal income tax return for a taxable year shall
file a consolidated municipal income tax return for that taxable year if the
Tax Administrator determines, by a preponderance of the evidence, that
intercompany transactions have not been conducted at arm’s length and that
there has been a distortive shifting of income or expenses with regard to
allocation of net profits to the municipal corporation. A taxpayer that is
required to file a consolidated municipal income tax return for a taxable year
shall file a consolidated municipal income tax return for all subsequent
taxable years unless the taxpayer requests and receives written permission from
the Tax Administrator to file a separate return or a taxpayer has experienced a
change in circumstances.
   (d)   A taxpayer shall prepare a consolidated municipal income tax return in
the same manner as is required under the United States Department of Treasury
regulations that prescribe procedures for the preparation of the consolidated
federal income tax return required to be filed by the common parent of the
affiliated group of which the taxpayer is a member.
   (e)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (e)(2), (e)(3), and
(e)(4) of this section, corporations that file a consolidated municipal income
tax return shall compute adjusted federal taxable income, as defined in
division (a) of Section
192.06 of this chapter, by substituting “consolidated federal taxable income”
for “federal taxable income” wherever “federal taxable income” appears in that
division and by substituting “an affiliated group of corporation’s” for “a C
corporation’s” wherever “a C corporation’s” appears in that division.
      (2)   No corporation filing a consolidated municipal income tax return
shall make any adjustment otherwise required under division (a) of Section
192.06 of this chapter to the extent that the item of income or deduction
otherwise subject to the adjustment has been eliminated or consolidated in the
computation of consolidated federal taxable income.
      (3)   If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having at least
eighty percent (80%) of the value of its ownership interest owned or
controlled, directly or indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is
included in that affiliated group’s consolidated federal taxable income for a
taxable year, the corporation filing a consolidated municipal income tax return
shall do one (1) of the following with respect to that pass-through entity’s
net profit or loss for that taxable year:
         A.   Exclude the pass-through entity’s net profit or loss from the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purpose of making the computations required in Section
192.14 of this chapter, exclude the property, payroll, and gross receipts of
the pass-through entity in the computation of the affiliated group’s net profit
sitused to a municipal corporation. If the entity’s net profit or loss is so
excluded, the entity shall be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on the
basis of the entity’s net profits that would otherwise be included in the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group.
         B.   Include the pass-through entity’s net profit or loss in the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purpose of making the computations required in Section
192.14 of this chapter, include the property, payroll, and gross receipts of
the pass-through entity in the computation of the affiliated group’s net profit
sitused to a municipal corporation. If the entity’s net profit or loss is so
included, the entity shall not be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on
the basis of the entity’s net profits that are included in the consolidated
federal taxable income of the affiliated group.
      (4)   If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having less than
eighty percent (80%) of the value of its ownership interest owned or
controlled, directly or indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is
included in that affiliated group’s consolidated federal taxable income for a
taxable year, all of the following shall apply:
         A.   The corporation filing the consolidated municipal income tax
return shall exclude the pass-through entity’s net profit or loss from the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purposes of making the computations required in Section
192.14 of this chapter, exclude the property, payroll, and gross receipts of
the pass- through entity in the computation of the affiliated group’s net
profit sitused to a municipal corporation; and
         B.   The pass-through entity shall be subject to municipal income
taxation as a separate taxpayer under this chapter on the basis of the entity’s
net profits that would otherwise be included in the consolidated federal
taxable income of the affiliated group.
   (f)   Corporations filing a consolidated municipal income tax return shall
make the computations required under Section
192.14 of this chapter by substituting “consolidated federal taxable income
attributable to” for “net profit from” wherever “net profit from” appears in
that section and by substituting “affiliated group of corporations” for
“taxpayer” wherever “taxpayer” appears in that section.
   (g)   Each corporation filing a consolidated municipal income tax return is
jointly and severally liable for any tax, interest, penalties, fines, charges,
or other amounts imposed by a municipal corporation under this chapter on the
corporation, an affiliated group of which the corporation is a member for any
portion of the taxable year, or any one (1) or more members of such an
affiliated group.
   (h)   Corporations and their affiliates that made an election or entered
into an agreement with a municipal corporation before January 1, 2016, to file
a consolidated or combined tax return with such municipal corporation may
continue to file consolidated or combined tax returns under such election or
agreement for taxable years beginning on and after January 1, 2016.
(Ord. No. 1412-15. Passed 11-23-15, eff. 1-1-16)
§ 192.16 Tax Credit for Businesses that Foster New Jobs in Ohio
   The municipality, by ordinance, may grant a refundable or nonrefundable
credit against its tax on income to a taxpayer to foster job creation in the
municipality. If a credit is granted under this section, it shall be measured
as a percentage of the new income tax revenue the municipality derives from new
employees of the taxpayer and shall be for a term not exceeding fifteen (15)
years. Before the municipality passes an ordinance granting a credit, the
municipality and the taxpayer shall enter into an agreement specifying all the
conditions of the credit.
(Ord. No. 1412-15. Passed 11-23-15, eff. 1-1-16)
§ 192.17 Tax Credits to Foster Job Retention
   The municipality, by ordinance, may grant a refundable or nonrefundable
credit against its tax on income to a taxpayer for the purpose of fostering job
retention in the municipality. If a credit is granted under this section, it
shall be measured as a percentage of the income tax revenue the municipality
derives from the retained employees of the taxpayer, and shall be for a term
not exceeding fifteen (15) years. Before the municipality passes an ordinance
allowing such a credit, the municipality and the taxpayer shall enter into an
agreement specifying all the conditions of the credit.
(Ord. No. 1412-15. Passed 11-23-15, eff. 1-1-16)
§ 192.18 Declaration of Estimated Tax
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Estimated taxes” means the amount that the taxpayer reasonably
estimates to be the taxpayer’s tax liability for a municipal corporation’s
income tax for the current taxable year.
      (2)   “Tax liability” means the total taxes due to a municipal
corporation for the taxable year, after allowing any credit to which the
taxpayer is entitled, and after applying any estimated tax payment, withholding
payment, or credit from another taxable year.
   (b)   (1)   Every taxpayer shall make a declaration of estimated taxes for
the current taxable year, on the form prescribed by the Tax Administrator, if
the amount payable as estimated taxes is at least two hundred dollars
($200.00). For the purposes of this section:
         A.   Taxes withheld from qualifying wages shall be considered as paid
to the municipal corporation for which the taxes were withheld in equal amounts
on each payment date. If the taxpayer establishes the dates on which all
amounts were actually withheld, the amounts withheld shall be considered as
paid on the dates on which the amounts were actually withheld.
         B.   An overpayment of tax applied as a credit to a subsequent taxable
year is deemed to be paid on the date of the postmark stamped on the cover in
which the payment is mailed or, if the payment is made by electronic funds
transfer, the date the payment is submitted. As used in this division, “date of
the postmark” means, in the event there is more than one (1) date on the cover,
the earliest date imprinted on the cover by the postal service.
         C.   A taxpayer having a taxable year of less than twelve (12) months
shall make a declaration under rules prescribed by the Tax Administrator.
         D.   Taxes withheld by a casino operator or by a lottery sales agent
under RC 718.031 are deemed to be paid to the municipal corporation for which
the taxes were withheld on the date the taxes are withheld from the taxpayer’s
winnings.
      (2)   Taxpayers filing joint returns shall file joint declarations of
estimated taxes.
      (3)   The declaration of estimated taxes shall be filed on or before the
date prescribed for the filing of municipal income tax returns under division
(g) of Section
192.23 of this chapter or on or before the fifteenth (15th) day of the fourth
(4th) month of the first (1st) taxable year after the taxpayer becomes subject
to tax for the first (1st) time.
      (4)   Taxpayers reporting on a fiscal year basis shall file a declaration
on or before the fifteenth (15th) day of the fourth (4th) month after the
beginning of each fiscal year or period.
      (5)   The original declaration or any subsequent amendment may be
increased or decreased on or before any subsequent quarterly payment day as
provided in this section.
   (c)   (1)   The required portion of the tax liability for the taxable year
that shall be paid through estimated taxes made payable to the municipality or
Tax Administrator, including the application of tax refunds to estimated taxes
and withholding on or before the applicable payment date, shall be as follows:
         A.   On or before the fifteenth (15th) day of the fourth (4th) month
after the beginning of the taxable year, twenty-two and one-half percent
(22.5%) of the tax liability for the taxable year;
         B.   On or before the fifteenth (15th) day of the sixth (6th) month
after the beginning of the taxable year, forty-five percent (45%) of the tax
liability for the taxable year;
         C.   On or before the fifteenth (15th) day of the ninth (9th) month
after the beginning of the taxable year, sixty-seven and one-half percent
(67.5%) of the tax liability for the taxable year;
         D.   On or before the fifteenth (15th) day of the twelfth (12th) month
of the taxable year, ninety percent (90%) of the tax liability for the taxable
year.
      (2)   A taxpayer may amend a declaration under rules prescribed by the
Tax Administrator. When an amended declaration has been filed, the unpaid
balance shown due on the amended declaration shall be paid in equal
installments on or before the remaining payment dates. The amended declaration
must be filed on the next applicable due date as outlined in (c)(1)A. through
D. of this section.
      (3)   On or before the fifteenth (15th) day of the fourth (4th) month of
the year following that for which the declaration or amended declaration was
filed, an annual return shall be filed and any balance which may be due shall
be paid with the return under Section
192.23 of this chapter.
         A.   For taxpayers who are individuals, or who are not individuals and
are reporting and filing on a calendar year basis, the annual tax return is due
on the same date as the filing of the federal tax return, unless extended under
division (G) of RC 5747.08.
         B.   For taxpayers who are not individuals, and are reporting and
filing on a fiscal year basis or any period other than a calendar year, the
annual return is due on the fifteenth day (15th) of the fourth (4th) month
following the end of the taxable year or period.
      (4)   An amended declaration is required whenever the taxpayer’s
estimated tax liability changes during the taxable year. A change in estimated
tax liability may either increase or decrease the estimated tax liability for
the taxable year.
   (d)   (1)   In the case of any underpayment of any portion of a tax
liability, penalty and interest may be imposed under Section
192.29 of this chapter upon the amount of underpayment for the period of
underpayment, unless the underpayment is due to reasonable cause as described
in division (e) of this section. The amount of the underpayment shall be
determined as follows:
         A.   For the first (1st) payment of estimated taxes each year, twenty-
two and one-half percent (22.5%) of the tax liability, less the amount of taxes
paid by the date prescribed for that payment;
         B.   For the second (2nd) payment of estimated taxes each year, forty-
five percent (45%) of the tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the
date prescribed for that payment;
         C.   For the third (3rd) payment of estimated taxes each year, sixty-
seven and one-half percent (67.5%) of the tax liability, less the amount of
taxes paid by the date prescribed for that payment;
         D.   For the fourth (4th) payment of estimated taxes each year, ninety
percent (90%) of the tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date
prescribed for that payment.
      (2)   The period of the underpayment shall run from the day the estimated
payment was required to be made to the date on which the payment is made. For
purposes of this section, a payment of estimated taxes on or before any payment
date shall be considered a payment of any previous underpayment only to the
extent the payment of estimated taxes exceeds the amount of the payment
presently required to be paid to avoid any penalty.
   (e)   An underpayment of any portion of tax liability determined under
division (d) of this section shall be due to reasonable cause and the penalty
imposed by this section shall not be added to the taxes for the taxable year if
any of the following apply:
      (1)   The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least ninety
percent (90%) of the tax liability for the current taxable year, determined by
annualizing the income received during the year up to the end of the month
immediately preceding the month in which the payment is due.
      (2)   The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least one
hundred percent (100%) of the tax liability shown on the return of the taxpayer
for the preceding taxable year, provided that the immediately preceding taxable
year reflected a period of twelve (12) months and the taxpayer filed a return
with the municipal corporation under Section
192.23 of this chapter for that year.
      (3)   The taxpayer is an individual who resides in the municipality but
was not domiciled there on the first (1st) day of January of the calendar year
that includes the first (1st) day of the taxable year.
   (f)   A Tax administrator may waive the requirement for filing a declaration
of estimated taxes for any class of taxpayers after finding that the waiver is
reasonable and proper in view of administrative costs and other factors.
(Ord. No. 1412-15. Passed 11-23-15, eff. 1-1-16)
§ 192.19 Cleveland Resident Subject to Income Tax in Other Municipal
Corporation
   (a)   When a resident is subject to and has paid a municipal income tax in
another municipal corporation on the same income taxable under this chapter,
regardless of whether such other municipal corporation allows a credit to its
residents, and the rate of Cleveland’s municipal income tax is less than two
and one-half percent (2.5%), such resident may claim a credit of the amount of
income tax paid to the other municipal corporation, but not in excess of fifty
percent (50%) of the tax imposed by this chapter or fifty percent (50%) of the
tax imposed by the other municipal corporation, whichever is less. When a
resident is subject to and has paid a municipal income tax in another municipal
corporation on the same income taxable under this chapter regardless of whether
such other municipal corporation allows a credit to its residents and the rate
of Cleveland’s municipal income tax is two and one-half percent (2.5%) or more,
such resident may claim a credit of the amount of income tax paid to the other
municipal corporation which credit shall not exceed the tax assessed by this
chapter on the resident’s taxable income subject to tax by another municipal
corporation.
   (b)   In the event a resident is entitled to credit for taxes paid another
municipal corporation, such resident is required to file a return on a form in
such manner as the Tax Administrator may prescribe.
   (c)   Assignment of any claim for refund to which a resident may be entitled
from another municipal corporation shall be tentatively accepted as payment of
that portion of city income tax represented by such assignment. However, if
satisfactory evidence is offered that the taxpayer is entitled to the claim
covered by the assignment, such taxpayer shall not be deprived of credit
therefore because of fault or neglect on the part of either municipal
corporation.
   (d)   In the event such resident fails, neglects or refuses to file such
return or form as is prescribed by the Tax Administrator, such resident shall
not be entitled to such credit and shall be considered in violation of this
chapter for failure to file a return and make payment of taxes due hereunder.
   (e)   A resident owner of a pass-through entity that does not conduct
business in the City and that has paid an income tax to another municipal
corporation may claim a credit equal to the lesser of (i) the resident owner’s
proportionate share of the amount, if any, of income tax paid by the pass-
through entity to another municipal corporation in the state; or (ii) the
resident owner’s proportionate share of the amount of city income tax that
would be imposed on the pass- through entity if the pass-through entity
conducted business in the City.
   (f)   In no case shall the amount of the credit allowed under division (e)
of this section exceed the tax assessed by this chapter on the resident owner’s
taxable income subject to tax by another municipal corporation.
   (g)   The credits provided in RC 718.021 and 718.121 shall be available to
residents, if applicable.
   Except as otherwise provided in RC Chapter 718, this chapter and the rules
and regulations, where a nonresident is subject to the tax imposed by this
chapter and is subject to tax on the same taxable income in the municipal
corporation where such nonresident resides, no credit against the city income
tax levied by this chapter shall be allowed.
(Ord. No. 1412-15. Passed 11-23-15, eff. 1-1-16)
§ 192.20 Refundable Credit for Qualifying Loss
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Nonqualified deferred compensation plan” means a compensation plan
described in Section 3121(v)(2)(C) of the Internal Revenue Code.
      (2)   A.   Except as provided in division (a)(2)B. of this section.
“qualifying loss” means the excess, if any, of the total amount of compensation
the payment of which is deferred under a nonqualified deferred compensation
plan over the total amount of income the taxpayer has recognized for federal
income tax purposes for all taxable years on a cumulative basis as compensation
with respect to the taxpayer’s receipt of money and property attributable to
distributions in connection with the nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
         B.   If, for one (1) or more taxable years, the taxpayer has not paid
to one (1) or more municipal corporations income tax imposed on the entire
amount of compensation the payment of which is deferred under a nonqualified
deferred compensation plan, then the “qualifying loss” is the product of the
amount resulting from the calculation described in division (a)(2)A. of this
section computed without regard to division (a)(2)B. of this section and a
fraction the numerator of which is the portion of such compensation on which
the taxpayer has paid income tax to one or more municipal corporations and the
denominator of which is the total amount of compensation the payment of which
is deferred under a nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
         C.   With respect to a nonqualified deferred compensation plan, the
taxpayer sustains a qualifying loss only in the taxable year in which the
taxpayer receives the final distribution of money and property under that
nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
      (3)   “Qualifying tax rate” means the applicable tax rate for the taxable
year for the which the taxpayer paid income tax to a municipal corporation with
respect to any portion of the total amount of compensation the payment of which
is deferred under a nonqualified deferred compensation plan. If different tax
rates applied for different taxable years, then the “qualifying tax rate” is a
weighted average of those different tax rates. The weighted average shall be
based upon the tax paid to the municipal corporation each year with respect to
the nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
   (b)   (1)   Except as provided in division (d) of this section, a refundable
credit shall be allowed against the income tax imposed by a municipal
corporation for each qualifying loss sustained by a taxpayer during the taxable
year. The amount of the credit shall be equal to the product of the qualifying
loss and the qualifying tax rate.
      (2)   A taxpayer shall claim the credit allowed under this section from
each municipal corporation to which the taxpayer paid municipal income tax with
respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation plan in one or more taxable
years.
      (3)   If a taxpayer has paid tax to more than one (1) municipal
corporation with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation plan, the
amount of the credit that a taxpayer may claim from each municipal corporation
shall be calculated on the basis of each municipal corporation’s proportionate
share of the total municipal corporation income tax paid by the taxpayer to all
municipal corporations with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation
plan.
      (4)   In no case shall the amount of the credit allowed under this
section exceed the cumulative income tax that a taxpayer has paid to a
municipal corporation for all taxable years with respect to the nonqualified
deferred compensation plan.
   (c)   (1)   For purposes of this section, municipal corporation income tax
that has been withheld with respect to a nonqualified deferred compensation
plan shall be considered to have been paid by the taxpayer with respect to the
nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
      (2)   Any municipal income tax that has been refunded or otherwise
credited for the benefit of the taxpayer with respect to a nonqualified
deferred compensation plan shall not be considered to have been paid to the
municipal corporation by the taxpayer.
   (d)   The credit allowed under this section is allowed only to the extent
the taxpayer’s qualifying loss is attributable to:
      (1)   The insolvency or bankruptcy of the employer who had established
the nonqualified deferred compensation plan; or
      (2)   The employee’s failure or inability to satisfy all of the
employer’s terms and conditions necessary to receive the nonqualified deferred
compensation.
(Ord. No. 1412-15. Passed 11-23-15, eff. 1-1-16)
§ 192.21 Credit for Person Working in Joint Economic Development District or
Zone
   The municipality shall grant a credit against its tax on income to a
resident of the municipality who works in a joint economic development zone
created under RC 715.691 or a joint economic development district created under
RC 715.70, 715.71, or 715.72 to the same extent that it grants a credit against
its tax on income to its residents who are employed in another municipal
corporation, under Section
192.19 of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 1412-15. Passed 11-23-15, eff. 1-1-16)
§ 192.22 Credit for Tax Beyond Statute for Obtaining Refund
   (a)   Income tax that has been deposited or paid to the municipality, but
should have been deposited or paid to another municipal corporation, is
allowable by the municipality as a refund, but is subject to the three (3) year
limitation on refunds as provided in Section
192.28 of this chapter.
   (b)   Income tax that should have been deposited or paid to the
municipality, but was deposited or paid to another municipal corporation, shall
be subject to collection and recovery by the municipality. To the extent a
refund of such tax or withholding is barred by the limitation on refunds as
provided in Section
192.28, the municipality will allow a non-refundable credit equal to the tax or
withholding paid to the other municipality against the income tax the
municipality claims is due. If the municipality’s tax rate is higher, the tax
representing the net difference of the tax rates is also subject to collection
by the municipality, along with any penalty and interest accruing during the
period of nonpayment.
   (c)   No carryforward of credit will be permitted when the overpayment is
beyond the three (3) year limitation for refunding of same as provided in
Section
192.28 of this chapter.
   (d)   Nothing in this section requires a municipality to allow credit for
tax paid to another municipal corporation if the municipality has reduced
credit for tax paid to another municipal corporation. Section
192.19 of this chapter regarding any limitation on credit shall prevail.
(Ord. No. 1412-15. Passed 11-23-15, eff. 1-1-16)
§ 192.23 Return and Payment of Tax
   (a)   (1)   An annual return with respect to the income tax levied on
municipal taxable income by the municipality shall be completed and filed by
every taxpayer for any taxable year for which the taxpayer is subject to the
tax, regardless of whether or not income tax is due.
   (2)   The Tax Administrator shall accept on behalf of all nonresident
individual taxpayers a return filed by an employer, agent of an employer, or
other payer located in the municipality under division (c) of Section
192.10 of this chapter when the nonresident individual taxpayer’s sole income
subject to the tax is the qualifying wages reported by the employer, agent of
an employer, or other payer, and no additional tax is due to the municipality.
      (3)   All resident individual taxpayers, eighteen (18) years of age and
older, shall file an annual municipal income tax return with the municipality,
regardless of income or liability.
   (b)   If an individual is deceased, any return or notice required of that
individual shall be completed and filed by that decedent’s executor,
administrator, or other person charged with the property of that decedent.
   (c)   If an individual is unable to complete and file a return or notice
required by the municipality under this chapter, the return or notice required
of that individual shall be completed and filed by the individual’s duly
authorized agent, guardian, conservator, fiduciary, or other person charged
with the care of the person or property of that individual. Such duly
authorized agent, guardian, conservator, fiduciary, or other person charged
with the care of the person or property of that individual shall provide, with
the filing of the return, appropriate documentation to support that they are
authorized to file a return or notice on behalf of the taxpayer. This notice
shall include any legally binding authorizations, and contact information
including name, address, and phone number of the duly authorized agent,
guardian, conservator, fiduciary, or other person.
   (d)   Returns or notices required of an estate or a trust shall be completed
and filed by the fiduciary of the estate or trust. Such fiduciary shall
provide, with the filing of the return, appropriate documentation to support
that they are authorized to file a return or notice on behalf of the taxpayer.
This notice shall include any legally binding authorizations, and contact
information including name, address, and phone number of the fiduciary.
   (e)   The municipality shall not deny spouses the ability to file a joint
return.
   (f)   (1)   Each return required to be filed under this section shall
contain the signature of the taxpayer or the taxpayer’s duly authorized agent
and of the person who prepared the return for the taxpayer, and shall include
the taxpayer’s social security number or taxpayer identification number. Each
return shall be verified by a declaration under penalty of perjury.
      (2)   A taxpayer who is an individual is required to include, with each
annual return, amended return, or request for refund required under this
section, copies of only the following documents: all of the taxpayer’s Internal
Revenue Service Form W-2, “Wage and Tax Statements,” including all information
reported on the taxpayer’s federal W-2, as well as taxable wages reported or
withheld for any municipal corporation; the taxpayer’s Internal Revenue Service
Form 1040 and, with respect to an amended tax return or refund request, any
other documentation necessary to support the refund request or the adjustments
made in the amended return. An individual taxpayer who files the annual return
required by this section electronically is not required to provide paper copies
of any of the foregoing to the Tax Administrator unless the Tax Administrator
requests such copies after the return has been filed.
      (3)   A taxpayer that is not an individual is required to include, with
each annual net profit return, amended net profit return, or request for refund
required under this section, copies of only the following documents: the
taxpayer’s Internal Revenue Service Form 1041, Form 1065, Form 1120, Form 1120-
REIT, Form 1120F, or Form 1120S, and, with respect to an amended tax return or
refund request, any other documentation necessary to support the refund request
or the adjustments made in the amended return.
      (4)   A taxpayer that is not an individual and that files an annual net
profit return electronically through the Ohio Business Gateway or in some other
manner shall either mail the documents required under this division to the Tax
Administrator at the time of filing or, if electronic submission is available,
submit the documents electronically through the Ohio Business Gateway or a
portal provided by municipality. The department of taxation shall publish a
method of electronically submitting the documents required under this division
through the Ohio Business Gateway on or before January 1, 2016. The department
shall transmit all documents submitted electronically under this division to
the appropriate Tax Administrator.
      (5)   After a taxpayer files a tax return, the Tax Administrator shall
request, and the taxpayer shall provide, any information, statements, or
documents required by the municipality to determine and verify the taxpayer’s
municipal income tax liability. The requirements imposed under division (f) of
this section apply regardless of whether the taxpayer files on a generic form
or on a form prescribed by the Tax Administrator.
      (6)   Any other documentation, including schedules, other municipal
income tax returns, or other supporting documentation necessary to verify
credits, income, losses, or other pertinent factors on the return shall also be
included to avoid delay in processing, or disallowance by the Tax Administrator
of undocumented credits or losses.
   (g)   (1)   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, each
individual income tax return required to be filed under this section shall be
completed and filed as required by the Tax Administrator on or before the date
prescribed for the filing of state individual income tax returns under division
(G) of RC 5747.08. The taxpayer shall complete and file the return or notice on
forms prescribed by the Tax Administrator or on generic forms, together with
remittance made payable to the municipality or Tax Administrator.
         B.   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, each annual net
profit income tax return required to be filed under this section by a taxpayer
that is not an individual shall be completed and filed as required by the Tax
Administrator on or before the fifteenth (15th) day of the fourth (4th) month
following the end of the taxpayer’s taxable year or period. The taxpayer shall
complete and file the return or notice on forms prescribed by the Tax
Administrator or on generic forms, together with remittance made payable to the
municipality or Tax Administrator.
         C.   In the case of individual income tax return required to be filed
by an individual, and net profit income tax return required to be filed by a
taxpayer who is not an individual, no remittance is required if the amount
shown to be due is ten dollars ($10.00) or less.
      (2)   If the Tax Administrator considers it necessary in order to ensure
the payment of the tax imposed by the municipality in accordance with this
chapter, the Tax Administrator may require taxpayers to file returns and make
payments otherwise than as provided in this section, including taxpayers not
otherwise required to file annual returns.
      (3)   With respect to taxpayers to whom Section
192.24 of this chapter applies, to the extent that any provision in this
division conflicts with any provision in Section
192.24 of this chapter, the provision in Section
192.24 of this chapter prevails.
   (h)   (1)   For taxable years beginning after 2015, the municipality shall
not require a taxpayer to remit tax with respect to net profits if the amount
due is ten dollars ($10.00) or less.
      (2)   Any taxpayer not required to remit tax to the municipality for a
taxable year under division (h)(1) of this section shall file with the
municipality an annual net profit return under division (f)(3) and (f)(4) of
this section.
   (i)   This division shall not apply to payments required to be made under
division (b)(1)B. or C. of Section
192.10 of this chapter.
      (1)   If any report, claim, statement, or other document required to be
filed, or any payment required to be made, within a prescribed period or on or
before a prescribed date under this chapter is delivered after that period or
that date to the Tax Administrator or other municipal official with which the
report, claim, statement, or other document is required to be filed, or to
which the payment is required to be made, the date of the postmark stamped on
the cover in which the report, claim, statement, or other document, or payment
is mailed shall be deemed to be the date of delivery or the date of payment.
“The date of postmark” means, in the event there is more than one (1) date on
the cover, the earliest date imprinted on the cover by the postal service.
      (2)   If a payment is required to be made by electronic funds transfer,
the payment is considered to be made when the payment is credited to an account
designated by the Tax Administrator for the receipt of tax payments, except
that, when a payment made by electronic funds transfer is delayed due to
circumstances not under the control of the taxpayer, the payment is considered
to be made when the taxpayer submitted the payment. For purposes of this
section, “submitted the payment” means the date which the taxpayer has
designated for the delivery of payment, which may or may not be the same date
as the date the payment was initiated by the taxpayer.
   (j)   The amounts withheld for the municipality by an employer, the agent of
an employer, or other payer as described in Section
192.10 of this chapter shall be allowed to the recipient of the compensation as
credits against payment of the tax imposed on the recipient unless the amounts
withheld were not remitted to the municipality and the recipient colluded with
the employer, agent, or other payer in connection with the failure to remit the
amounts withheld.
   (k)   Each return required by the municipality to be filed under this
section shall include a box that the taxpayer may check to authorize another
person, including a tax return preparer who prepared the return, to communicate
with the Tax Administrator about matters pertaining to the return. The return
or instructions accompanying the return shall indicate that by checking the box
the taxpayer authorizes the Tax Administrator to contact the preparer or other
person concerning questions that arise during the examination or other review
of the return and authorizes the preparer or other person only to provide the
Tax Administrator with information that is missing from the return, to contact
the Tax Administrator for information about the examination or other review of
the return or the status of the taxpayer’s refund or payments, and to respond
to notices about mathematical errors, offsets, or return preparation that the
taxpayer has received from the Tax Administrator and has shown to the preparer
or other person. Authorization by the taxpayer of another person to communicate
with the Tax Administrator about matters pertaining to the return does not
preclude the Tax Administrator from contacting the taxpayer regarding such
matters.
   (l)   The Tax Administrator shall accept for filing a generic form of any
income tax return, report, or document required by the municipality under this
chapter, provided that the generic form, once completed and filed, contains all
of the information required by ordinances, resolutions, or rules adopted by the
municipality or Tax Administrator, and provided that the taxpayer or tax return
preparer filing the generic form otherwise complies with the provisions of this
chapter and of the municipality’s ordinance or resolution governing the filing
of returns, reports, or documents.
   (m)   When income tax returns, reports, or other documents require the
signature of a tax return preparer, the Tax Administrator shall accept a
facsimile of such a signature in lieu of a manual signature.
   (n)   (1)   As used in this division, “worksite location” has the same
meaning as in Section
192.11 of this chapter.
      (2)   A person may notify the Tax Administrator that the person does not
expect to be a taxpayer with respect to the municipal corporation for a taxable
year if both of the following conditions apply:
         A.   The person was required to file a tax return with the municipal
corporation for the immediately preceding taxable year because the person
performed services at a worksite location within the municipal corporation, and
the person has filed all appropriate and required returns and remitted all
applicable income tax and withholding payments as provided by this chapter. The
Tax Administrator is not required to accept an affidavit from a taxpayer who
has not complied with the provisions of this chapter.
         B.   The person no longer provides services in the municipal
corporation, and does not expect to be subject to the municipal corporation’s
income tax for the taxable year
   The person shall provide the notice in a signed affidavit that briefly
explains the person’s circumstances, including the location of the previous
worksite location and the last date on which the person performed services or
made any sales within the municipal corporation. The affidavit also shall
include the following statement: “The affiant has no plans to perform any
services within the municipal corporation, make any sales in the municipal
corporation, or otherwise become subject to the tax levied by the municipal
corporation during the taxable year. If the affiant does become subject to the
tax levied by the municipal corporation for the taxable year, the affiant
agrees to be considered a taxpayer and to properly register as a taxpayer with
the municipal corporation, if such a registration is required by the municipal
corporation’s resolutions, ordinances, or rules.” The person shall sign the
affidavit under penalty of perjury.
         C.   If a person submits an affidavit described in division (n)(2) of
this section, the Tax Administrator shall not require the person to file any
tax return for the taxable year unless the Tax Administrator possesses
information that conflicts with the affidavit or if the circumstances described
in the affidavit change, or the taxpayer has engaged in activity which results
in work being performed, services provided, sales made, or other activity that
results in municipal taxable income reportable to the municipality in the
taxable year. It shall be the responsibility of the taxpayer to comply with the
provisions of this chapter relating to the reporting and filing of municipal
taxable income on an annual municipal income tax return, even if an affidavit
has been filed with the Tax Administrator for the taxable year. Nothing in
division (n) of this section prohibits the Tax Administrator from performing an
audit of the person.
(Ord. No. 1412-15. Passed 11-23-15, eff. 1-1-16)
§ 192.24 Return and Payment of Tax; Individuals Serving in Combat Zone
   (a)   Each member of the national guard of any state and each member of a
reserve component of the armed forces of the United States called to active
duty under an executive order issued by the President of the United States or
an act of the Congress of the United States, and each civilian serving as
support personnel in a combat zone or contingency operation in support of the
armed forces, may apply to the Tax Administrator of the municipality for both
an extension of time for filing of the return and an extension of time for
payment of taxes required by the municipality under this chapter during the
period of the member’s or civilian’s duty service and for one hundred eighty
days thereafter. The application shall be filed on or before the one hundred
eightieth (180th) day after the member’s or civilian’s duty terminates. An
applicant shall provide such evidence as the Tax Administrator considers
necessary to demonstrate eligibility for the extension.
   (b)   (1)   If the Tax Administrator ascertains that an applicant is
qualified for an extension under this section, the Tax Administrator shall
enter into a contract with the applicant for the payment of the tax in
installments that begin on the one hundred eighty-first (181st) day after the
applicant’s active duty or service terminates. Except as provided in division
(b)(3) of this section, the Tax Administrator may prescribe such contract terms
as the Tax Administrator considers appropriate.
      (2)   If the Tax Administrator ascertains that an applicant is qualified
for an extension under this section, the applicant shall neither be required to
file any return, report, or other tax document nor be required to pay any tax
otherwise due to the municipality before the one hundred eighty-first (181st)
day after the applicant’s active duty or service terminates.
      (3)   Taxes paid under a contract entered into under division (b)(1) of
this section are not delinquent. The Tax Administrator shall not require any
payments of penalties or interest in connection with those taxes for the
extension period.
   (c)   (1)   Nothing in this division denies to any person described in this
division the application of divisions (a) and (b) of this section.
      (2)   A.   In accordance with RC 718.05(G), a qualifying taxpayer who is
eligible for an extension under the Internal Revenue Code shall receive both an
extension of time in which to file any return, report, or other tax document
and an extension of time in which to make any payment of taxes required by the
municipality in accordance with this chapter. The length of any extension
granted under division (c)(2)A. of this section shall be equal to the length of
the corresponding extension that the taxpayer receives under the Internal
Revenue Code. As used in this section, “qualifying taxpayer” means a member of
the national guard or a member of a reserve component of the armed forces of
the United States called to active duty pursuant to either an executive order
issued by the President of the United States or an act of the Congress of the
United States, or a civilian serving as support personnel in a combat zone or
contingency operation in support of the armed forces.
         B.   Taxes the payment of which is extended under division (c)(2)A. of
this section are not delinquent during the extension period. Such taxes become
delinquent on the first day after the expiration of the extension period if the
taxes are not paid prior to that date. The Tax Administrator shall not require
any payment of penalties or interest in connection with those taxes for the
extension period. The Tax Administrator shall not include any period of
extension granted under division (c)(2)A. of this section in calculating the
penalty or interest due on any unpaid tax.
   (d)   For each taxable year to which division (a), (b), or (c) of this
section applies to a taxpayer, the provisions of divisions (b)(2) and (b)(3) or
(c) of this section, as applicable, apply to the spouse of that taxpayer if the
filing status of the spouse and the taxpayer is married filing jointly for that
year.
(Ord. No. 1344-2023. Passed 11-27-23, eff. 11-28-23)
§ 192.25 Use of Ohio Business Gateway; Types of Filings Authorized
   (a)   Any taxpayer subject to municipal income taxation with respect to the
taxpayer’s net profit from a business or profession may file any municipal
income tax return or, estimated municipal income tax return, or extension for
filing a municipal income tax return, and may make payment of amounts shown to
be due on such returns, by using the Ohio Business Gateway.
   (b)   Any employer, agent of an employer, or other payer may report the
amount of municipal income tax withheld from qualifying wages, and may make
remittance of such amounts, by using the Ohio Business Gateway.
   (c)   Nothing in this section affects the due dates for filing employer
withholding tax returns or deposit of any required tax.
   (d)   The use of the Ohio Business Gateway by municipal corporations,
taxpayers, or other persons does not affect the legal rights of municipalities
or taxpayers as otherwise permitted by law. The State of Ohio shall not be a
party to the administration of municipal income taxes or to an appeal of a
municipal income tax matter, except as otherwise specifically provided by law.
   (e)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as limiting or removing the
authority of the municipality to administer, audit, and enforce the provisions
of its municipal income tax.
(Ord. No. 1412-15. Passed 11-23-15, eff. 1-1-16)
§ 192.26 Extension of Time to File
   (a)   Any taxpayer that has duly requested an automatic six (6) month
extension for filing the taxpayer’s federal income tax return shall
automatically receive an extension for the filing of a municipal income tax
return. The extended due date of the municipal income tax return shall be the
fifteenth (15th) day of the tenth (10th) month after the last day of the
taxable year to which the return relates. The extended due date of the
municipal income tax return for a taxpayer that is not an individual shall be
the fifteenth (15th) day of the eleventh (11th) month after the last day of the
taxable year to which the return relates.
   (b)   Any taxpayer that qualifies for an automatic federal extension for a
period other than six (6) months for filing the taxpayer’s federal income tax
return shall automatically receive an extension for the filing of a municipal
income tax return. The extended due date of the municipal income tax return
shall be the same as that of the extended federal income tax return.
   (c)   A taxpayer that has not requested or received a six (6) month
extension for filing the taxpayer’s federal income tax return may request that
the Tax Administrator grant the taxpayer a six (6) month extension of the date
for filing the taxpayer’s municipal income tax return. If the request is
received by the Tax Administrator on or before the date the municipal income
tax return is due, the Tax Administrator shall grant the taxpayer’s requested
extension.
   (d)   An extension of time to file under this chapter is not an extension of
the time to pay any tax due unless the Tax Administrator grants an extension of
that date.
   (e)   If the State Tax Commissioner extends for all taxpayers the date for
filing state income tax returns under division (G) of RC 5747.08, a taxpayer
shall automatically receive an extension for the filing of a municipal income
tax return. The extended due date of the municipal income tax return shall be
the same as the extended due date of the state income tax return.
(Ord. No. 1344-2023. Passed 11-27-23, eff. 11-28-23)
§ 192.27 Amended Returns
   (a)   (1)   A taxpayer shall file an amended return with the Tax
Administrator in such form as the Tax Administrator requires if any of the
facts, figures, computations, or attachments required in the taxpayer’s annual
return to determine the tax due levied by the municipality in accordance with
this chapter must be altered.
      (2)   Within sixty (60) days after the final determination of any federal
or state tax liability affecting the taxpayer’s municipal tax liability, that
taxpayer shall make and file an amended municipal return showing income subject
to the municipal income tax based upon such final determination of federal or
state tax liability, and pay any additional municipal income tax shown due
thereon or make a claim for refund of any overpayment, unless the tax or
overpayment is ten dollars ($10.00) or less.
      (3)   If a taxpayer intends to file an amended consolidated municipal
income tax return, or to amend its type of return from a separate return to a
consolidated return, based on the taxpayer’s consolidated federal income tax
return, the taxpayer shall notify the Tax Administrator before filing the
amended return.
   (b)   (1)   In the case of an underpayment, the amended return shall be
accompanied by payment of any combined additional tax due together with any
penalty and interest thereon. If the combined tax shown to be due is ten
dollars ($10.00) or less, such amount need not accompany the amended return.
Except as provided under division (b)(2) of this section, the amended return
shall not reopen those facts, figures, computations, or attachments from a
previously filed return that are not affected, either directly or indirectly,
by the adjustment to the taxpayer’s federal or state income tax return unless
the applicable statute of limitations for civil actions or prosecutions under
Section
192.41 of this chapter has not expired for a previously filed return.
      (2)   The additional tax to be paid shall not exceed the amount of tax
that would be due if all facts, figures, computations, and attachments were
reopened.
   (c)   (1)   In the case of an overpayment, a request for refund may be filed
under this division within the period prescribed division (a)(2) of this
section for filing the amended return even if it is filed beyond the period
prescribed in that division if it otherwise conforms to the requirements of
that division. If the amount of the refund is ten dollars ($10.00) or less, no
refund need be paid by the municipality to the taxpayer. Except as set forth in
division (c)(2) of this section, a request filed under this division shall
claim refund of overpayments resulting from alterations to only those facts,
figures, computations, or attachments required in the taxpayer’s annual return
that are affected, either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the
taxpayer’s federal or state income tax return unless it is also filed within
the time prescribed in Section
192.28 of this chapter. Except as set forth in division (c)(2) of this section,
the request shall not reopen those facts, figures, computations, or attachments
that are not affected, either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the
taxpayer’s federal or state income tax return.
      (2)   The amount to be refunded shall not exceed the amount of refund
that would be due if all facts, figures, computations, and attachments were
reopened.
(Ord. No. 1412-15. Passed 11-23-15, eff. 1-1-16)
§ 192.28 Refunds
   (a)   Upon receipt of a request for a refund, the Tax Administrator of the
municipality, under this section, shall refund to employers, agents of
employers, other payers, or taxpayers, with respect to any income or
withholding tax levied by the municipality:
      (1)   Overpayments of more than ten dollars ($10.00);
      (2)   Amounts paid erroneously if the refund requested exceeds ten
dollars ($10.00).
   (b)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, returns setting
forth a request for refund shall be filed with the Tax Administrator, within
three (3) years after the tax was due or paid, whichever is later. Any
documentation that substantiates the taxpayer’s claim for a refund must be
included with the return filing. Failure to remit all documentation, including
schedules, other municipal income tax returns, or other supporting
documentation necessary to verify credits, income, losses or other pertinent
factors on the return will cause delay in processing, and/or disallowance of
undocumented credits or losses.
      (2)   On filing of the refund request, the Tax Administrator shall
determine the amount of refund due and certify such amount to the appropriate
municipality official for payment. Except as provided in division (b)(3) of
this section, the administrator shall issue an assessment to any taxpayer whose
request for refund is fully or partially denied. The assessment shall state the
amount of the refund that was denied, the reasons for the denial, and
instructions for appealing the assessment.
      (3)   If a Tax Administrator denies in whole or in part a refund request
included within the taxpayer’s originally filed annual income tax return, the
Tax Administrator shall notify the taxpayer, in writing, of the amount of the
refund that was denied, the reasons for the denial, and instructions for
requesting an assessment that may be appealed under Section
192.40 of this chapter.
   (c)   A request for a refund that is received after the last day for filing
specified in division (b) of this section shall be considered to have been
filed in a timely manner if any of the following situations exist:
      (1)   The request is delivered by the postal service, and the earliest
postal service postmark on the cover in which the request is enclosed is not
later than the last day for filing the request;
      (2)   The request is delivered by the postal service, the only postmark
on the cover in which the request is enclosed was affixed by a private postal
meter, the date of that postmark is not later than the last day for filing the
request, and the request is received within seven (7) days of such last day; or
      (3)   The request is delivered by the postal service, no postmark date
was affixed to the cover in which the request is enclosed or the date of the
postmark so affixed is not legible, and the request is received within seven
(7) days of the last day for making the request.
   (d)   Interest shall be allowed and paid on any overpayment by a taxpayer of
any municipal income tax obligation from the date of the overpayment until the
date of the refund of the overpayment, except that if any overpayment is
refunded within ninety (90) days after the final filing date of the annual
return or ninety (90) days after the completed return is filed, whichever is
later, no interest shall be allowed on the refund. For the purpose of computing
the payment of interest on amounts overpaid, no amount of tax for any taxable
year shall be considered to have been paid before the date on which the return
on which the tax is reported is due, without regard to any extension of time
for filing that return. Interest shall be paid at the interest rate described
in division (a)(4) of Section
192.29 of this chapter.
   (e)   As used in this section, “withholding tax” has the same meaning as in
Section
192.29 of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 1412-15. Passed 11-23-15, eff. 1-1-16)
§ 192.29 Penalty, Interest, Fees, and Charges
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Applicable law” means this chapter, the resolutions, ordinances,
codes, directives, instructions, and rules adopted by the municipality provided
such resolutions, ordinances, codes, directives, instructions, and rules impose
or directly or indirectly address the levy, payment, remittance, or filing
requirements of a municipal income tax.
      (2)   “Federal short-term rate” means the rate of the average market
yield on outstanding marketable obligations of the United States with remaining
periods to maturity of three (3) years or less, as determined under Section
1274 of the Internal Revenue Code, for July of the current year.
      (3)   “Income tax,” “estimated income tax,” and “withholding tax” mean
any income tax, estimated income tax, and withholding tax imposed by a
municipal corporation under applicable law, including at any time before
January 1, 2016.
      (4)   “Interest rate as described in division (a) of this section” means
the federal short-term rate, rounded to the nearest whole number percent, plus
five percent (5%). The rate shall apply for the calendar year next following
the July of the year in which the federal short- term rate is determined in
accordance with division (a)(2) of this section.
      (5)   “Return” includes any tax return, report, reconciliation, schedule,
and other document required to be filed with a Tax Administrator or municipal
corporation by a taxpayer, employer, any agent of the employer, or any other
payer under applicable law, including at any time before January 1, 2016.
      (6)   “Unpaid estimated income tax” means estimated income tax due but
not paid by the date the tax is required to be paid under applicable law.
      (7)   “Unpaid income tax” means income tax due but not paid by the date
the income tax is required to be paid under applicable law.
      (8)   “Unpaid withholding tax” means withholding tax due but not paid by
the date the withholding tax is required to be paid under applicable law.
      (9)   “Withholding tax” includes amounts an employer, any agent of an
employer, or any other payer did not withhold in whole or in part from an
employee’s qualifying wages, but that, under applicable law, the employer,
agent, or other payer is required to withhold from an employee’s qualifying
wages.
   (b)   (1)   This section shall apply to the following:
         A.   Any return required to be filed under applicable law for taxable
years beginning on or after January 1, 2016;
         B.   Income tax, estimated income tax, and withholding tax required to
be paid or remitted to the municipality on or after January 1, 2016 for taxable
years beginning on or after January 1, 2016.
      (2)   This section does not apply to returns required to be filed or
payments required to be made before January 1, 2016, regardless of the filing
or payment date. Returns required to be filed or payments required to be made
before January 1, 2016, but filed or paid after that date shall be subject to
the ordinances or rules, as adopted from time to time before January 1, 2016 of
this municipality.
   (c)   The municipality shall impose on a taxpayer, employer, any agent of
the employer, and any other payer, and will attempt to collect, the interest
amounts and penalties prescribed in this section when the taxpayer, employer,
any agent of the employer, or any other payer for any reason fails, in whole or
in part, to make to the municipality timely and full payment or remittance of
income tax, estimated income tax, or withholding tax or to file timely with the
municipality any return required to be filed.
      (1)   Interest shall be imposed at the rate defined as “interest rate as
described in division (a) of this section”, per annum, on all unpaid income
tax, unpaid estimated income tax, and unpaid withholding tax. This imposition
of interest shall be assessed per month, or fraction of a month.
      (2)   With respect to unpaid income tax and unpaid estimated income tax,
a penalty equal to fifteen percent (15%) of the amount not timely paid shall be
imposed.
      (3)   With respect to any unpaid withholding tax, a penalty equal to
fifty percent (50%) of the amount not timely paid shall be imposed.
      (4)   With respect to returns other than estimated income tax returns,
the municipality shall impose a monthly penalty of twenty-five dollars ($25.00)
for each failure to timely file each return, regardless of the liability shown
thereon for each month, or any fraction thereof, during which the return
remains unfiled regardless of the liability shown thereon. The penalty shall
not exceed a total of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) in assessed penalty for each
failure to timely file a return, except that a municipal corporation shall
abate or refund the penalty assessed on a taxpayer’s first failure to timely
file a return after the taxpayer files that return.
   (d)   With respect to income taxes, estimated income taxes, withholding
taxes, and returns, the municipality shall not impose, seek to collect, or
collect any penalty, amount of interest, charges or additional fees not
described in this section.
   (e)   With respect to income taxes, estimated income taxes, withholding
taxes, and returns, the municipality shall not refund or credit any penalty,
amount of interest, charges, or additional fees that were properly imposed or
collected before January 1, 2016.
   (f)   The Tax Administrator may, in the Tax Administrator’s sole discretion,
abate or partially abate penalties or interest imposed under this section when
the Tax Administrator deems such abatement or partial abatement to be
appropriate. Such abatement or partial abatement shall be properly documented
and maintained on the record of the taxpayer who received benefit of such
abatement or partial abatement.
   (g)   The municipality may impose on the taxpayer, employer, any agent of
the employer, or any other payer the municipality’s post-judgment collection
costs and fees, including attorney’s fees.
(Ord. No. 1344-2023. Passed 11-27-23, eff. 11-28-23)
§ 192.30 Audit
   (a)   At or before the commencement of an audit, as defined in division (c)
of Section
192.06 of this chapter, the Tax Administrator shall provide to the taxpayer a
written description of the roles of the Tax Administrator and of the taxpayer
during an audit and a statement of the taxpayer’s rights, including any right
to obtain a refund of an overpayment of tax. At or before the commencement of
an audit, the Tax Administrator shall inform the taxpayer when the audit is
considered to have commenced.
   (b)   Except in cases involving suspected criminal activity, the Tax
Administrator shall conduct an audit of a taxpayer during regular business
hours and after providing reasonable notice to the taxpayer. A taxpayer who is
unable to comply with a proposed time for an audit on the grounds that the
proposed time would cause inconvenience or hardship must offer reasonable
alternative dates for the audit.
   (c)   At all stages of an audit by the Tax Administrator, a taxpayer is
entitled to be assisted or represented by an attorney, accountant, bookkeeper,
or other tax practitioner. The Tax Administrator shall prescribe a form by
which a taxpayer may designate such a person to assist or represent the
taxpayer in the conduct of any proceedings resulting from actions by the Tax
Administrator. If a taxpayer has not submitted such a form, the Tax
Administrator may accept other evidence, as the Tax Administrator considers
appropriate, that a person is the authorized representative of a taxpayer.
   A taxpayer may refuse to answer any questions asked by the person conducting
an audit until the taxpayer has an opportunity to consult with the taxpayer’s
attorney, accountant, bookkeeper, or other tax practitioner. This division does
not authorize the practice of law by a person who is not an attorney.
   (d)   A taxpayer may record, electronically or otherwise, the audit
examination.
   (e)   The failure of the Tax Administrator to comply with a provision of
this section shall neither excuse a taxpayer from payment of any taxes owed by
the taxpayer nor cure any procedural defect in a taxpayer’s case.
   (f)   If the Tax Administrator fails to substantially comply with the
provisions of this section, the Tax Administrator, upon application by the
taxpayer, shall excuse the taxpayer from penalties and interest arising from
the audit.
(Ord. No. 1412-15. Passed 11-23-15, eff. 1-1-16)
§ 192.31 Rounding
   A person may round to the nearest whole dollar all amounts the person is
required to enter on any return, report, voucher, or other document required
under this chapter. Any fractional part of a dollar that equals or exceeds
fifty cents ($0.50) shall be rounded to the next whole dollar, and any
fractional part of a dollar that is less than fifty cents ($0.50) shall be
dropped, rounding down to the nearest whole dollar. If a person chooses to
round amounts entered on a document, the person shall round all amounts entered
on the document.
(Ord. No. 1412-15. Passed 11-23-15, eff. 1-1-16)
§ 192.32 Authority of Tax Administrator; Administrative Powers of the Tax
Administrator
   The Tax Administrator has the authority to perform all duties and functions
necessary and appropriate to implement the provisions of this chapter,
including without limitation:
   (a)   Exercise all powers whatsoever of an inquisitorial nature as provided
by law, including, the right to inspect books, accounts, records, memorandums,
and federal and state income tax returns, to examine persons under oath, to
issue orders or subpoenas for the production of books, accounts, papers,
records, documents, and testimony, to take depositions, to apply to a court for
attachment proceedings as for contempt, to approve vouchers for the fees of
officers and witnesses, and to administer oaths; provided that the powers
referred to in this division of this section shall be exercised by the Tax
Administrator only in connection with the performance of the duties
respectively assigned to the Tax Administrator under a municipal corporation
income tax ordinance or resolution adopted under this chapter;
   (b)   Appoint agents and prescribe their powers and duties;
   (c)   Confer and meet with officers of other municipal corporations and
states and officers of the United States on any matters pertaining to their
respective official duties as provided by law;
   (d)   Exercise the authority provided by law, including orders from
bankruptcy courts, relative to remitting or refunding taxes, including
penalties and interest thereon, illegally or erroneously imposed or collected,
or for any other reason overpaid, and, in addition, the Tax Administrator may
investigate any claim of overpayment and make a written statement of the Tax
Administrator’s findings, and, if the Tax Administrator finds that there has
been an overpayment, approve and issue a refund payable to the taxpayer, the
taxpayer’s assigns, or legal representative as provided in this chapter;
   (e)   Exercise the authority provided by law relative to consenting to the
compromise and settlement of tax claims;
   (f)   Exercise the authority provided by law relative to the use of
alternative apportionment methods by taxpayers under Section
192.14 of this chapter;
   (g)   Make all tax findings, determinations, computations, assessments and
orders the Tax Administrator is by law authorized and required to make and,
pursuant to time limitations provided by law, on the Tax Administrator’s own
motion, review, re-determine, or correct any tax findings, determinations,
computations, assessments or orders the Tax Administrator has made, but the Tax
Administrator shall not review, redetermine, or correct any tax finding,
determination, computation, assessment or order which the Tax Administrator has
made for which an appeal has been filed with the Local Board of Tax Review or
other appropriate tribunal, unless such appeal or application is withdrawn by
the appellant or applicant, is dismissed, or is otherwise final;
   (h)   Destroy any or all returns or other tax documents in the manner
authorized by law;
   (i)   Enter into an agreement with a taxpayer to simplify the withholding
obligations described in Section
192.10 of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 1412-15. Passed 11-23-15, eff. 1-1-16)
§ 192.33 Authority of Tax Administrator; Compromise of Claim and Payment over
Time
   (a)   As used in this section, “claim” means a claim for an amount payable
to the municipality that arises under the municipal income tax imposed in
accordance with this chapter.
   (b)   The Tax Administrator may do either of the following if such action is
in the best interests of the municipality:
      (1)   Compromise a claim in accordance with the Charter and Codified
Ordinances of the municipality; or
      (2)   Extend for a reasonable period the time for payment of a claim by
agreeing to accept monthly or other periodic payments, upon such terms and
conditions as the Tax Administrator may require.
   (c)   The Tax Administrator’s rejection of a compromise or payment-over-time
agreement proposed by a person with respect to a claim shall not be appealable.
   (d)   A compromise or payment-over-time agreement with respect to a claim
shall be binding upon and shall inure to the benefit of only the parties to the
compromise or agreement, and shall not extinguish or otherwise affect the
liability of any other person.
   (e)   (1)   A compromise or payment-over-time agreement with respect to a
claim shall be void if the taxpayer defaults under the compromise or agreement
or if the compromise or agreement was obtained by fraud or by misrepresentation
of a material fact. Any amount that was due before the compromise or agreement
and that is unpaid shall remain due, and any penalties or interest that would
have accrued in the absence of the compromise or agreement shall continue to
accrue and be due.
      (2)   The Tax Administrator shall have sole discretion to determine
whether or not penalty, interest, charges or applicable fees will be assessed
through the duration of any compromise or payment-over-time agreement.
   (f)   The Tax Administrator may require that the taxpayer provide detailed
financial documentation and information, in order to determine whether or not a
payment-over-time agreement will be authorized. The taxpayer’s failure to
provide the necessary and required information by the Tax Administrator shall
preclude consideration of a payment-over-time agreement.
(Ord. No. 1412-15. Passed 11-23-15, eff. 1-1-16)
§ 192.34 Authority of Tax Administrator; Right to Examine
   (a)   The Tax Administrator, or any authorized agent or employee thereof may
examine the books, papers, records, and federal and state income tax returns of
any employer, taxpayer, or other person that is subject to, or that the Tax
Administrator believes is subject to, the provisions of this chapter for the
purpose of verifying the accuracy of any return made or, if no return was
filed, to ascertain the tax due under this chapter. On written request by the
Tax Administrator or a duly authorized agent or employee thereof, every
employer, taxpayer, or other person subject to this section is required to
furnish the opportunity for the Tax Administrator, authorized agent, or
employee to investigate and examine such books, papers, records, and federal
and state income tax returns at a reasonable time and place designated in the
request.
   (b)   The records and other documents of any taxpayer, employer, or other
person that is subject to, or that a Tax Administrator believes is subject to,
the provisions of this chapter shall be open to the Tax Administrator’s
inspection during business hours and shall be preserved for a period of six (6)
years following the end of the taxable year to which the records or documents
relate, unless the Tax Administrator, in writing, consents to their destruction
within that period, or by order requires that they be kept longer. The Tax
Administrator of a municipal corporation may require any person, by notice
served on that person, to keep such records as the Tax Administrator determines
necessary to show whether or not that person is liable, and the extent of such
liability, for the income tax levied by the municipality or for the withholding
of such tax.
   (c)   The Tax Administrator may examine under oath any person that the Tax
Administrator reasonably believes has knowledge concerning any income that was
or would have been returned for taxation or any transaction tending to affect
such income. The Tax Administrator may, for this purpose, compel any such
person to attend a hearing or examination and to produce any books, papers,
records, and federal and state income tax returns in such person’s possession
or control. The person may be assisted or represented by an attorney,
accountant, bookkeeper, or other tax practitioner at any such hearing or
examination. This division does not authorize the practice of law by a person
who is not an attorney.
   (d)   No person issued written notice by the Tax Administrator compelling
attendance at a hearing or examination or the production of books, papers,
records, or federal and state income tax returns under this section shall fail
to comply.
(Ord. No. 1412-15. Passed 11-23-15, eff. 1-1-16)
§ 192.35 Authority of Tax Administrator; Requiring Identifying Information
   (a)   The Tax Administrator may require any person filing a tax document
with the Tax Administrator to provide identifying information, which may
include the person’s social security number, federal employer identification
number, or other identification number requested by the Tax Administrator. A
person required by the Tax Administrator to provide identifying information
that has experienced any change with respect to that information shall notify
the Tax Administrator of the change before, or upon, filing the next tax
document requiring the identifying information.
   (b)   (1)   If the Tax Administrator makes a request for identifying
information and the Tax Administrator does not receive valid identifying
information within thirty days of making the request, nothing in this chapter
prohibits the Tax Administrator from imposing a penalty upon the person to whom
the request was directed under Section
192.29 of this chapter, in addition to any applicable penalty described in
Section
192.99 of this chapter.
      (2)   If a person required by the Tax Administrator to provide
identifying information does not notify the Tax Administrator of a change with
respect to that information as required under division (a) of this section
within thirty (30) days after filing the next tax document requiring such
identifying information, nothing in this chapter prohibits the Tax
Administrator from imposing a penalty under Section
192.29 of this chapter.
      (3)   The penalties provided for under divisions (b)(1) and (b)(2) of
this section may be billed and imposed in the same manner as the tax or fee
with respect to which the identifying information is sought and are in addition
to any applicable criminal penalties described in Section
192.99 of this chapter for a violation of Section
192.37 of this chapter, and any other penalties that may be imposed by the Tax
Administrator by law.
(Ord. No. 1412-15. Passed 11-23-15, eff. 1-1-16)
§ 192.36 Confidentiality
   (a)   Any information gained as a result of returns, investigations,
hearings, or verifications required or authorized by RC Chapter 718 or by the
charter or ordinance of the municipality is confidential, and no person shall
access or disclose such information except under a proper judicial order or in
connection with the performance of that person’s official duties or the
official business of the municipality as authorized by RC Chapter 718 or the
charter or ordinance authorizing the levy. The Tax Administrator of the
municipality or a designee thereof may furnish copies of returns filed or
otherwise received under this chapter and other related tax information to the
Internal Revenue Service, the State Tax Commissioner, and tax administrators of
other municipal corporations.
   (b)   This section does not prohibit the municipality from publishing or
disclosing statistics in a form that does not disclose information with respect
to particular taxpayers.
(Ord. No. 1412-15. Passed 11-23-15, eff. 1-1-16)
§ 192.37 Fraud
   No person shall knowingly make, present, aid, or assist in the preparation
or presentation of a false or fraudulent report, return, schedule, statement,
claim, or document authorized or required by municipal corporation ordinance or
state law to be filed with the Tax Administrator, or knowingly procure,
counsel, or advise the preparation or presentation of such report, return,
schedule, statement, claim, or document, or knowingly change, alter, or amend,
or knowingly procure, counsel or advise such change, alteration, or amendment
of the records upon which such report, return, schedule, statement, claim, or
document is based with intent to defraud the municipality or the Tax
Administrator.
(Ord. No. 1412-15. Passed 11-23-15, eff. 1-1-16)
§ 192.38 Opinion of the Tax Administrator
   (a)   An “opinion of the Tax Administrator” means an opinion issued under
this section with respect to prospective municipal income tax liability. It
does not include ordinary correspondence of the Tax Administrator.
   (b)   A taxpayer may submit a written request for an opinion of the Tax
Administrator as to whether or how certain income, source of income, or a
certain activity or transaction will be taxed. The written response of the Tax
Administrator shall be an “opinion of the Tax Administrator” and shall bind the
Tax Administrator, under divisions (c), (g), and (h) of this section, provided
all of the following conditions are satisfied:
      (1)   The taxpayer’s request fully and accurately describes the specific
facts or circumstances relevant to a determination of the taxability of the
income, source of income, activity, or transaction, and, if an activity or
transaction, all parties involved in the activity or transaction are clearly
identified by name, location, or other pertinent facts;
      (2)   The request relates to a tax imposed by the municipality under this
chapter; and
      (3)   The Tax Administrator’s response is signed by the Tax Administrator
and designated as an “opinion of the Tax Administrator.”
   (c)   An opinion of the Tax Administrator shall remain in effect and shall
protect the taxpayer for whom the opinion was prepared and who reasonably
relies on it from liability for any taxes, penalty, or interest otherwise
chargeable on the activity or transaction specifically held by the Tax
Administrator’s opinion to be taxable in a particular manner or not to be
subject to taxation for any taxable years that may be specified in the opinion,
or until the earliest of the following dates:
      (1)   The effective date of a written revocation by the Tax Administrator
sent to the taxpayer by certified mail, return receipt requested. The effective
date of the revocation shall be the taxpayer’s date of receipt or one (1) year
after the issuance of the opinion, whichever is later;
      (2)   The effective date of any amendment or enactment of a relevant
section of the Revised Code, uncodified state law, or the municipality’s income
tax ordinance that would substantially change the analysis and conclusion of
the opinion of the Tax Administrator;
      (3)   The date on which a court issues an opinion establishing or
changing relevant case law with respect to the Revised Code, uncodified state
law, or the municipality’s income tax ordinance;
      (4)   If the opinion of the Tax Administrator was based on the
interpretation of federal law, the effective date of any change in the relevant
federal statutes or regulations, or the date on which a court issues an opinion
establishing or changing relevant case law with respect to federal statutes or
regulations;
      (5)   The effective date of any change in the taxpayer’s material facts
or circumstances; or
      (6)   The effective date of the expiration of the opinion, if specified
in the opinion.
   (d)   (1)   A taxpayer is not relieved of tax liability for any activity or
transaction related to a request for an opinion that contained any
misrepresentation or omission of one or more material facts.
      (2)   If the taxpayer knowingly has misrepresented the pertinent facts or
omitted material facts with intent to defraud the municipality in order to
obtain a more favorable opinion, the taxpayer may be in violation of Section
192.37 of this chapter.
   (e)   If a Tax Administrator provides written advice under this section, the
opinion shall include a statement that:
      (1)   The tax consequences stated in the opinion may be subject to change
for any of the reasons stated in division (c) of this section; and
         (2)   It is the duty of the taxpayer to be aware of such changes.
   (f)   A Tax Administrator may refuse to offer an opinion on any request
received under this section.
   (g)   This section binds a Tax Administrator only with respect to opinions
of the Tax Administrator issued on or after January 1, 2016.
   (h)   An opinion of a Tax Administrator binds that Tax Administrator only
with respect to the taxpayer for whom the opinion was prepared and does not
bind the Tax Administrator of any other municipal corporation.
   (i)   A Tax Administrator shall make available the text of all opinions
issued under this section, except those opinions prepared for a taxpayer who
has requested that the text of the opinion remain confidential. In no event
shall the text of an opinion be made available until the Tax Administrator has
removed all information that identifies the taxpayer and any other parties
involved in the activity or transaction.
   (j)   An opinion of the Tax Administrator issued under this section or a
refusal to offer an opinion under division (f) may not be appealed.
(Ord. No. 1412-15. Passed 11-23-15, eff. 1-1-16)
§ 192.39 Assessment; Appeal Based on Presumption of Delivery
   (a)   (1)   The Tax Administrator shall serve an assessment either by
personal service, by certified mail, or by a delivery service authorized under
RC 5703.056.
      (2)   The Tax Administrator may deliver the assessment through
alternative means as provided in this section, including, but not limited to,
delivery by secure electronic mail. Such alternative delivery method must be
authorized by the person subject to the assessment.
      (3)   Once service of the assessment has been made by the Tax
Administrator or other municipal official, or the designee of either, the
person to whom the assessment is directed may protest the ruling of that
assessment by filing an appeal with the Local Board of Tax Review within sixty
(60) days after the receipt of service. The delivery of an assessment of the
Tax Administrator as prescribed in RC 718.18 is prima facie evidence that
delivery is complete and that the assessment is served.
   (b)   (1)   A person may challenge the presumption of delivery and service
as set forth in this division. A person disputing the presumption of delivery
and service under this section bears the burden of proving by a preponderance
of the evidence that the address to which the assessment was sent was not an
address with which the person was associated at the time the Tax Administrator
originally mailed the assessment by certified mail. For the purposes of this
section, a person is associated with an address at the time the Tax
Administrator originally mailed the assessment if, at that time, the person was
residing, receiving legal documents, or conducting business at the address; or
if, before that time, the person had conducted business at the address and,
when the assessment was mailed, the person’s agent or the person’s affiliate
was conducting business at the address. For the purposes of this section, a
person’s affiliate is any other person that, at the time the assessment was
mailed, owned or controlled at least twenty percent (20%), as determined by
voting rights, of the addressee’s business.
      (2)   If a person elects to appeal an assessment on the basis described
in division (b)(1) of this section, and if that assessment is subject to
collection and is not otherwise appealable, the person must do so within sixty
days after the initial contact by the Tax Administrator or other municipal
official, or the designee of either, with the person. Nothing in this division
prevents the Tax Administrator or other official from entering into a
compromise with the person if the person does not actually file such an appeal
with the Local Board of Tax Review.
(Ord. No. 1412-15. Passed 11-23-15, eff. 1-1-16)
§ 192.40 Local Board of Tax Review; Appeal to Local Board of Tax Review
   (a)   A Board of Review, consisting of three (3) members, one (1) appointed
by the mayor and two (2) members appointed by Council, is hereby created and
shall be maintained to hear appeals by taxpayers of assessments issued by the
Tax Administrator regarding a municipal income tax obligation that is subject
to appeal as provided in RC Chapter 718, this chapter or the rules and
regulations. Said appeal shall be filed within sixty (60) days after the
taxpayer receives the assessment.
   (b)   The members appointed by Council may not be employees of the City of
Cleveland, elected officials, or contractors with the City of Cleveland at any
time during their term or in the five (5) years immediately preceding the date
of appointment.
      (1)   These members shall serve for a term of two (2) years and may be
re- appointed by Council an unlimited number of times.
      (2)   Members appointed by Council may be removed pursuant to RC Chapter
718.
   (c)   The member appointed by the Mayor may be an employee of the City of
Cleveland, but may not be the Director of Finance, Tax Administrator, or an
employee directly involved in municipal tax matters, or any direct subordinate
thereof. This member shall serve at the discretion of the Mayor.
   (d)   A member of the Board who, for any reason, ceases to meet the
qualifications for the position prescribed by this section or RC Chapter 718
shall resign immediately by operation of law.
   (e)   Any vacancy in an unexpired term shall be filled by the appointing
authority within sixty (60) days of when the vacancy was created. Any member
appointed to fill a vacancy occurring prior to the expiration of the term for
which the member’s predecessor was appointed shall hold office for the
remainder of such term. No vacancy on the Board shall impair the power and
authority of the remaining members to exercise all the powers of the Board.
   (f)   If a member is temporarily unable to serve on the Board due to a
conflict of interest, illness, absence, or similar reason, another individual
shall be appointed by the original appointing authority, the Mayor or Council,
to temporarily serve in the member’s place. The appointment of such an
individual shall be subject to the same requirements and limitations as are
applicable to the appointment of the member temporarily unable to serve.
   (g)   The Board shall follow all procedures and requirements imposed by RC
Chapter 718 in conducting hearings and appeals before the Board as well as in
issuing its decisions. All matters before the Board shall be confidential as
provided under RC Chapter 718.
(Ord. No. 1412-15. Passed 11-23-15, eff. 1-1-16)
§ 192.41 Actions to Recover; Statute of Limitations
   (a)   (1)   A.   Civil actions to recover municipal income taxes and
penalties and interest on municipal income taxes shall be brought within the
latter of:
            1.   Three (3) years after the tax was due or the return was filed,
whichever is later; or
            2.   One (1) year after the conclusion of the qualifying deferral
period, if any.
         B.   The time limit described in division (a)(1)A. of this section may
be extended at any time if both the Tax Administrator and the employer, agent
of the employer, other payer, or taxpayer consent in writing to the extension.
Any extension shall also extend for the same period of time the time limit
described in division (c) of this section.
      (2)   As used in this section, “qualifying deferral period” means a
period of time beginning and ending as follows:
         A.   Beginning on the date a person who is aggrieved by an assessment
files with a Local Board of Tax Review the request described in Section
192.40 of this chapter. That date shall not be affected by any subsequent
decision, finding, or holding by any administrative body or court that the
Local Board of Tax Review with which the aggrieved person filed the request did
not have jurisdiction to affirm, reverse, or modify the assessment or any part
of that assessment.
         B.   Ending the later of the sixtieth (60th) day after the date on
which the final determination of the Local Board of Tax Review becomes final
or, if any party appeals from the determination of the Local Board of Tax
Review, the sixtieth (60th) day after the date on which the final determination
of the Local Board of Tax Review is either ultimately affirmed in whole or in
part or ultimately reversed and no further appeal of either that affirmation,
in whole or in part, or that reversal is available or taken.
   (b)   Prosecutions for an offense made punishable under a resolution or
ordinance imposing an income tax shall be commenced within three (3) years
after the commission of the offense, provided that in the case of fraud,
failure to file a return, or the omission of twenty-five percent (25%) or more
of income required to be reported, prosecutions may be commenced within six (6)
years after the commission of the offense.
   (c)   A claim for a refund of municipal income taxes shall be brought within
the time limitation provided in Section
192.28 of this chapter.
   (d)   (1)   Notwithstanding the fact that an appeal is pending, the
petitioner may pay all or a portion of the assessment that is the subject of
the appeal. The acceptance of a payment by the municipality does not prejudice
any claim for refund upon final determination of the appeal.
      (2)   If upon final determination of the appeal an error in the
assessment is corrected by the Tax Administrator, upon an appeal so filed or
under a final determination of the Local Board of Tax Review created under
Section
192.40 of this chapter, of the Ohio Board of Tax Appeals, or any court to which
the decision of the Ohio Board of Tax Appeals has been appealed, so that the
amount due from the party assessed under the corrected assessment is less than
the amount paid, there shall be issued to the appellant or to the appellant’s
assigns or legal representative a refund in the amount of the overpayment as
provided by Section
192.28 of this chapter, with interest on that amount as provided by division
(d) of this section.
   (e)   No civil action to recover municipal income tax or related penalties
or interest shall be brought during either of the following time periods:
      (1)   The period during which a taxpayer has a right to appeal the
imposition of that tax or interest or those penalties; or
      (2)   The period during which an appeal related to the imposition of that
tax or interest or those penalties is pending.
(Ord. No. 1412-15. Passed 11-23-15, eff. 1-1-16)
§ 192.42 Adoption of Rules
   (a)   Under RC 718.30, the municipality, under this chapter, grants
authority to the Tax Administrator to adopt rules to administer the income tax
imposed by the municipality.
   (b)   All rules adopted under this section shall be published and posted on
the internet.
(Ord. No. 1412-15. Passed 11-23-15, eff. 1-1-16)
§ 192.43 Rentals
   (a)   Rental income received by a resident or nonresident taxpayer for any
and all properties located within this municipality shall be taxable as
municipal taxable income under this ordinance.
   (b)   Where the gross monthly rental of any and all real properties,
regardless of number and value, aggregates in excess of one hundred twenty-five
dollars ($125.00) per month, it shall be prima facie evidence that the rental,
ownership, management or operation of such properties, is a business activity
of such taxpayer, and the net income of such rental property shall be subject
to tax. However, in the case of commercial property, the owner shall be
considered engaged in a business activity when the rental is based on a fixed
or fluctuating percentage of gross or net sales, receipts or profits, of the
lessee, whether or not such rental exceeds one hundred twenty- five dollars
($125.00) per month; provided further that in the case of farm property, the
owner shall be considered engaged in a business activity when he or she shares
in crops or when the rental is based on a percentage of the gross or net
receipts derived from the farm, whether or not the gross income exceeds one
hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) per month. It is provided further that
the person who operates a licensed rooming house shall be considered in
business whether or not the gross income exceeds one hundred twenty-five
dollars ($125.00) per month.
(Ord. No. 1412-15. Passed 11-23-15, eff. 1-1-16)
§ 192.44 Unpaid Taxes Recoverable as Other Debts
   All taxes imposed by this chapter shall be collectible, together with any
interest and penalties thereon, as other debts of like amount are recoverable,
including, but not limited to, collection by suit. Any suit shall be brought
within three (3) years after the city income tax was due or the return was
filed, whichever is later. Except in the case of fraud, of omission of twenty-
five percent (25%) or more of taxable income required to be reported, or of
failure to file a return, no additional assessment shall be made after three
(3) years from the time the city income tax was due or the city income tax
return was filed, whichever is later.
(Ord. No. 1412-15. Passed 11-23-15, eff. 1-1-16)
§ 192.45 Receipt and Records of Tax
   The Tax Administrator shall collect and receive the tax imposed by this
chapter in the manner prescribed herein from the taxpayers, keep an accurate
record thereof, and report all monies so received.
(Ord. No. 1412-15. Passed 11-23-15, eff. 1-1-16)
§ 192.46 Enforcement of Collection
   The Tax Administrator shall enforce payment of all income taxes owing to the
City, keep accurate records for a minimum of five (5) years, showing the amount
due from each taxpayer required to file a declaration of estimated municipal
income tax and make any return, or both, including returns of taxes withheld
and show the dates and amounts of payments thereof.
(Ord. No. 1412-15. Passed 11-23-15, eff. 1-1-16)
§ 192.47 Authority to Determine Amount of Tax Due
   In any case where a taxpayer has failed to file a return or has filed a city
income tax return which does not show the proper amount of tax due, the Tax
Administrator may determine the amount of city income tax appearing to be due
the City from the taxpayer and may send to such taxpayer a written statement
showing the amount of tax so determined, together with interest and penalties
thereon, if any.
(Ord. No. 1412-15. Passed 11-23-15, eff. 1-1-16)
§ 192.48 Investigations
   The Tax Administrator, or any authorized agent, representative or employee,
is authorized to examine the books, papers, records and federal income tax
returns of any employer or of any taxpayer or any person subject to, or whom
the Tax Administrator believes is subject to the provisions of this chapter,
for the purpose of verifying the accuracy of any return made, or, if no return
was made, to ascertain the tax or withholding due under this chapter. Every
such employer, supposed employer, taxpayer or supposed taxpayer is directed and
required to furnish within fifteen (15) days upon written request by the
administrator, or his or her duly authorized agent, representative, or
employee, the means, facilities and opportunities for making such examinations
and investigations as are hereby authorized.
(Ord. No. 1412-15. Passed 11-23-15, eff. 1-1-16)
§ 192.49 Authority to Compel Production of Records
   The Tax Administrator is hereby authorized to order any person presumed to
have knowledge of the facts to appear before him or her and may examine such
person, under oath, concerning any income which was or should have been
reported or withheld for city income tax purposes or any transaction tending to
affect such income, and for this purpose may compel the production of books,
papers, records and federal income tax returns and the attendance of all
persons before him or her, whether as parties or witnesses, whenever he or she
believes such persons have knowledge of such income or information pertinent to
such inquiry.
(Ord. No. 1412-15. Passed 11-23-15, eff. 1-1-16)
§ 192.50 Refusal to Produce Records
   The refusal to produce books, papers, records and federal income tax
returns, or the refusal to submit to such examination by any employer or
persons subject or presumed to be subject to the city income tax or by any
officer, agent or employee of a person subject to the city income tax or
required to withhold such tax or the failure of any person to comply with the
provisions of this chapter, including this section, or with an order or
subpoena of the Tax Administrator is a violation of this chapter punishable
under Section
192.99.
(Ord. No. 1412-15. Passed 11-23-15, eff. 1-1-16)
§ 192.51 Taxpayer Required to Retain Records
   Every taxpayer shall retain all records necessary to compute his or her city
income tax liability for a period of five (5) years from the date his or her
city income tax return is filed or the city income taxes required to be
withheld are paid.
(Ord. No. 1412-15. Passed 11-23-15, eff. 1-1-16)
§ 192.52 Authority to Contract for Central Collection Facilities
   The Tax Administrator is authorized to enter into an agreement on behalf of
the City with any other municipality or village for the purpose of
administering the city income tax laws of the other municipality or village as
its agent and for the purpose of providing a central collection facility for
the collection of the city income tax on behalf of the other municipality or
village.
(Ord. No. 1412-15. Passed 11-23-15, eff. 1-1-16)
§ 192.53 Withholding Taxes from Federal Employees
   The Tax Administrator is authorized to enter into an agreement on behalf of
the City with the United States Secretary of the Treasury for the purpose of
withholding city income or employment taxes from the compensation of federal
employees whose regular place of federal employment is within the territorial
jurisdiction of the City.
(Ord. No. 1412-15. Passed 11-23-15, eff. 1-1-16)
§ 192.54 Collection after Termination of Chapter
   (a)   This chapter shall continue in full force and effect insofar as the
levy of taxes is concerned until repealed, and insofar as the collection of
taxes levied hereunder and actions and proceedings for collecting any tax so
levied or enforcing any provisions of this chapter are concerned, it shall
continue in full force and effect until all of the taxes levied in the
aforesaid period are fully paid and any and all suits and prosecutions for the
collection of taxes or for the punishment of violations of this chapter have
been fully terminated, subject to the limitations contained in Section
192.41.
   (b)   Annual returns due for all or any part of the last effective year of
this chapter shall be due on the date provided in Section
192.23 as though the same were continuing.
(Ord. No. 1412-15. Passed 11-23-15, eff. 1-1-16)
§ 192.55 Savings Clause
   If any sentence, clause, section or part of this chapter, or any tax imposed
against, or exemption from tax granted to, any taxpayer or forms of income
specified herein is found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such
unconstitutionality, illegality, or invalidity shall affect only such clause,
sentence, section or part of this chapter so found and shall not affect or
impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or other
parts of this chapter. It is hereby declared to be the intention of the
legislative authority of the municipality that this chapter would have been
adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, clause, section
or part thereof not been included in this chapter.
(Ord. No. 1412-15. Passed 11-23-15, eff. 1-1-16)
§ 192.56 Deposit of Funds
   All monies collected by the Tax Administrator under the provisions of this
chapter shall be kept in a fund segregated from and not commingled with any
other funds from any sources whatsoever.
(Ord. No. 1412-15. Passed 11-23-15, eff. 1-1-16)
§ 192.57 Filing Net Profit Taxes; Election to be Subject to Provisions of
Chapter
   (a)   A taxpayer may elect to be subject to Sections
192.57 to
192.72 of the Codified Ordinances in lieu of the provisions set forth in the
remainder of this chapter. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter,
upon the taxpayer's election, both of the following shall apply:
      (1)   The State Tax Commissioner as defined in RC 718.01 shall serve as
the sole administrator of the municipal net profit tax levied pursuant to this
chapter for which the taxpayer as defined in Section
192.58(c) of the Codified Ordinances is liable for the term of the election;
      (2)   The Tax Commissioner shall administer the tax pursuant to RC 718.80
to 718.95, Sections
192.57 to
192.72 of the Codified Ordinances, and any applicable provision of RC Chapter
5703.
   (b)   (1)   A taxpayer shall make the initial election on or before the
first (1st) day of the third (3rd) month after the beginning of the taxpayer's
taxable year by notifying the Tax Commissioner and the City, on a form
prescribed by the Tax Commissioner.
      (2)   At least quarterly, the Tax Commissioner shall notify each
municipal corporation that a taxpayer lists in its election under division (b)
(1) of this section that the taxpayer has made such election.
      (3)   A.   The election, once made by the taxpayer, applies to the
taxable year in which the election is made and to each subsequent taxable year
until the taxpayer notifies the Tax Commissioner and the City of its
termination of the election.
         B.   A notification of termination shall be made, on a form prescribed
by the Tax Commissioner, on or before the first (1st) day of the third (3rd)
month of any taxable year.
         C.   Upon a timely and valid termination of the election, the taxpayer
is no longer subject to Sections
192.57 to
192.72 of the Codified Ordinances, and is instead subject to the provisions set
forth in the remainder of this chapter.
   (c)   The Tax Commissioner shall enforce and administer Sections
192.57 to
192.72 of the Codified Ordinances. In addition to any other powers conferred
upon the Tax Commissioner by law, the Tax Commissioner may:
      (1)   Prescribe all forms necessary to administer those sections;
      (2)   Adopt such rules as the Tax Commissioner finds necessary to carry
out those sections;
      (3)   Appoint and employ such personnel as are necessary to carry out the
duties imposed upon the Tax Commissioner by those sections.
   (d)   The Tax Commissioner shall not be considered a Tax Administrator, as
that term is defined in RC 718.01 and Section
192.06 of the City Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 1344-2023. Passed 11-27-23, eff. 11-28-23)
Note: Pursuant to Section 3 of Ord. No. 120-18, "if any provision of the H.B.
49 municipal income tax provisions is found unconstitutional, or the
effectiveness of any provision of H.B. 49 is stayed or enjoined, that the
provisions adopted in Section 2 of this ordinance shall likewise be stayed or
ineffective."
§ 192.58 Definitions
   If a term used in Sections
192.57 to
192.72 of the Codified Ordinances that is not otherwise defined in this chapter
is used in a comparable context in both the laws of the United States relating
to federal income tax and in RC Title LVII and the use is not consistent, then
the use of the term in the laws of the United States relating to federal income
tax shall have control over the use of the term in RC Title LVII, unless the
term is defined in RC Chapter 5703, in which case the definition in that
chapter shall control. Any reference in this chapter to the Internal Revenue
Code includes other laws of the United States related to federal income taxes.
If a term is defined in both this section and Section
192.06 of the Codified Ordinances, the definition in this section shall control
for all uses of that term in Sections
192.58 to
192.72 of the Codified Ordinances.
   As used in Sections
192.58 to
192.72 of the Codified Ordinances only:
   (a)   "Municipal taxable income" means income apportioned or sitused to the
municipal corporation under Section
192.59 of the Codified Ordinances, as applicable, reduced by any pre-2017 net
operating loss carryforward available to the person for the municipal
corporation.
   (b)   "Adjusted federal taxable income," for a person required to file as a
C corporation, or for a person that has elected to be taxed as a C corporation
as described in division (D)(5) of RC 718.01 and Section
192.06 of the Codified Ordinances, means a C corporation's federal taxable
income before net operating losses and special deductions as determined under
the Internal Revenue Code, adjusted as follows:
      (1)   Deduct intangible income to the extent included in federal taxable
income. The deduction shall be allowed regardless of whether the intangible
income relates to assets used in a trade or business or assets held for the
production of income.
      (2)   Add an amount equal to five percent (5%) of intangible income
deducted under division (b)(1) of this section, but excluding that portion of
intangible income directly related to the sale, exchange, or other disposition
of property described in Section 1221 of the Internal Revenue Code.
      (3)   Add any losses allowed as a deduction in the computation of federal
taxable income if the losses directly relate to the sale, exchange, or other
disposition of an asset described in Section 1221 or 1231 of the Internal
Revenue Code.
      (4)   A.   Except as provided in division (b)(4)B. of this section,
deduct income and gain included in federal taxable income to the extent the
income and gain directly relate to the sale, exchange, or other disposition of
an asset described in Section 1221 or 1231 of the Internal Revenue Code.
         B.   Division (b)(4)A. of this section does not apply to the extent
the income or gain is income or gain described in Section 1245 or 1250 of the
Internal Revenue Code.
      (5)   Add taxes on or measured by net income allowed as a deduction in
the computation of federal taxable income.
      (6)   In the case of a real estate investment trust or regulated
investment company, add all amounts with respect to dividends to, distributions
to, or amounts set aside for or credited to the benefit of investors and
allowed as a deduction in the computation of federal taxable income.
      (7)   Deduct, to the extent not otherwise deducted or excluded in
computing federal taxable income, any income derived from a transfer agreement
or from the enterprise transferred under that agreement under RC 4313.02.
      (8)   Deduct exempt income to the extent not otherwise deducted or
excluded in computing adjusted federal taxable income.
      (9)   Deduct any net profit of a pass-through entity owned directly or
indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer's federal taxable
income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that net profit in
the group's federal taxable income in accordance with division (e)(3)B. of
Section
192.63 of the Codified Ordinances.
      (10)   Add any loss incurred by a pass-through entity owned directly or
indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer's federal taxable
income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that loss in the
group's federal taxable income in accordance with division (e)(3)B. of Section
192.63 of the Codified Ordinances.
   If the taxpayer is not a C corporation, is not a disregarded entity that has
made the election described in division (uu)(2)A. of Section
192.06 of the Codified Ordinances, and is not a publicly traded partnership
that has made the election described in division (w)(4)B. of Section
192.06 of the Codified Ordinances, the taxpayer shall compute adjusted federal
taxable income under this section as if the taxpayer were a C corporation,
except guaranteed payments and other similar amounts paid or accrued to a
partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former
member shall not be allowed as a deductible expense unless such payments are in
consideration for the use of capital and treated as payment of interest under
Section 469 of the Internal Revenue Code or United States treasury regulations.
Amounts paid or accrued to a qualified self-employed retirement plan with
respect to a partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member,
or former member of the taxpayer, amounts paid or accrued to or for health
insurance for a partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder,
member, or former member, and amounts paid or accrued to or for life insurance
for a partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or
former member shall not be allowed as a deduction.
   Nothing in division (b) of this section shall be construed as allowing the
taxpayer to add or deduct any amount more than once or shall be construed as
allowing any taxpayer to deduct any amount paid to or accrued for purposes of
federal self-employment tax.
   (c)   "Taxpayer" has the same meaning as in division (uu) of Section
192.06 of the Codified Ordinances, except that "taxpayer" does not include
natural persons or entities subject to the tax imposed under RC Chapter 5745.
"Taxpayer" may include receivers, assignees, or trustees in bankruptcy when
such persons are required to assume the role of a taxpayer.
   (d)   "Tax return" or "return" means the notifications and reports required
to be filed pursuant to Sections
192.57 to
192.72 of the Codified Ordinances for the purpose of reporting municipal income
taxes, and includes declarations of estimated tax.
   (e)   "Taxable year" means the calendar year or the taxpayer's fiscal year
ending during the calendar year, or fractional part thereof, upon which the
calculation of the taxpayer's adjusted federal taxable income is based pursuant
to this chapter. If a taxpayer's taxable year is changed for federal income tax
purposes, the taxable year for purposes of Sections
192.57 to
192.72 of the Codified Ordinances is changed accordingly but may consist of an
aggregation of more than one (1) taxable year for federal income tax purposes.
The Tax Commissioner may prescribe by rule an appropriate period as the taxable
year for a taxpayer that has had a change of its taxable year for federal
income tax purposes, for a taxpayer that has two (2) or more short taxable
years for federal income tax purposes as the result of a change of ownership,
or for a new taxpayer that would otherwise have no taxable year.
   (f)   "Assessment" means a notice of underpayment or nonpayment of a tax
issued pursuant to Section
192.67 of the Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 120-18. Passed 2-5-18, eff. 2-6-18)
Note: Pursuant to Section 3 of Ord. No. 120-18, "if any provision of the H.B.
49 municipal income tax provisions is found unconstitutional, or the
effectiveness of any provision of H.B. 49 is stayed or enjoined, that the
provisions adopted in Section 2 of this ordinance shall likewise be stayed or
ineffective."
§ 192.59 Applicability; Taxable Situs; Apportionment
   This section applies to any taxpayer that is engaged in a business or
profession in the City and that has made the election under Section
192.57 of the Codified Ordinances.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b) of this section, net
profit from a business or profession conducted both within and without the
boundaries of the City shall be considered as having a taxable situs in the
City for purposes of municipal income taxation in the same proportion as the
average ratio of the following:
      (1)   The average original cost of the real property and tangible
personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the business or profession
in the City during the taxable period to the average original cost of all of
the real and tangible personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the
business or profession during the same period, wherever situated.
      As used in the preceding paragraph, tangible personal or real property
shall include property rented or leased by the taxpayer and the value of such
property shall be determined by multiplying the annual rental thereon by eight
(8);
      (2)   Wages, salaries, and other compensation paid during the taxable
period to individuals employed in the business or profession for services
performed in the City to wages, salaries, and other compensation paid during
the same period to individuals employed in the business or profession, wherever
the individual's services are performed, excluding compensation from which
taxes are not required to be withheld under Section
192.11 of the Codified Ordinances;
      (3)   Total gross receipts of the business or profession from sales and
rentals made and services performed during the taxable period in the City to
total gross receipts of the business or profession during the same period from
sales, rentals, and services, wherever made or performed.
   (b)   (1)   If the apportionment factors described in division (a) of this
section do not fairly represent the extent of a taxpayer's business activity in
the City, the taxpayer may request, or the Tax Commissioner may require, that
the taxpayer use, with respect to all or any portion of the income of the
taxpayer, an alternative apportionment method involving one (1) or more of the
following:
         A.   Separate accounting;
         B.   The exclusion of one (1) or more of the factors;
         C.   The inclusion of one (1) or more additional factors that would
provide for a more fair apportionment of the income of the taxpayer to the
municipal corporation;
         D.   A modification of one (1) or more of the factors.
      (2)   A taxpayer request to use an alternative apportionment method shall
be in writing and shall accompany a tax return, timely filed appeal of an
assessment, or timely filed amended tax return. The taxpayer may use the
requested alternative method unless the Tax Commissioner denies the request in
an assessment issued within the period prescribed by division (a) of Section
192.67 of the Codified Ordinances.
      (3)   The Tax Commissioner may require a taxpayer to use an alternative
apportionment method as described in division (b)(1) of this section only by
issuing an assessment to the taxpayer within the period prescribed by division
(a) of Section
192.67 of the Codified Ordinances.
   (c)   As used in division (a)(2) of this section, "wages, salaries, and
other compensation" includes only wages, salaries, or other compensation paid
to an employee for services performed at any of the following locations:
      (1)   A location that is owned, controlled, or used by, rented to, or
under the possession of one (1) of the following:
         A.   The employer;
         B.   A vendor, customer, client, or patient of the employer, or a
related member of such a vendor, customer, client, or patient;
         C.   A vendor, customer, client, or patient of a person described in
division (c)(1)B. of this section, or a related member of such a vendor,
customer, client, or patient.
      (2)   Any location at which a trial, appeal, hearing, investigation,
inquiry, review, court-martial, or similar administrative, judicial, or
legislative matter or proceeding is being conducted, provided that the
compensation is paid for services performed for, or on behalf of, the employer
or that the employee's presence at the location directly or indirectly benefits
the employer;
      (3)   Any other location, if the Tax Commissioner determines that the
employer directed the employee to perform the services at the other location in
lieu of a location described in division (c)(1) or (c)(2) of this section
solely in order to avoid or reduce the employer's municipal income tax
liability. If the Tax Commissioner makes such a determination, the employer may
dispute the determination by establishing, by a preponderance of the evidence,
that the Tax Commissioner's determination was unreasonable.
   (d)   For the purposes of division (a)(3) of this section, receipts from
sales and rentals made and services performed shall be sitused to the City as
follows:
      (1)   Gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property shall be
sitused to the City only if, regardless of where title passes, the property
meets either of the following criteria:
         A.   The property is shipped to or delivered within the City from a
stock of goods located within the City.
         B.   The property is delivered within the City from a location outside
the City, provided the taxpayer is regularly engaged through its own employees
in the solicitation or promotion of sales within the City and the sales result
from such solicitation or promotion.
      (2)   Gross receipts from the sale of services shall be sitused to the
City to the extent that such services are performed in the City.
      (3)   To the extent included in income, gross receipts from the sale of
real property located in the City shall be sitused to the City.
      (4)   To the extent included in income, gross receipts from rents and
royalties from real property located in the City shall be sitused to the City.
      (5)   Gross receipts from rents and royalties from tangible personal
property shall be sitused to the City based upon the extent to which the
tangible personal property is used in the City.
   (e)   Commissions received by a real estate agent or broker relating to the
sale, purchase, or lease of real estate shall be sitused to the City in which
the real estate is located. Net profit reported by the real estate agent or
broker shall be allocated to the City based upon the ratio of the commissions
the agent or broker received from the sale, purchase, or lease of real estate
located in the City to the commissions received from the sale, purchase, or
lease of real estate everywhere in the taxable year.
   (f)   If, in computing a taxpayer's adjusted federal taxable income, the
taxpayer deducted any amount with respect to a stock option granted to an
employee, and if the employee is not required to include in the employee's
income any such amount or a portion thereof because it is exempted from
taxation under the Codified Ordinances by the City, the taxpayer shall add the
amount that is exempt from taxation to the taxpayer's net profit that was
apportioned to the City. In no case shall a taxpayer be required to add to its
net profit that was apportioned to the City any amount other than the amount
upon which the employee would be required to pay tax were the amount related to
the stock option not exempted from taxation.
   This division applies solely for the purpose of making an adjustment to the
amount of a taxpayer's net profit that was apportioned to the City under this
section.
   (g)   When calculating the ratios described in division (a) of this section
for the purposes of that division or division (b) of this section, the owner of
a disregarded entity shall include in the owner's ratios the property, payroll,
and gross receipts of such disregarded entity.
(Ord. No. 120-18. Passed 2-5-18, eff. 2-6-18)
Note: Pursuant to Section 3 of Ord. No. 120-18, "if any provision of the H.B.
49 municipal income tax provisions is found unconstitutional, or the
effectiveness of any provision of H.B. 49 is stayed or enjoined, that the
provisions adopted in Section 2 of this ordinance shall likewise be stayed or
ineffective."
§ 192.591 Alternative Net Profits Apportionment for Remote Employees
   (a)   Terms used in this section have the same meanings as in RC 718.021.
   (b)   A taxpayer may elect to apply the provisions of this section to the
apportionment of its net profit from a business or profession. For taxpayers
that make this election, the provisions of Section
192.14(b) of the Codified Ordinances apply to such apportionment except as
otherwise provided in this section.
   A taxpayer shall make the election allowed under this section by notifying
the Tax Commissioner in writing on or with the taxpayer’s net profit return or,
if applicable, a timely filed amended net profit return or a timely filed
appeal of an assessment. The election applies to the taxable year for which
that return or appeal is filed and for all subsequent taxable years, until the
taxpayer revokes the election. After the taxpayer makes the initial election,
the election applies to every municipal corporation in which the taxpayer
conducts business.
   Nothing in this section prohibits a taxpayer from making a new election
under this section after properly revoking a prior election.
   (c)   For the purpose of calculating the ratios described in division (a) of
Section
192.14 of the Codified Ordinances, all of the following apply to a taxpayer
that has made the election described in division (b) of this section:
      (1)   For the purpose of division (a)(1) of Section
192.14 of the Codified Ordinances, the average original cost of any tangible
personal property used by a qualifying remote employee or owner at that
individual’s qualifying remote work location shall be sitused to that
individual’s qualifying reporting location.
      (2)   For the purpose of division (a)(2) of Section
192.14 of the Codified Ordinances, any wages, salaries, and other compensation
paid during the taxable period to a qualifying remote employee or owner for
services performed at that individual’s qualifying remote work location shall
be sitused to that individual’s qualifying reporting location.
      (3)   For the purpose of division (a)(3) of Section
192.14 of the Codified Ordinances, and notwithstanding division (d) of that
section, any gross receipts of the business or profession from services
performed during the taxable period by a qualifying remote employee or owner
for services performed at that individual’s qualifying remote work location
shall be sitused to that individual’s qualifying reporting location.
   (d)   Nothing in this section prevents a taxpayer from requesting, or the
Tax Commissioner from requiring, that the taxpayer use, with respect to all or
a portion of the income of the taxpayer, an alternative apportionment method as
described in division (b) of Section
192.14 of the Codified Ordinances. However, the Commissioner shall not require
an alternative apportionment method in such a manner that it would cause a
taxpayer to incur tax liability in a municipal corporation solely because a
qualifying remote employee’s or owner’s qualifying remote work location is
located in that municipal corporation.
   (e)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, nothing in this section
is intended to affect the withholding of taxes on qualifying wages pursuant to
RC 718.011 and RC 718.03.
(Ord. No. 1344-2023. Passed 11-27-23, eff. 11-28-23)
§ 192.60 Information Provided to Tax Administrators; Confidentiality
   (a)   Any information gained as a result of returns, investigations,
hearings, or verifications required or authorized by Sections
192.57 to
192.72 of the Codified Ordinances is confidential, and no person shall disclose
such information, except for official purposes, in accordance with a proper
judicial order, or as provided in RC 4123.271 or RC 5703.21. The Tax
Commissioner may furnish the Internal Revenue Service with copies of returns
filed. This section does not prohibit the publication of statistics in a form
which does not disclose information with respect to particular taxpayers.
   (b)   In May and November of each year, the Tax Commissioner shall provide
the City Tax Administrator with the following information for every taxpayer
that filed tax returns with the commissioner under Sections
192.57 to
192.72 of the Codified Ordinances and that had municipal taxable income
apportionable to the City under this chapter for any prior year:
      (1)   The taxpayer's name, address, and federal employer identification
number;
      (2)   The taxpayer's apportionment ratio for, and amount of municipal
taxable income apportionable to, the City pursuant to Section
192.59 of the Codified Ordinances;
      (3)   The amount of any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward utilized
by the taxpayer;
      (4)   Whether the taxpayer requested that any overpayment be carried
forward to a future taxable year;
      (5)   The amount of any credit claimed under RC 718.94.
   (c)   Not later than thirty (30) days after each distribution made to
municipal corporations under RC 718.83, the Tax Commissioner shall provide to
the City a report stating the name and federal identification number of every
taxpayer that made estimated payments that are attributable to the City and the
amount of each such taxpayer's estimated payment.
   (d)   The information described under divisions (b) and (c) of this section
shall be provided to the individual or individuals designated by the City Tax
Administrator under RC 718.84(D).
   (e)   (1)   The City expects that the Tax Commissioner will, pursuant to RC
718.84(E), provide tax returns and other information it receives in the
performance of its administration of the municipal net profits tax for
taxpayers making the election provided in Section
192.57 of the Codified Ordinances. The Tax Administrator shall review these
returns and information, as well as the information received pursuant to
divisions (b) and (c) of this section, and has discretion to refer any taxpayer
for audit by the Tax Commissioner. Such referral shall be made on a form
prescribed by the Tax Commissioner and shall include any information that forms
the basis for the referral.
      (2)   If the Tax Commissioner declines to audit a taxpayer referred by
the Tax Administrator under this section, the City reserves its right to pursue
any and all remedies, whether at law or in equity, to ensure that the correct
tax liability has been calculated and paid by the taxpayer.
(Ord. No. 120-18. Passed 2-5-18, eff. 2-6-18)
Note: Pursuant to Section 3 of Ord. No. 120-18, "if any provision of the H.B.
49 municipal income tax provisions is found unconstitutional, or the
effectiveness of any provision of H.B. 49 is stayed or enjoined, that the
provisions adopted in Section 2 of this ordinance shall likewise be stayed or
ineffective."
§ 192.61 Filing of Annual Return; Remittance; Disposition of Funds
   (a)   (1)   For each taxable year, every taxpayer shall file an annual
return. Such return, along with the amount of tax shown to be due on the return
less the amount paid for the taxable year under Section
192.65 of the Codified Ordinances, shall be submitted to the Tax Commissioner,
on a form and in the manner prescribed by the Tax Commissioner, on or before
the fifteenth (15th) day of the fourth (4th) month following the end of the
taxpayer's taxable year.
      (2)   If a taxpayer has multiple taxable years ending within one (1)
calendar year, the taxpayer shall aggregate the facts and figures necessary to
compute the tax due under this chapter, in accordance with Sections
192.58,
192.59, and, if applicable,
192.63 of the Codified Ordinances onto its annual return.
      (3)   The remittance shall be made payable to the Treasurer of State and
in the form prescribed by the Tax Commissioner. If the amount payable with the
tax return is ten dollars ($10.00) or less, no remittance is required.
   (b)   (1)   Each return required to be filed under this section shall
contain the signature of the taxpayer or the taxpayer's duly authorized agent
and of the person who prepared the return for the taxpayer, and shall include
the taxpayer's identification number. Each return shall be verified by a
declaration under penalty of perjury.
      (2)   A.   The Tax Commissioner may require a taxpayer to include, with
each annual tax return, amended return, or request for refund filed with the
Tax Commissioner under Sections
192.57 to
192.72 of the Codified Ordinances, copies of any relevant documents or other
information.
         B.   A taxpayer that files an annual tax return electronically through
the Ohio Business Gateway or in another manner as prescribed by the Tax
Commissioner shall either submit the documents required under this division
electronically as prescribed at the time of filing or, if electronic submission
is not available, mail the documents to the Tax Commissioner. The Department of
Taxation shall publish a method of electronically submitting the documents
required under this division on or before January 1, 2019.
      (3)   After a taxpayer files a tax return, the Tax Commissioner may
request, and the taxpayer shall provide, any information, statements, or
documents required to determine and verify the taxpayer's municipal income tax.
   (c)   (1)   A.   Any taxpayer that has duly requested an automatic extension
for filing the taxpayer's federal income tax return shall automatically receive
an extension for the filing of a tax return with the Tax Commissioner under
this section. The extended due date of the return shall be the fifteenth (15th)
day of the eleventh (11th) month after the last day of the taxable year to
which the return relates.
         B.   A taxpayer that has not requested or received a six (6) month
extension for filing the taxpayer's federal income tax return may request that
the Tax Commissioner grant the taxpayer a six (6) month extension of the date
for filing the taxpayer's municipal income tax return. If the Tax Commissioner
receives the request on or before the date the municipal income tax return is
due, the Tax Commissioner shall grant the taxpayer's extension request.
         C.   An extension of time to file under division (c)(1) of this
section is not an extension of the time to pay any tax due unless the Tax
Commissioner grants an extension of that date.
      (2)   If the Tax Commissioner considers it necessary in order to ensure
payment of a tax imposed in accordance with Section
192.03 of the Codified Ordinances, the Tax Commissioner may require taxpayers
to file returns and make payments otherwise than as provided in this section,
including taxpayers not otherwise required to file annual returns.
   (d)   Each return required to be filed in accordance with this section shall
include a box that the taxpayer may check to authorize another person,
including a tax return preparer who prepared the return, to communicate with
the Tax Commissioner about matters pertaining to the return. The return or
instructions accompanying the return shall indicate that by checking the box
the taxpayer authorizes the Tax Commissioner to contact the preparer or other
person concerning questions that arise during the examination or other review
of the return and authorizes the preparer or other person only to provide the
Tax Commissioner with information that is missing from the return, to contact
the Tax Commissioner for information about the examination or other review of
the return or the status of the taxpayer's refund or payments, and to respond
to notices about mathematical errors, offsets, or return preparation that the
taxpayer has received from the Tax Commissioner and has shown to the preparer
or other person.
   (e)   When income tax returns or other documents require the signature of a
tax return preparer, the Tax Commissioner shall accept a facsimile or
electronic version of such a signature in lieu of a manual signature.
(Ord. No. 1344-2023. Passed 11-27-23, eff. 11-28-23)
Note: Pursuant to Section 3 of Ord. No. 120-18, "if any provision of the H.B.
49 municipal income tax provisions is found unconstitutional, or the
effectiveness of any provision of H.B. 49 is stayed or enjoined, that the
provisions adopted in Section 2 of this ordinance shall likewise be stayed or
ineffective."
§ 192.62 Electronic Filing
   (a)   All taxpayers that have made the election allowed under Section
192.57 of the Codified Ordinances shall file any tax return or extension for
filing a tax return, and shall make payment of amounts shown to be due on such
returns, electronically, either through the Ohio Business Gateway or in another
manner as prescribed by the Tax Commissioner.
   (b)   A taxpayer may apply to the Tax Commissioner, on a form prescribed by
the Tax Commissioner, to be excused from the requirement to file returns and
make payments electronically. For good cause shown, the Tax Commissioner may
excuse the applicant from the requirement and permit the applicant to file the
returns or make the payments by non-electronic means.
   (c)   The Tax Commissioner may adopt rules establishing the following:
      (1)   The format of documents to be used by taxpayers to file returns and
make payments by electronic means;
      (2)   The information taxpayers must submit when filing tax returns by
electronic means.
(Ord. No. 120-18. Passed 2-5-18, eff. 2-6-18)
Note: Pursuant to Section 3 of Ord. No. 120-18, "if any provision of the H.B.
49 municipal income tax provisions is found unconstitutional, or the
effectiveness of any provision of H.B. 49 is stayed or enjoined, that the
provisions adopted in Section 2 of this ordinance shall likewise be stayed or
ineffective."
§ 192.63 Consolidated Returns
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   "Affiliated group of corporations" means an affiliated group as
defined in Section 1504 of the Internal Revenue Code, except that, if such a
group includes at least one (1) incumbent local exchange carrier that is
primarily engaged in the business of providing local exchange telephone service
in this state, the affiliated group shall not include any incumbent local
exchange carrier that would otherwise be included in the group.
      (2)   "Consolidated federal income tax return" means a consolidated
return filed for federal income tax purposes pursuant to Section 1501 of the
Internal Revenue Code.
      (3)   "Consolidated federal taxable income" means the consolidated
taxable income of an affiliated group of corporations, as computed for the
purposes of filing a consolidated federal income tax return, before
consideration of net operating losses or special deductions. "Consolidated
federal taxable income" does not include income or loss of an incumbent local
exchange carrier that is excluded from the affiliated group under division (a)
(1) of this section.
      (4)   "Incumbent local exchange carrier" has the same meaning as in RC
4927.01.
      (5)   "Local exchange telephone service" has the same meaning as in RC
5727.01.
   (b)   (1)   A taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of
corporations may elect to file a consolidated tax return for a taxable year if
at least one (1) member of the affiliated group of corporations is subject to
municipal income tax levied pursuant to this chapter in that taxable year and
if the affiliated group of corporations filed a consolidated federal income tax
return with respect to that taxable year. The election is binding for a five
(5) year period beginning with the first (1st) taxable year of the initial
election unless a change in the reporting method is required under federal law.
The election continues to be binding for each subsequent five (5) year period
unless the taxpayer elects to discontinue filing consolidated tax returns under
division (b)(2) of this section or a taxpayer receives permission from the Tax
Commissioner. The Tax Commissioner shall approve such a request for good cause
shown.
      (2)   An election to discontinue filing consolidated tax returns under
this section must be made on or before the fifteenth (15th) day of the fourth
(4th) month of the year following the last year of a five (5) year consolidated
tax return election period in effect under division (b)(1) of this section. The
election to discontinue filing a consolidated tax return is binding for a five
(5) year period beginning with the first (1st) taxable year of the election.
      (3)   An election made under division (b)(1) or (b)(2) of this section is
binding on all members of the affiliated group of corporations subject to a
municipal income tax.
      (4)   When a taxpayer makes the election allowed under Section
192.57 of the Codified Ordinances, a valid election made by the taxpayer under
division (b)(1) or (b)(2) of Section
192.15 of the Codified Ordinances is binding upon the Tax Commissioner for the
remainder of the five (5) year period.
      (5)   When an election made under Section
192.57 of the Codified Ordinances is terminated, a valid election made under
this section is binding upon the Tax Administrator for the remainder of the
five (5) year period.
   (c)   A taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of corporations
that filed a consolidated federal income tax return for a taxable year shall
file a consolidated tax return for that taxable year if the Tax Commissioner
determines, by a preponderance of the evidence, that intercompany transactions
have not been conducted at arm's length and that there has been a distortive
shifting of income or expenses with regard to allocation of net profits to a
municipal corporation. A taxpayer that is required to file a consolidated tax
return for a taxable year shall file a consolidated tax return for all
subsequent taxable years unless the taxpayer requests and receives written
permission from the Tax Commissioner to file a separate return or a taxpayer
has experienced a change in circumstances.
   (d)   A taxpayer shall prepare a consolidated tax return in the same manner
as is required under the United States Department of Treasury regulations that
prescribe procedures for the preparation of the consolidated federal income tax
return required to be filed by the common parent of the affiliated group of
which the taxpayer is a member.
   (e)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (e)(2), (e)(3), and
(e)(4) of this section, corporations that file a consolidated tax return shall
compute adjusted federal taxable income, as defined in Section
192.58 of the Codified Ordinances, by substituting "consolidated federal
taxable income" for "federal taxable income" wherever "federal taxable income"
appears in that division and by substituting "an affiliated group of
corporation's" for "a C corporation's" wherever "a C corporation's" appears in
that division.
      (2)   No corporation filing a consolidated tax return shall make any
adjustment otherwise required under division (b) of Section
192.58 of the Codified Ordinances to the extent that the item of income or
deduction otherwise subject to the adjustment has been eliminated or
consolidated in the computation of consolidated federal taxable income.
      (3)   If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having at least
eighty percent (80%) of the value of its ownership interest owned or
controlled, directly or indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is
included in that affiliated group's consolidated federal taxable income for a
taxable year, the corporation filing a consolidated tax return shall do one (1)
of the following with respect to that pass-through entity's net profit or loss
for that taxable year:
         A.   Exclude the pass-through entity's net profit or loss from the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purpose of making the computations required in Section
192.59 of the Codified Ordinances, exclude the property, payroll, and gross
receipts of the pass-through entity in the computation of the affiliated
group's net profit sitused to a municipal corporation. If the entity's net
profit or loss is so excluded, the entity shall be subject to taxation as a
separate taxpayer on the basis of the entity's net profits that would otherwise
be included in the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group.
         B.   Include the pass-through entity's net profit or loss in the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purpose of making the computations required in Section
192.59 of the Codified Ordinances, include the property, payroll, and gross
receipts of the pass-through entity in the computation of the affiliated
group's net profit sitused to a municipal corporation. If the entity's net
profit or loss is so included, the entity shall not be subject to taxation as a
separate taxpayer on the basis of the entity's net profits that are included in
the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group.
      (4)   If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having less than
eighty percent (80%) of the value of its ownership interest owned or
controlled, directly or indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is
included in that affiliated group's consolidated federal taxable income for a
taxable year, all of the following shall apply:
         A.   The corporation filing the consolidated tax return shall exclude
the pass-through entity's net profit or loss from the consolidated federal
taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the purposes of making the
computations required in Section
192.59 of the Codified Ordinances, exclude the property, payroll, and gross
receipts of the pass-through entity in the computation of the affiliated
group's net profit sitused to a municipal corporation;
         B.   The pass-through entity shall be subject to municipal income
taxation as a separate taxpayer in accordance with Sections
192.57 to
192.72 of the Codified Ordinances on the basis of the entity's net profits that
would otherwise be included in the consolidated federal taxable income of the
affiliated group.
   (f)   Corporations filing a consolidated tax return shall make the
computations required under Section
192.59 of the Codified Ordinances by substituting "consolidated federal taxable
income attributable to" for "net profit from" wherever "net profit from"
appears in that section and by substituting "affiliated group of corporations"
for "taxpayer" wherever "taxpayer" appears in that section.
   (g)   Each corporation filing a consolidated tax return is jointly and
severally liable for any tax, interest, penalties, fines, charges, or other
amounts applicable under Section
192.57 to
192.72 of the Codified Ordinances or RC Chapter 5703 to the corporation, an
affiliated group of which the corporation is a member for any portion of the
taxable year, or any one (1) or more members of such an affiliated group.
(Ord. No. 120-18. Passed 2-5-18, eff. 2-6-18)
Note: Pursuant to Section 3 of Ord. No. 120-18, "if any provision of the H.B.
49 municipal income tax provisions is found unconstitutional, or the
effectiveness of any provision of H.B. 49 is stayed or enjoined, that the
provisions adopted in Section 2 of this ordinance shall likewise be stayed or
ineffective."
§ 192.64 Failure to Pay Tax
   If a taxpayer that has made the election allowed under Section
192.57 of the Codified Ordinances fails to pay any tax as required under
Sections
192.57 to
192.72 of the Codified Ordinances, or any portion of that tax, on or before the
date prescribed for its payment, interest shall be assessed, collected, and
paid, in the same manner as the tax, upon such unpaid amount at the rate per
annum prescribed by RC 5703.47 from the date prescribed for its payment until
it is paid or until the date an assessment is issued under Section
192.67 of the Codified Ordinances, whichever occurs first.
(Ord. No. 120-18. Passed 2-5-18, eff. 2-6-18)
Note: Pursuant to Section 3 of Ord. No. 120-18, "if any provision of the H.B.
49 municipal income tax provisions is found unconstitutional, or the
effectiveness of any provision of H.B. 49 is stayed or enjoined, that the
provisions adopted in Section 2 of this ordinance shall likewise be stayed or
ineffective."
§ 192.65 Declaration of Estimated Taxes
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   "Combined tax liability" means the total amount of a taxpayer's
income tax liabilities to all municipal corporations in this state for a
taxable year.
      (2)   "Estimated taxes" means the amount that the taxpayer reasonably
estimates to be the taxpayer's combined tax liability for the current taxable
year.
   (b)   (1)   Except as provided in division (b)(4) of this section, every
taxpayer shall make a declaration of estimated taxes for the current taxable
year, on the form prescribed by the Tax Commissioner, if the amount payable as
estimated taxes is at least two hundred dollars ($200.00).
      (2)   Except as provided in division (b)(4) of this section, a taxpayer
having a taxable year of less than twelve (12) months shall make a declaration
under rules prescribed by the Tax Commissioner.
      (3)   The declaration of estimated taxes shall be filed on or before the
fifteenth (15th) day of the fourth (4th) month after the beginning of the
taxable year or on or before the fifteenth (15th) day of the fourth (4th) month
after the taxpayer becomes subject to tax for the first time.
      (4)   The Tax Commissioner may waive the requirement for filing a
declaration of estimated taxes for any class of taxpayers after finding that
the waiver is reasonable and proper in view of administrative costs and other
factors.
   (c)   Each taxpayer shall file the declaration of estimated taxes with, and
remit estimated taxes to, the Tax Commissioner at the times and in the amounts
prescribed in division (c)(1) of this section. Remitted taxes shall be made
payable to the Treasurer of State.
      (1)   The required portion of the combined tax liability for the taxable
year that shall be paid through estimated taxes shall be as follows:
         A.   On or before the fifteenth (15th) day of the fourth (4th) month
after the beginning of the taxable year, twenty-two and one-half percent
(22.5%) of the combined tax liability for the taxable year;
         B.   On or before the fifteenth (15th) day of the sixth (6th) month
after the beginning of the taxable year, forty-five percent (45%) of the
combined tax liability for the taxable year;
         C.   On or before the fifteenth (15th) day of the ninth (9th) month
after the beginning of the taxable year, sixty-seven and one-half percent
(67.5%) of the combined tax liability for the taxable year;
         D.   On or before the fifteenth (15th) day of the twelfth (12th) month
of the taxable year, ninety percent (90%) of the combined tax liability for the
taxable year.
      (2)   If the taxpayer determines that its declaration of estimated taxes
will not accurately reflect the taxpayer's tax liability for the taxable year,
the taxpayer shall increase or decrease, as appropriate, its subsequent
payments in equal installments to result in a more accurate payment of
estimated taxes.
      (3)   A.   Each taxpayer shall report on the declaration of estimated
taxes the portion of the remittance that the taxpayer estimates that it owes to
each municipal corporation for the taxable year.
         B.   Upon receiving a payment of estimated taxes under this section,
the Tax Commissioner shall immediately forward the payment to the Treasurer of
State. The Treasurer shall credit the payment in the same manner as in division
(B) of RC 718.85.
   (d)   (1)   In the case of any underpayment of estimated taxes, there shall
be added to the taxes an amount determined at the rate per annum prescribed by
RC 5703.47 upon the amount of underpayment for the period of underpayment,
unless the underpayment is due to reasonable cause as described in division (e)
of this section. The amount of the underpayment shall be determined as follows:
         A.   For the first (1st) payment of estimated taxes each year, twenty-
two and one-half percent (22.5%) of the combined tax liability, less the amount
of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that payment;
         B.   For the second (2nd) payment of estimated taxes each year, forty-
five percent (45%) of the combined tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid
by the date prescribed for that payment;
         C.   For the third (3rd) payment of estimated taxes each year, sixty-
seven and one-half percent (67.5%) of the combined tax liability, less the
amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that payment;
         D.   For the fourth (4th) payment of estimated taxes each year, ninety
percent (90%) of the combined tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by
the date prescribed for that payment.
      (2)   The period of the underpayment shall run from the day the estimated
payment was required to be made to the date on which the payment is made. For
purposes of this section, a payment of estimated taxes on or before any payment
date shall be considered a payment of any previous underpayment only to the
extent the payment of estimated taxes exceeds the amount of the payment
presently due.
      (3)   All amounts collected under this section shall be considered as
taxes collected under Sections
192.57 to
192.72 of the Codified Ordinances and shall be credited and distributed to
municipal corporations in accordance with RC 718.83.
   (e)   An underpayment of any portion of a combined tax liability shall be
due to reasonable cause and the penalty imposed by this section shall not be
added to the taxes for the taxable year if any of the following apply:
      (1)   The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least ninety
percent (90%) of the combined tax liability for the current taxable year,
determined by annualizing the income received during the year up to the end of
the month immediately preceding the month in which the payment is due.
      (2)   The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least one
hundred percent (100%) of the tax liability shown on the return of the taxpayer
for the preceding taxable year, provided that the immediately preceding taxable
year reflected a period of twelve (12) months and the taxpayer filed a
municipal income tax return for that year.
(Ord. No. 120-18. Passed 2-5-18, eff. 2-6-18)
Note: Pursuant to Section 3 of Ord. No. 120-18, "if any provision of the H.B.
49 municipal income tax provisions is found unconstitutional, or the
effectiveness of any provision of H.B. 49 is stayed or enjoined, that the
provisions adopted in Section 2 of this ordinance shall likewise be stayed or
ineffective."
§ 192.66 Additional Penalties
   (a)   In addition to any other penalty imposed by Sections
192.57 to
192.72 of the Codified Ordinances or RC Chapter 5703, the following penalties
shall apply:
      (1)   If a taxpayer required to file a tax return under Sections
192.57 to
192.72 of the Codified Ordinances fails to make and file the return within the
time prescribed, including any extensions of time granted by the Tax
Commissioner, the Tax Commissioner may impose a penalty not exceeding twenty-
five dollars ($25.00), except that the Commissioner shall abate or refund the
penalty assessed on a taxpayer’s first failure to timely file a return after
the taxpayer files that return.
      (2)   If a person required to file a tax return electronically under
Sections
192.57 to
192.72 of the Codified Ordinances fails to do so, the Tax Commissioner may
impose a penalty not to exceed the following:
         A.   For each of the first two (2) failures, five percent (5%) of the
amount required to be reported on the return;
         B.   For the third (3rd) and any subsequent failure, ten percent (10%)
of the amount required to be reported on the return.
      (3)   If a taxpayer that has made the election allowed under Section
192.57 of the Codified Ordinances fails to timely pay an amount of tax required
to be paid under this chapter, the Tax Commissioner may impose a penalty equal
to fifteen percent (15%) of the amount not timely paid.
      (4)   If a taxpayer files what purports to be a tax return required by
Sections
192.57 to
192.72 of the Codified Ordinances that does not contain information upon which
the substantial correctness of the return may be judged or contains information
that on its face indicates that the return is substantially incorrect, and the
filing of the return in that manner is due to a position that is frivolous or a
desire that is apparent from the return to delay or impede the administration
of Sections
192.57 to
192.72 of the Codified Ordinances, a penalty of up to five hundred dollars
($500.00) may be imposed.
      (5)   If a taxpayer makes a fraudulent attempt to evade the reporting or
payment of the tax required to be shown on any return required under Sections
192.57 to
192.72 of the Codified Ordinances, a penalty may be imposed not exceeding the
greater of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or one hundred percent (100%) of
the tax required to be shown on the return.
      (6)   If any person makes a false or fraudulent claim for a refund under
Section
192.68 of the Codified Ordinances, a penalty may be imposed not exceeding the
greater of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or one hundred percent (100%) of
the claim. Any penalty imposed under this division, any refund issued on the
claim, and interest on any refund from the date of the refund, may be assessed
under Section
192.67 of the Codified Ordinances without regard to any time limitation for the
assessment imposed by division (a) of that section.
   (b)   For purposes of this section, the tax required to be shown on a tax
return shall be reduced by the amount of any part of the tax paid on or before
the date, including any extensions of the date, prescribed for filing the
return.
   (c)   Each penalty imposed under this section shall be in addition to any
other penalty imposed under this section. All or part of any penalty imposed
under this section may be abated by the Tax Commissioner. The Tax Commissioner
may adopt rules governing the imposition and abatement of such penalties.
   (d)   All amounts collected under this section shall be considered as taxes
collected under Sections
192.57 to
192.72 of the Codified Ordinances and shall be credited and distributed to
municipal corporations in the same proportion as the underlying tax liability
is required to be distributed to such municipal corporations under RC 718.83.
(Ord. No. 1344-2023. Passed 11-27-23, eff. 11-28-23)
Note: Pursuant to Section 3 of Ord. No. 120-18, "if any provision of the H.B.
49 municipal income tax provisions is found unconstitutional, or the
effectiveness of any provision of H.B. 49 is stayed or enjoined, that the
provisions adopted in Section 2 of this ordinance shall likewise be stayed or
ineffective."
§ 192.67 Assessments Against Taxpayer
   (a)   If any taxpayer required to file a return under Sections
192.57 to
192.72 of the Codified Ordinances fails to file the return within the time
prescribed, files an incorrect return, or fails to remit the full amount of the
tax due for the period covered by the return, the Tax Commissioner may make an
assessment against the taxpayer for any deficiency for the period for which the
return or tax is due, based upon any information in the Tax Commissioner's
possession.
   The Tax Commissioner shall not make or issue an assessment against a
taxpayer more than three (3) years after the later of the date the return
subject to assessment was required to be filed or the date the return was
filed. Such time limit may be extended if both the taxpayer and the Tax
Commissioner consent in writing to the extension. Any such extension shall
extend the three (3) year time limit in Section
192.68 of the Codified Ordinances for the same period of time. There shall be
no bar or limit to an assessment against a taxpayer that fails to file a return
subject to assessment as required by Sections
192.57 to
192.72 of the Codified Ordinances, or that files a fraudulent return. The Tax
Commissioner shall give the taxpayer assessed written notice of the assessment
as provided in RC 5703.37. With the notice, the Tax Commissioner shall provide
instructions on how to petition for reassessment and request a hearing on the
petition.
   (b)   Unless the taxpayer assessed files with the Tax Commissioner within
sixty (60) days after service of the notice of assessment, either personally or
by certified mail, a written petition for reassessment signed by the authorized
agent of the taxpayer assessed having knowledge of the facts, the assessment
becomes final, and the amount of the assessment is due and payable from the
taxpayer to the Treasurer of State. The petition shall indicate the taxpayer's
objections, but additional objections may be raised in writing if received by
the Tax Commissioner prior to the date shown on the final determination. If the
petition has been properly filed, the Tax Commissioner shall proceed under RC
5703.60.
   (c)   After an assessment becomes final, if any portion of the assessment
remains unpaid, including accrued interest, a certified copy of the Tax
Commissioner's entry making the assessment final may be filed in the office of
the clerk of the court of common pleas in the county in which the taxpayer has
an office or place of business in this state, the county in which the
taxpayer's statutory agent is located, or Franklin County.
   Immediately upon the filing of the entry, the clerk shall enter a judgment
against the taxpayer assessed in the amount shown on the entry. The judgment
may be filed by the clerk in a loose-leaf book entitled "special judgments for
municipal income taxes," and shall have the same effect as other judgments.
Execution shall issue upon the judgment upon the request of the tax
commissioner, and all laws applicable to sales on execution shall apply to
sales made under the judgment.
   If the assessment is not paid in its entirety within sixty (60) days after
the day the assessment was issued, the portion of the assessment consisting of
tax due shall bear interest at the rate per annum prescribed by RC 5703.47 from
the day the Tax Commissioner issues the assessment until the assessment is paid
or until it is certified to the Attorney General for collection under RC
131.02, whichever comes first. If the unpaid portion of the assessment is
certified to the Attorney General for collection, the entire unpaid portion of
the assessment shall bear interest at the rate per annum prescribed by RC
5703.47 from the date of certification until the date it is paid in its
entirety. Interest shall be paid in the same manner as the tax and may be
collected by issuing an assessment under this section.
   (d)   All money collected under this section shall be credited to the
municipal income tax fund and distributed to the municipal corporation to which
the money is owed based on the assessment issued under this section.
   (e)   If the Tax Commissioner believes that collection of the tax will be
jeopardized unless proceedings to collect or secure collection of the tax are
instituted without delay, the Tax Commissioner may issue a jeopardy assessment
against the taxpayer liable for the tax. Immediately upon the issuance of the
jeopardy assessment, the Tax Commissioner shall file an entry with the clerk of
the court of common pleas in the manner prescribed by division (c) of this
section. Notice of the jeopardy assessment shall be served on the taxpayer
assessed or the taxpayer's legal representative in the manner provided in RC
5703.37 within five (5) days of the filing of the entry with the clerk. The
total amount assessed is immediately due and payable, unless the taxpayer
assessed files a petition for reassessment in accordance with division (b) of
this section and provides security in a form satisfactory to the Tax
Commissioner and in an amount sufficient to satisfy the unpaid balance of the
assessment. Full or partial payment of the assessment does not prejudice the
Tax Commissioner's consideration of the petition for reassessment.
   (f)   Notwithstanding the fact that a petition for reassessment is pending,
the taxpayer may pay all or a portion of the assessment that is the subject of
the petition. The acceptance of a payment by the Treasurer of State does not
prejudice any claim for refund upon final determination of the petition.
   If upon final determination of the petition an error in the assessment is
corrected by the Tax Commissioner, upon petition so filed or pursuant to a
decision of the Board of Tax Appeals or any court to which the determination or
decision has been appealed, so that the amount due from the taxpayer under the
corrected assessment is less than the portion paid, there shall be issued to
the taxpayer, its assigns, or legal representative a refund in the amount of
the overpayment as provided by Section
192.68 of the Codified Ordinances, with interest on that amount as provided by
that section.
(Ord. No. 120-18. Passed 2-5-18, eff. 2-6-18)
Note: Pursuant to Section 3 of Ord. No. 120-18, "if any provision of the H.B.
49 municipal income tax provisions is found unconstitutional, or the
effectiveness of any provision of H.B. 49 is stayed or enjoined, that the
provisions adopted in Section 2 of this ordinance shall likewise be stayed or
ineffective."
§ 192.68 Refund Applications
   (a)   An application to refund to a taxpayer the amount of taxes paid on any
illegal, erroneous, or excessive payment of tax under Sections
192.57 to
192.72 of the Codified Ordinances, including assessments, shall be filed with
the Tax Commissioner within three (3) years after the date of the illegal,
erroneous, or excessive payment of the tax, or within any additional period
allowed by division (a) of Section
192.67 of the Codified Ordinances. The application shall be filed in the form
prescribed by the Tax Commissioner.
   (b)   (1)   On the filing of a refund application, the Tax Commissioner
shall determine the amount of refund to which the applicant is entitled. The
amount determined shall be based on the amount overpaid per return or
assessment. If the amount is greater than ten dollars ($10.00) and not less
than that claimed, the Tax Commissioner shall certify that amount to the
Director of Budget and Management and the Treasurer of State for payment from
the tax refund fund created in RC 5703.052. If the amount is greater than ten
dollars ($10.00) but less than that claimed, the Tax Commissioner shall proceed
in accordance with RC 5703.70.
      (2)   Upon issuance of a refund under this section, the Tax Commissioner
shall notify each municipal corporation of the amount refunded to the taxpayer
attributable to that municipal corporation, which shall be deducted from the
municipal corporation's next distribution under RC 718.83.
   (c)   Any portion of a refund determined under division (b) of this section
that is not issued within ninety (90) days after such determination shall bear
interest at the rate per annum prescribed by RC 5703.47 from the ninety-first
(91st) day after such determination until the day the refund is paid or
credited. On an illegal or erroneous assessment, interest shall be paid at that
rate from the date of payment on the illegal or erroneous assessment until the
day the refund is paid or credited.
(Ord. No. 120-18. Passed 2-5-18, eff. 2-6-18)
Note: Pursuant to Section 3 of Ord. No. 120-18, "if any provision of the H.B.
49 municipal income tax provisions is found unconstitutional, or the
effectiveness of any provision of H.B. 49 is stayed or enjoined, that the
provisions adopted in Section 2 of this ordinance shall likewise be stayed or
ineffective."
§ 192.69 Amended Returns
   (a)   If any of the facts, figures, computations, or attachments required in
an annual return filed by a taxpayer that has made the election allowed under
Section
192.57 of the Codified Ordinances and used to determine the tax due under
Sections
192.57 to
192.72 of the Codified Ordinances must be altered as the result of an
adjustment to the taxpayer's federal income tax return, whether initiated by
the taxpayer or the Internal Revenue Service, and such alteration affects the
taxpayer's tax liability under those sections, the taxpayer shall file an
amended return with the Tax Commissioner in such form as the Tax Commissioner
requires. The amended return shall be filed not later than sixty (60) days
after the adjustment is agreed upon or finally determined for federal income
tax purposes or after any federal income tax deficiency or refund, or the
abatement or credit resulting therefrom, has been assessed or paid, whichever
occurs first. If a taxpayer intends to file an amended consolidated municipal
income tax return, or to amend its type of return from a separate return to a
consolidated return, based on the taxpayer's consolidated federal income tax
return, the taxpayer shall notify the Tax Commissioner before filing the
amended return.
   (b)   In the case of an underpayment, the amended return shall be
accompanied by payment of any combined additional tax due together with any
penalty and interest thereon. An amended return required by this section is a
return subject to assessment under Section
192.67 of the Codified Ordinances for the purpose of assessing any additional
tax due under this section, together with any applicable penalty and interest.
The amended return shall not reopen those facts, figures, computations, or
attachments from a previously filed return no longer subject to assessment that
are not affected, either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the
taxpayer's federal tax return.
   (c)   In the case of an overpayment, an application for refund may be filed
under this division within the sixty (60) day period prescribed for filing the
amended return, even if that period extends beyond the period prescribed in
Section
192.68 of the Codified Ordinances, if the application otherwise conforms to the
requirements of that section. An application filed under this division shall
claim refund of overpayments resulting from alterations to only those facts,
figures, computations, or attachments required in the taxpayer's annual return
that are affected, either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the
taxpayer's federal income tax return unless it is also filed within the time
prescribed in Section
192.68 of the Codified Ordinances. The application shall not reopen those
facts, figures, computations, or attachments that are not affected, either
directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the taxpayer's federal income tax
return.
(Ord. No. 120-18. Passed 2-5-18, eff. 2-6-18)
Note: Pursuant to Section 3 of Ord. No. 120-18, "if any provision of the H.B.
49 municipal income tax provisions is found unconstitutional, or the
effectiveness of any provision of H.B. 49 is stayed or enjoined, that the
provisions adopted in Section 2 of this ordinance shall likewise be stayed or
ineffective."
§ 192.70 Examination of Records and Other Documents and Persons
   (a)   The Tax Commissioner, or any authorized agent or employee thereof, may
examine the books, papers, records, and federal and state income tax returns of
any taxpayer or other person that is subject to Sections
192.57 to
192.72 of the Codified Ordinances for the purpose of verifying the accuracy of
any return made or, if no return was filed, to ascertain the tax due as
required under those sections. Upon written request by the Tax Commissioner or
a duly authorized agent or employee thereof, every taxpayer or other person
subject to this section is required to furnish the opportunity for the Tax
Commissioner, authorized agent, or employee to investigate and examine such
books, papers, records, and federal and state income tax returns at a
reasonable time and place designated in the request.
   (b)   The records and other documents of any taxpayer or other person that
is subject to Sections
192.57 to
192.72 of the Codified Ordinances shall be open to the Tax Commissioner's
inspection during business hours and shall be preserved for a period of six (6)
years following the end of the taxable year to which the records or documents
relate, unless the Tax Commissioner, in writing, consents to their destruction
within that period, or by order requires that they be kept longer. The Tax
Commissioner may require any person, by notice served on that person, to keep
such records as the Tax Commissioner determines necessary to show whether or
not that person is liable, and the extent of such liability, for the income tax
levied by a municipal corporation.
   (c)   The Tax Commissioner may examine under oath any person that the Tax
Commissioner reasonably believes has knowledge concerning any income that was
or would have been returned for taxation or any transaction tending to affect
such income. The Tax Commissioner may, for this purpose, compel any such person
to attend a hearing or examination and to produce any books, papers, records,
and federal income tax returns in such person's possession or control. The
person may be assisted or represented by an attorney, accountant, bookkeeper,
or other tax practitioner at any such hearing or examination. This division
does not authorize the practice of law by a person who is not an attorney.
   (d)   No person issued written notice by the Tax Commissioner compelling
attendance at a hearing or examination or the production of books, papers,
records, or federal income tax returns under this section shall fail to comply.
(Ord. No. 120-18. Passed 2-5-18, eff. 2-6-18)
Note: Pursuant to Section 3 of Ord. No. 120-18, "if any provision of the H.B.
49 municipal income tax provisions is found unconstitutional, or the
effectiveness of any provision of H.B. 49 is stayed or enjoined, that the
provisions adopted in Section 2 of this ordinance shall likewise be stayed or
ineffective."
§ 192.71 Credits
   (a)   A credit, granted by resolution or ordinance of the City pursuant to
Section
192.16 or
192.17 of the Codified Ordinances, shall be available to a taxpayer that has
made the election allowed under Section
192.57 of the Codified Ordinances, against the municipal corporation's tax on
income. A municipal corporation shall submit the following information to the
Tax Commissioner on or before the later of January 31, 2018, or the thirty-
first (31st) day of January of the first (1st) year in which the taxpayer is
eligible to receive the credit:
      (1)   A copy of the agreement entered into by the City and taxpayer under
Section
192.16 or
192.17 of the Codified Ordinances;
      (2)   A copy of the ordinance or resolution authorizing the agreement
entered into between the City and the taxpayer.
   (b)   (1)   Each taxpayer that claims a credit shall submit, with the
taxpayer's tax return, documentation issued by the City granting the credit
that confirms the eligibility of the taxpayer for the credit, the amount of the
credit for which the taxpayer is eligible, and the tax year to which the credit
is to be applied.
      (2)   Such documentation shall be provided in the form prescribed by the
Tax Commissioner.
      (3)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize the Tax
Commissioner to enter into an agreement with a taxpayer to grant a credit, to
determine if a taxpayer meets the conditions of a tax credit agreement entered
into by the City and taxpayer under Section
192.16 or
192.17 of the Codified Ordinances, or to modify the terms or conditions of any
such existing agreement.
(Ord. No. 120-18. Passed 2-5-18, eff. 2-6-18)
Note: Pursuant to Section 3 of Ord. No. 120-18, "if any provision of the H.B.
49 municipal income tax provisions is found unconstitutional, or the
effectiveness of any provision of H.B. 49 is stayed or enjoined, that the
provisions adopted in Section 2 of this ordinance shall likewise be stayed or
ineffective."
§ 192.72 Reckless Violations; Penalties
   (a)   Whoever recklessly violates division (a) of Section
192.60 of the Codified Ordinances shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree and shall be subject to a fine of not more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or imprisonment for a term of up to six (6) months, or both.
   (b)   Each instance of access or disclosure in violation of division (a) of
Section
192.60 of the Codified Ordinances constitutes a separate offense.
   (c)   These specific penalties shall not be construed to prevent the City
from prosecuting any and all other offenses that may apply.
(Ord. No. 120-18. Passed 2-5-18, eff. 2-6-18)
Note: Pursuant to Section 3 of Ord. No. 120-18, "if any provision of the H.B.
49 municipal income tax provisions is found unconstitutional, or the
effectiveness of any provision of H.B. 49 is stayed or enjoined, that the
provisions adopted in Section 2 of this ordinance shall likewise be stayed or
ineffective."
§ 192.99 Violations; Penalty
   (a)   Except as provided in division (b) of this section, whoever violates
Section
192.37 of this chapter, division (a) of Section
192.36 of this chapter, Section
192.03 of this chapter or Section
192.10 of this chapter by failing to remit municipal income taxes deducted and
withheld from an employee, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree
and shall be subject to a fine of not more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or imprisonment for a term of up to six (6) months, or both. In
addition, the violation is punishable by dismissal from office or discharge
from employment, or both.
   (b)   Any person who discloses information received from the Internal
Revenue Service in violation of Internal Revenue Code Section 7213(a), 7213A,
or 7431 shall be guilty of a felony of the fifth (5th) degree and shall be
subject to a fine of not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) plus the
costs of prosecution, or imprisonment for a term not exceeding five (5) years,
or both. In addition, the violation is punishable by dismissal from office or
discharge from employment, or both.
   (c)   Each instance of access or disclosure in violation of division (a) of
Section
192.36 of this chapter constitutes a separate offense.
   (d)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which violation no
penalty is otherwise provided, is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
By way of an illustrative enumeration, violations of this chapter shall include
but not be limited to the following acts, conduct, and/or omissions:
      (1)   Fail, neglect or refuse to make any return or declaration required
by this chapter; or
      (2)   Knowingly make any incomplete return; or
      (3)   Willfully fail, neglect, or refuse to pay the tax, penalties, and
interest, or any combination thereof, imposed by this chapter; or
      (4)   Cause to not be remitted the city income tax withheld from
qualifying wages of employees to the municipality municipal corporation as
required by Section
192.10; or
      (5)   Neglect or refuse to withhold or remit municipal income tax from
employees; or
      (6)   Refuse to permit the Tax Administrator or any duly authorized agent
or employee to examine his or her books, records, papers, federal and state
income tax returns, or any documentation relating to the income or net profits
of a taxpayer; or
      (7)   Fail to appear before the Tax Administrator and to produce his or
her books, records, papers, federal and state income tax returns, or any
documentation relating to the income or net profits of a taxpayer upon order or
subpoena of the Tax Administrator; or
      (8)   Refuse to disclose to the Tax Administrator any information with
respect to such person’s income or net profits, or in the case of a person
responsible for maintaining information relating to his or her employers’
income or net profits, such person’s employer’s income or net profits; or
      (9)   Fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter or any order or
subpoena of the Tax Administrator; or
      (10)   To avoid imposition or collection of municipal income tax,
willfully give to an employer or prospective employer false information as to
his or her true name, correct social security number and residence address, or
willfully fail to promptly notify an employer or a prospective employer of any
change in residence address and date thereof; or
      (11)   Fail, as an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer, to
maintain proper records of employees residence addresses, total qualifying
wages paid and municipal tax withheld, or to knowingly give the Tax
Administrator false information; or
      (12)   Willfully fail, neglect, or refuse to make any payment of
estimated municipal income tax for any taxable year or any part of any taxable
under this chapter; or
      (13)   Attempt to do anything whatsoever to avoid the payment of the
whole or any part of the tax, penalties or interest imposed by this chapter.
   (e)   For purposes of this section, any violation that does not specify a
culpable mental state or intent, shall be one of strict liability and no
culpable mental state or intent shall be required for a person to be guilty of
that violation.
   (f)   For purposes of this section, the term “person” shall, in addition to
the meaning prescribed in Section
192.06, include in the case of a corporation, association, pass-through entity
or unincorporated business entity not having any resident owner or officer
within the city, any employee or agent of such corporation, association, pass-
through entity or unincorporated business entity who has control or supervision
over or is charged with the responsibility of filing the municipal income tax
returns and making the payments of the municipal income tax as required by this
chapter.
(Ord. No. 1412-15. Passed 11-23-15, eff. 1-1-16)
CHAPTER 193 – TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
193.01   Intent of Tax
193.02   Definitions
193.03   Purpose, Rate and Application of Tax
193.031   Expansion of Levy; Additional Purpose for Tax – Repealed
193.04   Transient Guest to Pay the Tax
193.05   Records Inspection and Preservation
193.06   Tax to be Separately Stated and Charged
193.07   Regulations for Filing Returns
193.08   Refunds
193.09   Failure to Collect and Report Tax; Determination by Administrator
193.10   Appeals
193.11   Actions to Collect
193.12   Interest on Unpaid Tax
193.121   Booking Agents
193.13   Penalties on Unpaid Tax
193.14   Rules and Regulations
193.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Authority to impose tax, RC Ch. 5739
§ 193.01 Intent of Tax
   It is the intent of the City to levy the excise tax of three percent (3%) on
transactions by which lodging is or is to be furnished by a hotel to transient
guests as referred to and authorized by RC 5739.02(C). Accordingly, this
chapter shall be construed to effectuate that purpose and so as to be
consistent with any requirement of law, compliance with which is a prerequisite
to the validity of the tax intended to be levied hereby.
(Ord. No. 252-A-83. Passed 6-15-83, eff. 6-16-83)
§ 193.02 Definitions
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   "Administrator" means the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses or
his or her authorized representative.
   (b)   "Booking agent" means any person or entity that facilitates
reservations or collects payment for hotel accommodations on behalf of or for a
vendor. Merely publishing an advertisement for accommodations does not make the
publisher a booking agent.
   (c)   "Hotel" means every establishment kept, used, maintained, advertised,
or held out to the public to be a place where lodging is offered to guests in
one (1) or more rooms, regardless of use of keyed entry, whether such rooms are
in one (1) or several structures, and whether the rooms are located in
different structures or on different parcels of land if the structures are not
identified in advertisements of the accommodations as distinct establishments.
   (d)   "Transaction price" means the total amount of consideration, including
money or any other value, paid, or to be paid, or given by, or on behalf of, a
transient guest to a hotel or booking agent in exchange for lodging. The
transaction price is the amount advertised or published to the public inclusive
of any fees built into the advertised or published price; however, service fees
or booking fees, if separately stated, shall not be included in the transaction
price.
   (e)   "Transient guest" or "transient guests" means a person or persons
occupying a room or rooms for lodging for less than thirty (30) consecutive
days.
   (f)   "Vendor" means the person who is the owner or operator of the hotel
and who furnishes the lodging.
(Ord. No. 30-16. Passed 6-6-16, eff. 7-1-16)
§ 193.03 Purpose, Rate and Application of Tax
   (a)   There is hereby levied an excise tax of three percent (3%) on
transactions by which lodging by a hotel is, or is to be, furnished to
transient guests.
   (b)   The excise tax levied under this chapter shall provide revenue for the
purposes of general municipal operations, procurement of fixed assets or
permanent improvements, payment of debt charges, the elimination of deficits in
City funds and for all other lawful purposes. To carry out such purposes, the
receipts of the tax levied under this chapter shall be deposited to the credit
of the General Fund.
   (c)   The tax, which shall be known as the transient occupancy tax, applies
and is collectible at the time the lodging is furnished, regardless of the time
when the price is paid. The tax shall not apply to transactions by which
lodging is furnished to:
      (1)   the Federal government, the State or any of its political
subdivisions; or
      (2)   a person maintaining occupancy for a period of thirty (30) or more
consecutive days; provided, however, that except in the case of employees of
the same employer, no occupancy may be used in combination with the occupancy
of another, regardless of the source of payment, to exempt a transaction under
this division.
   (d)   For the purpose of the proper administration of this chapter and to
prevent the evasion of the tax, it shall be presumed that all lodging furnished
by hotels in the City to transient guests is subject to the tax until the
contrary is established.
(Ord. No. 597-13. Passed 5-20-13, eff. 7-1-13)
§ 193.031 Expansion of Levy; Additional Purpose for Tax – Repealed
(Ord. No. 597-13. Passed 5-20-13, eff. 7-1-13)
§ 193.04 Transient Guest to Pay the Tax
   (a)   The transient occupancy tax shall be paid by the transient guest to
the vendor unless division (b) of this section applies. Each vendor shall
collect from the transient guest the full and exact amount of the tax payable
on the taxable price for each taxable lodging. The tax required to be collected
under this chapter shall be deemed to be held in trust by the vendor or the
City until paid to the Administrator, as provided in Section
193.07 of this chapter. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the
vendor, the Administrator may require the transient guest to pay such tax
directly to the Administrator.
   (b)   A booking agent collecting for a vendor may collect and remit the
transient occupancy tax, and the vendor shall not be responsible for collecting
the transient occupancy tax on any transaction for which the vendor has
received confirmation that the booking agent has collected and remitted the
tax.
   (c)   No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the
time the lodging is furnished and, under penalty of perjury, upon a form and in
the manner prescribed by the Administrator.
(Ord. No. 30-16. Passed 6-6-16, eff. 7-1-16)
§ 193.05 Records Inspection and Preservation
   Each vendor and booking agent shall maintain complete and accurate records
of lodging furnished, together with a record of the tax collected thereon. Such
records shall be open and accessible to the inspection of the Administrator
within the City within fifteen (15) days upon notification in writing to the
vendor or booking agent and shall be preserved for a period of three (3) years,
unless the Administrator in writing consents to their destruction within that
period, or by order requires that they be kept longer.
(Ord. No. 30-16. Passed 6-6-16, eff. 7-1-16)
§ 193.06 Tax to be Separately Stated and Charged
   (a)   The vendor or booking agent collecting for a vendor shall state and
charge the transient occupancy tax to the transient guest separately from the
charge for the lodging and on any record thereof, at the time when the
occupancy is arranged or contracted and charged for, and upon every evidence of
occupancy or any bill or statement or charge made for occupancy issued or
delivered by the vendor.
   (b)   No vendor or booking agent shall advertise or state in any manner,
whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be
assumed or absorbed by the vendor or booking agent, or that the tax will not be
added to the amount charged for the lodging, or that, if added, any part will
be refunded except in the manner provided in this chapter.
(Ord. No. 30-16. Passed 6-6-16, eff. 7-1-16)
§ 193.07 Regulations for Filing Returns
   (a)   Each vendor or booking agent collecting for a vendor shall on or
before the last day of the month make and file a return for the preceding
month, on forms prescribed by the Administrator, showing the receipts from
furnishing lodging, the amount of tax due from the vendor or booking agent
collecting for a vendor to the City for the period covered by the return, and
such other information as the Administrator deems necessary for the proper
administration of this chapter. All returns shall be signed by the vendor, its
authorized agent, or booking agent collecting for a vendor. The Administrator
may extend the time for making and filing returns. Returns shall be filed by
delivering or mailing the same to the Administrator together with payment of
the full amount of tax shown to be due thereon.
   (b)   The Administrator may authorize vendors or booking agents collecting
for vendors whose tax liabilities are not such as to merit monthly returns, as
determined by the Administrator upon the basis of administrative costs of the
City, to make and file returns at less frequent intervals. Such authorization
shall be in writing and shall indicate the intervals at which returns are to be
filed.
   (c)   Each vendor or booking agent collecting for a vendor shall file all
claims for exemption from tax filed by the transient guests with the vendor
during the reporting period with the return.
   (d)   The Administrator shall treat all returns and payments submitted by
vendors and booking agents collecting for vendors as confidential and shall not
release them except upon order of a court of competent jurisdiction or to an
officer or agent of the United States, the State, the County, the City, for
official use only, or except as required by law.
   (e)   The Administrator, if he or she deems it necessary in order to insure
the payment of the tax imposed by this chapter, may require returns and
payments to be made and filed for periods longer or shorter than a month.
(Ord. No. 30-16. Passed 6-6-16, eff. 7-1-16)
§ 193.08 Refunds
   The Administrator shall refund or grant credits to vendors or booking agents
collecting for vendors for the amount of tax paid illegally or erroneously or
paid on any illegal or erroneous assessment where the vendor or booking agent
has not reimbursed itself from the transient guest. As between a vendor and a
booking agent, the request for refund shall be made by the party that filed the
return containing the illegal or erroneous assessment. A transient guest may
obtain a refund or credit for the amount of taxes paid illegally or
erroneously, but only when the tax was paid by the transient guest directly to
the Administrator. No refund shall be paid unless the claimant establishes a
right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto and makes a claim
filed within three (3) years of the date of payment in the manner and on forms
prescribed and furnished by the Administrator, and stating under penalty of
perjury, the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded.
(Ord. No. 30-16. Passed 6-6-16, eff. 7-1-16)
§ 193.09 Failure to Collect and Report Tax; Determination by Administrator
   (a)   If any vendor fails or refuses to collect the transient occupancy tax
or to file a return or remit the tax or any portion thereof, as required by
this chapter, and the vendor has not received confirmation that a booking agent
has collected and remitted the tax, the Administrator shall proceed in such
manner as he or she may deem best to obtain information on which to base an
assessment of the tax due. When the Administrator has obtained such information
as he or she is able, he or she shall proceed to determine and assess against
such vendor the tax and penalty provided for in this chapter.
   (b)   In case such determination is made, the Administrator shall serve
notice upon the vendor of the amount so assessed, either by personal service or
by registered or certified mail. Such vendor may, within ten (10) days after
the serving or mailing of such notice, apply in writing to the Administrator
for a hearing on the correctness of that amount assessed. If the vendor does
not apply within the time prescribed, the tax and penalty determined by the
Administrator shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and
payable. If the vendor makes timely application, the Administrator shall give
the vendor written notice not less than five (5) days in advance in the manner
prescribed in this section, to show cause at a time and place fixed in the
notice why the amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax and
penalty. At any such hearing, the vendor may appear and offer evidence why such
specified tax and penalty should not be so fixed.
   (c)   After such hearing, the Administrator shall determine the proper
amount of tax due and shall thereafter give written notice to the vendor in the
manner prescribed in this section, of such determination and the amount of such
tax and penalty. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after fifteen
(15) days.
(Ord. No. 30-16. Passed 6-6-16, eff. 7-1-16)
§ 193.10 Appeals
   Appeals from any ruling or determination of the Administrator with respect
to the amount of such tax and penalty shall be made as provided in Charter
Section
76-6 and in conformity with ordinances enacted pursuant thereto.
(Ord. No. 252-A-83. Passed 6-15-83, eff. 6-16-83)
§ 193.11 Actions to Collect
   Any tax required to be paid by a transient guest under the provisions of
this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient guest to the City.
Any such tax collected by a vendor or a booking agent collecting for a vendor
and not paid to the City shall be deemed a debt owed by the vendor or booking
agent to the City. Any person owing money to the City under the provisions of
this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the City for
the recovery of such an amount.
(Ord. No. 30-16. Passed 6-6-16, eff. 7-1-16)
§ 193.12 Interest on Unpaid Tax
   The tax imposed and collected or required to be collected under the
provisions of this chapter and remaining unpaid to the City after the tax
becomes due shall bear interest at the rate of one and one-half percent (1.5%)
per month or fraction thereof.
(Ord. No. 252-A-83. Passed 6-15-83, eff. 6-16-83)
§ 193.121 Booking Agents
   (a)   Any booking agent, that facilitates transactions for one (1) or more
hotels in the City and that does not collect or remit the tax on behalf of all
the vendors of such hotels, shall provide the City quarterly within thirty (30)
days of the end of each calendar quarter a transaction report. The transaction
report shall consist of all listings by the vendors during the preceding
calendar quarter, including, but not limited to, the dates of occupancy for
each lodging and the amount paid for each completed transaction, if any.
   (b)   Any booking agent that lists one (1) or more hotels in the City shall:
      (1)   at the time any vendor first lists a hotel with it, notify the
vendor of the vendor's tax and license obligations to the City; and
      (2)   annually provide all vendors of one (1) or more hotels with a
reminder of their tax and license obligations to the City.
   In both cases, the booking agent shall use language provided or approved by
the Administrator.
(Ord. No. 30-16. Passed 6-6-16, eff. 7-1-16)
§ 193.13 Penalties on Unpaid Tax
   In addition to interest as provided in Section
193.12 hereof, penalties based on the unpaid tax are hereby imposed as follows:
   (a)   Any vendor or booking agent collecting for a vendor who fails to remit
any tax imposed by this chapter within thirty (30) days after the date required
shall pay, in addition to the tax, a penalty equal to ten percent (10%) of the
amount of the tax;
   (b)   Any vendor or booking agent collecting for a vendor who fails to remit
any tax imposed by this chapter within sixty (60) days after the date required
shall pay, in addition to the tax, a penalty equal to fifteen percent (15%) of
the amount of the tax;
   (c)   Any vendor or booking agent collecting for a vendor who fails to remit
any tax imposed by this chapter within ninety (90) days required or upon a
second delinquency shall pay, in addition to the tax, a penalty equal to twenty
percent (20%) of the amount of the tax;
   (d)   Any vendor or booking agent collecting for a vendor who fails to remit
any tax imposed by this chapter within one hundred twenty (120) days or more or
upon a third or later delinquency shall pay, in addition to the tax, a penalty
equal to twenty-five percent (25%) of the amount of the tax.
(Ord. No. 30-16. Passed 6-6-16, eff. 7-1-16)
§ 193.14 Rules and Regulations
   The Administrator shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations not
inconsistent with the terms of this chapter for carrying out and enforcing the
payment, collection and remittance of the transient occupancy tax. A copy of
such rules and regulations shall be published in the City Record at least once
before they shall become effective. Copies shall be printed and made available
in the office of the Administrator.
(Ord. No. 252-A-83. Passed 6-15-83, eff. 6-16-83)
§ 193.99 Penalty
   (a)   Any booking agent or vendor who fails to file any return or report
required under this chapter shall be subject to a maximum fine of two thousand
dollars ($2,000.00) per occurrence. A separate offense shall be deemed to occur
on the first day of each month the failure to file continues.
   (b)   Whoever violates any other provision of this chapter shall be fined
not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(Ord. No. 30-16. Passed 6-6-16, eff. 7-1-16)
CHAPTER 195 – ADMISSIONS TAX
195.01   Definitions
195.02   Tax Levied
195.03   Exemptions from Tax
195.04   Collection of Tax, Monthly Reports, Payment of Tax
195.05   Assessments of Tax
195.06   Price to be Marked on Ticket
195.07   Form and Content of Return
195.08   Amended Returns
195.09   Payment of Tax on Filing of Return
195.10   Certificate of Registration Required; Application
195.11   Certificate of Registration for Temporary Amusement
195.12   Authority to Make and Enforce Rules and Regulations
195.13   Receipt and Records of Tax
195.14   Enforcement of Collection
195.15   Effective Date
195.16   Board to Approve Regulations and Hear Appeals; Right to Appeals
195.17   Confidential Nature of Information; Disclosure of Returns, Return
Information and Reports
195.18   Interest on Unpaid Tax
195.19   Penalties on Unpaid Tax
195.20   Additional Penalties
195.21   Exceptions to Penalties
195.22   Abatement of Interest and Penalty
195.23   Limitation of Prosecution
195.24   Unpaid Taxes Recoverable as Other Debts
195.25   Claims for Credit or Refund of Tax Paid
195.26   Authority to Determine Amount of Tax Due
195.27   When Taxes by Assessment are Due and Payable
195.28   Investigations
195.29   Authority to Compel Production of Records
195.30   Refusal to Produce Records
195.31   Taxpayer Required to Retain Records
195.32   Declaration of Legislative Intent
195.33   Collection of Tax after Termination of Chapter
195.99   Violations; Penalty
   Note: Former Chapter 195 was repealed by Ord. No. 1955-07, § 1, passed 12-3-
07, eff. 12-4-07.
§ 195.01 Definitions
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   “Administrative Rulings” or Rulings mean the Rulings issued by the
Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses, upon the request of a taxpayer,
interpreting this chapter and the Rules and Regulations. Administrative rulings
shall be binding and effective upon issuance as to the taxpayer requesting the
Ruling.
   (b)   “Admission charge” means a charge paid for the right or privilege to
enter into a place. Admission charge includes, but is not limited to, a charge
made for season tickets or subscriptions. However, if the charge includes
rental of property or services it shall be deemed to be an admission charge if
so designated, unless the charge is for rental or services and persons who do
not use such property or services are admitted free. If a lesser charge is made
to persons who do not desire to use the property or services offered, the
lesser charge shall constitute the admission charge. The designation of the
charge as a rental or service charge shall not be construed to avoid the
application of the tax if it is in effect a charge for admission.
   (c)   “Board of Review” means the board created under Section
191.2501 of the Codified Ordinances of Cleveland, Ohio, 1976.
   (d)   “City” means the City of Cleveland, Ohio.
   (e)   “Commissioner” means the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses of
the City.
   (f)   “Person” means individuals, receivers, assignees, trustees in
bankruptcy, estates, firms, partnerships, joint ventures, corporations,
companies, joint stock companies, associations, societies, clubs, the state and
its political subdivisions, or group or combination of individuals of any form.
With respect to provisions of this chapter that impose or prescribe a penalty,
the term “person” shall include the owners of an association, pass-through
entity and unincorporated business entity and the officers of a corporation.
   (g)   “Place” includes, but is not limited to, indoor and outdoor theaters,
dance halls, amphitheaters, auditoriums, stadiums, athletic pavilions and
fields, baseball and athletic parks, circuses, side shows, swimming pools,
outdoor amusement parks and observation towers and all other similar places.
   (h)   “Revised Code” means the codified statutes of the State of Ohio, as
amended.
   (i)   “Rules and Regulations” means the Rules and Regulations adopted by the
Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses.
   (j)   “Taxpayer” means the person charged by this chapter with the duty of
collecting and remitting the tax levied and imposed under this chapter.
(Ord. No. 1955-07. Passed 12-3-07, eff. 12-4-07)
§ 195.02 Tax Levied
   To provide funds for the purposes of general municipal operations,
procurement of fixed assets or permanent improvements including the payment of
costs of acquiring, constructing, reconstructing, rehabilitating, remodeling,
renovating, enlarging, improving, equipping or furnishing facilities by
contract, lease, lease-purchase, or otherwise, and including the improvement of
the municipal stadium by cooperative arrangements with other political
subdivisions or nonprofit corporations, payment of lease rentals, lease-
purchase amounts, debt charges or other obligations, the administration of
deficits in City funds and for all other lawful purposes, there is hereby
levied and imposed upon every person who pays an admission charge to any one
place:
   (a)   A tax of eight percent (8%) on the amounts paid for admission to any
place, including admission by season ticket or subscription. The tax shall
apply to every admission within the City for which a charge is made,
notwithstanding that the sale of the ticket or other evidence of right of
admission thereto is made outside of the City;
   (b)   A tax of eight percent (8%) on the excess of the amounts paid for
tickets or cards of admission to theaters, operas and other places of
amusement, sold at newsstands, hotel and places other than the ticket offices
of such theaters, operas or other places of amusement, over and above the
amounts representing the established price therefore at such ticket offices,
such tax to be returned and paid in the manner provided in Section
195.04 by the person selling the ticket;
   (c)   A tax of eight percent (8%) on the amount paid for admission to any
public performance for profit at any roof garden, cabaret or other similar
entertainment in case the charge for admission is in the form of a service
charge, cover charge or other similar charge;
   (d)   A tax of eight percent (8%) on the amount paid as annual membership
dues by every club or organization maintaining a golf course, and a tax of
eight percent (8%) on greens fees paid to golf courses either under club or
private ownership;
   (e)   A tax of six percent (6%) on the amount paid for admission to any
museum on land leased by the City and subject to tax pursuant to division (b)
(2) of Section
195.03;
   (f)   A tax of four percent (4%) on the amount paid for admission to any
small capacity live entertainment venue that has occupant load capacity of one
hundred-fifty-one (151) people or more, but not greater than seven hundred-
fifty (750) people. For purposes of this section, "small capacity live
entertainment venue" is defined as any separate room in a premises where people
pay admission to attend a separate active performance by an individual or
individuals who, at the time of and during the performance, create live
entertainment for an audience through the use or manipulation of voice,
instruments, or dance. If the same active performance is occurring for the
benefit of more than one separate room, then those separate rooms shall be
considered together as one venue.
(Ord. No. 595-13. Passed 4-29-13, eff. 5-1-13)
§ 195.03 Exemptions from Tax
   (a)    No tax shall be levied under this chapter with respect to any
admission all the proceeds of which inure:
      (1)   Exclusively to the benefit of religious, educational or charitable
institutions, societies or organizations; societies or organizations for the
prevention of cruelty to children or animals or societies or organizations
conducted for the sole purpose of maintaining symphony orchestras and receiving
substantial support from voluntary contributions, or of improving any municipal
corporation, or of maintaining a cooperative or community center, moving
picture theater, or swimming pool, if no part of the net earnings thereof
inures to the benefit of any private stockholder or individual;
      (2)   Exclusively to the benefit of persons in the military or naval
forces of the United States, or of National Guard organizations, reserve
officer associations or posts or organizations of war veterans or auxiliary
units or societies of any such posts or organizations, if such posts,
organizations, units or societies are organized in the State, and if no part of
their net earnings inures to the benefit of any private stockholder or
individual;
      (3)   Exclusively to the benefit of members of the police or fire
departments of any municipal corporation, or the dependents or heirs of such
members;
      (4)   Exclusively to the benefit of the general revenue fund of any
municipal corporation or exclusively to the benefit of any fund of any
municipal corporation under the control of a recreation commission.
      (5)   Exclusively to a small capacity live entertainment venue that has
occupant load capacity of less than or equal to one hundred-fifty (150) people.
For purposes of this section, "small capacity live entertainment venue" is
defined as any separate room in a premises where people pay admission to attend
a separate active performance by an individual or individuals who, at the time
of and during the performance, create live entertainment for an audience
through the use or manipulation of voice, instruments, or dance. If the same
active performance is occurring for the benefit of more than one separate room,
then those separate rooms shall be considered together as one venue.
   (b)   (1)   The exemption from tax provided by this section shall, however,
not be allowed in case of admissions to wrestling matches, prize fights or
boxing, sparring or other pugilistic matches or exhibitions, unless exclusively
for the benefit of those organizations set forth in division (a)(2) of this
section, nor in the case of admissions to any athletic game or exhibition the
proceeds of which inure wholly or partly to the benefit of any high school,
academy, preparatory or other school or wholly or partly to the benefit of any
college or university.
      (2)   The exemption from tax provided by division (a)(1) of this section
shall, however, not be allowed in case of admissions to museums located on land
leased by the City pursuant to a lease agreement entered into after August 21,
1991.
   (c)   Immediately after the event for which an exemption from admission tax
has been allowed, upon the demand of the Commissioner of Assessments and
Licenses, the treasurer of the institution, society or organization for whose
benefit such event was held shall file an itemized statement with the
Commissioner setting forth the amount of money actually received by such
treasurer together with the expenses of promoting and conducting such event.
Such statement shall be used as a basis of subsequent requests for exemption
from admissions tax for the benefit of such institution, society or
organization. If such statement shows a disproportionate expenditure for
promoting and conducting such event, in relation to the profits, if any, no
such exemption shall thereafter be allowed to such institution, society or
organization.
   (d)   The exemption from tax provided in this section shall not be allowed
to any institution, society or organization which does not control the sale of
admissions to the event for which the exemption is requested, nor shall any
exemption be allowed where talent, services or other items are compensated for
on a percentage basis if such percentage results in a payment in excess of the
flat rate ordinarily charged for the same talent, services or other items.
   (e)   The limitation contained in this section, upon the exemption from tax
in case of admissions to wrestling matches, prize fights or boxing, sparring or
other pugilistic matches or exhibitions, shall not be deemed to apply to any
such matches or exhibitions in which all the contestants are amateurs and the
entire proceeds thereof are devoted to a legitimate charitable purpose,
excepting therefrom the necessary expenses, which shall in no event include
payment to any contestant other than his or her necessary traveling expenses.
   (f)   Notwithstanding anything else in this chapter to the contrary, no tax
shall be levied under this chapter with respect to any admission to the indoor
arena facility (the "Gateway Arena") constructed by Gateway Economic
Development Corporation of Greater Cleveland ("Gateway") pursuant to that
certain Agreement Relating to Ownership, Financing, Construction and Operation
of a Sports Facility and Related Economic Development Projects, dated as of
November 7, 1990, as amended by the First Amendment as authorized by Ordinance
No. 325-92 (the "Three-Party Agreement"), between the City, Gateway, and the
County of Cuyahoga, Ohio (the "County"), provided, however, that the exemption
provided by this division (f) shall apply and be effective only as long as
there are outstanding any Arena Bonds to which reference is made in the
Cooperative Agreement between the City and County authorized by Ordinance No.
327-92 (the "Cooperative Agreement") (such Bonds being hereinafter referred to
as the "Arena Bonds") and only if and as long as the following conditions are
met and shall have been certified to be met by the Director of Law to the
Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses:
      (1)   Gateway shall pay or shall cause the lessees or operators of the
Gateway Arena to pay to the Trustee (the "Trustee") for the holders of the
Arena Bonds amounts equal to the taxes that would have been levied under
Section 195.02 but for the exemption provided by this division (f) at the times
and in the manner that such taxes would have been payable under this chapter.
In computing the amount payable pursuant to this division (f)(1), the admission
charges for admissions to the Arena shall be deemed to be net of the amount
payable pursuant to this division (f)(1).
      (2)   The County shall, in its trust agreement or a related agreement
with the Trustee, require the Trustee:
         A.   To retain each Bond Year as defined in the Cooperative Agreement
from the amounts paid to the Trustee pursuant to division (f)(1) of this
section to secure payments with respect to the Arena Bonds as provided in the
Cooperative Agreement, an amount up to the sum of: (a) three percent (3%) of
all admissions charges for admissions to the Gateway Arena during the related
Collection Year as provided in the Cooperative Agreement for: basketball games
played by the Cleveland Cavaliers at the Gateway Arena during each basketball
season (including divisional, conference and championship play-off games);
preseason or exhibition basketball games played by said Cavaliers at the
Gateway Arena and the NBA All-Star Game and any other event held at the Gateway
Arena in which professional basketball players participate (collectively,
"Games"), plus (b) in the event that the City increases the taxes payable under
this chapter from six percent (6%) to a higher rate, the percentage equal to
such increase times all admissions charges for all admissions during such
Collection Year to the Gateway Arena for Games, and plus (c) in the event that
the City increases the taxes payable under this chapter from six percent (6%)
to a higher rate, the percentage equal to such increase times all admissions
charges for all admissions during such Collection Year to the Gateway Arena for
any events other than Games;
         B.   To release and pay to the City at the end of each Bond Year any
of such amount described in division (f)(2)A. above not used or needed for such
purpose during such Bond Year, together with any investment income earned
thereon; and
         C.   To pay any such amounts in excess of the amount described in
division (f)(2)A. above directly to the City at the end of each Bond Year,
together with any investment income earned thereon.
      (3)   Gateway shall prepare and submit to the Director of Finance of the
City and the Clerk of City Council, or cause the preparation and submission to
the Director of Finance of the City and the Clerk of City Council, such returns
and reports regarding the amounts paid to the Trustee pursuant to division (f)
(1) of this section as the Directors of Law and Finance shall reasonably
require to demonstrate Gateway's compliance with this section.
      (4)   Gateway shall agree to repay or cause to be repaid to the City from
Gateway's future excess revenues any moneys paid to the Trustee pursuant to
division (f)(2)A. of this section actually applied to the payments with respect
to the Arena Bonds with interest and on such other terms and in such form as
are consistent with Gateway's obligations under the trust indentures and
related agreements securing Gateway's bonds and the Arena Bonds and as the
City's Director of Finance and Director of Law deem acceptable in the interests
of the City.
      (5)   Gateway shall make or cause to be made such other assurances and
commitments as the City's Director of Finance and Director of Law deem
necessary, and appropriate to protect the City's entitlements under this
division (f) and provide copies of such other assurances and commitments to the
Clerk of the Council.
   (g)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b), and
notwithstanding anything else in this chapter to the contrary, no tax shall be
levied under this chapter with respect to any admission to live theater, live
opera, live ballet, or live exhibition of dance, musical performance, or
monologue productions which are sponsored by an institution, society or
organization that has received a determination from the Internal Revenue
Service that the organization is exempt from federal income tax under section
501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended; provided that the
institution, society or organization actively participates in planning and
conducting the event, is responsible for the safety and success of the event,
is organized for the purpose of sponsoring live theater, live opera, live
ballet, or live exhibition of dance, musical performance, or monologue
productions and has among the stated purposes in its charter the promotion of
arts education in the communities which it serves, and will receive at least
twenty percent (20%) of the net profits, if any, of the events which the
institution, society or organization sponsors and will bear the risk of at
least twenty percent (20%) of the losses, if any, from the events which the
institution, society or organization sponsors.
      (2)   The exemption from tax provided in this subsection shall not be
allowed to any institution, society or organization which does not control the
sale of admissions to the event for which the exemption is requested.
      (3)   Immediately after an event for which an exemption from admission
tax has been allowed pursuant to this subsection (g), the treasurer of the
institution, society or organization shall file an itemized statement with the
Commissioner setting forth the amount of money actually received by such
treasurer together with the expenses of promoting and conducting such event.
Such statement shall be used as a basis of subsequent requests for exemption
from admissions tax in accordance with this subsection. If such statement
demonstrates a failure to qualify in accordance with paragraph (1) of this
subsection (g), no such exemption shall thereafter be allowed to such
institution, society or organization.
   (h)   Division (f) of this section shall continue to apply unaffected by
this division (h) so long as the Arena Bonds as defined in division (f) remain
outstanding. From and after the date on which all the Arena Bonds as defined in
division (f) cease to be outstanding, notwithstanding anything else in this
chapter to the contrary, no tax shall be levied under this chapter with respect
to any admission to the Gateway Arena as defined in division (f), provided,
however, that the exemption provided by this division (h) shall apply and be
effective only as long as there are outstanding any Series 2017 Arena Bonds to
which reference is made in the Supplemental Agreement No. 1 (the "Supplemental
Agreement"), between the City of Cleveland, Ohio (the "City") and the County of
Cuyahoga, Ohio (the "County") supplementing the Cooperative Agreement between
the City and the County referenced in division (f), and only if and as long as
the following conditions are met and shall have been certified to be met by the
Director of Law to the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses:
      (1)   Gateway shall pay or shall cause the lessees or operators of the
Gateway Arena to pay to the Trustee (the "Series 2017 Bonds Trustee") for the
holders of the Series 2017 Arena Bonds amounts equal to the taxes that would
have been levied under Section
195.02 but for the exemption provided by division (h) at the times and in the
manner that such taxes would have been payable under this chapter. In computing
the amount payable pursuant to this division (h)(1), the admission charges for
admissions to the Gateway Arena shall be deemed to be net of the amount payable
pursuant to this division (h)(1).
      (2)   The County shall, in the Series 2017 Bonds Trust Agreement (as
defined in the Supplemental Agreement), require the Series 2017 Bonds Trustee:
         A.   To retain in each Bond Year as defined in the Supplemental
Agreement from the amounts paid to the Series 2017 Bonds Trustee pursuant to
division (h)(1) of this section to fund and secure payments with respect to the
Series 2017 Arena Bonds and to fund improvements to sports facilities as
provided in the Supplemental Agreement (the "Series 2017 Arena Admissions
PILOT"), an amount up to the sum of (a) five percent (5%) of all admissions
charges for admissions to the Gateway Arena during the related Collection Year
as provided in the Supplemental Agreement for: basketball games played by the
Cleveland Cavaliers at the Gateway Arena during each basketball season
(including divisional, conference and championship play-off games); preseason
or exhibition basketball games played by said Cavaliers at the Gateway Arena
and the NBA All-Star Game and any other event held at the Gateway Arena in
which professional basketball players participate (collectively, "Games"), plus
(b) two percent (2%) of admissions charges for admissions to the Gateway Arena
for events other than Games in any Collection Year; plus (c) in the event that
the City increases the taxes payable under this chapter from eight percent (8%)
to a higher rate, the percentage equal to such increase times all admissions
charges for all admissions during such Collection Year to the Gateway Arena for
Games, and plus (d) in the event that the City increases the taxes payable
under this chapter from eight percent (8%) to a higher rate, the percentage
equal to such increase times all admissions charges for all admissions during
such Collection Year to the Gateway Arena for any events other than Games; and
         B.   From and after the date in each Bond Year when the full amount
needed to pay debt service on the Series 2017 Bonds during that Bond Year has
been deposited in the Series 2017 Bond Fund, to deposit any remaining amounts
paid to the Series 2017 Bonds Trustee pursuant to division (h)(1) of this
section in the Sports Facility Improvement Fund until a maximum amount of
$3,500,000 is deposited in the Sports Facility Improvement Fund and then into
the Cooperative Reserve, all as defined and provided in the Supplemental
Agreement, to be held and applied as required or permitted by the Series 2017
Bonds Trust Agreement; provided, however, that (A) all deposits of the Series
2017 Arena Admissions PILOT to the Sports Facility Reserve shall be credited to
a separate account in the Sports Facility Improvement Fund (the "City
Account"), and moneys in the City Account shall be permitted to be used only to
fund improvements to sports facilities and not for the payment of debt service
on Series 2017 Bonds; (B) any disbursements from the Sports Facility
Improvement Fund shall be made first from any moneys in the Sports Facility
Improvement Fund not in the City Account; and (C) any moneys in the City
Account at the time the Series 2017 Bonds are fully retired or deemed paid and
discharged under the Series 2017 Arena Bonds Trust Agreement that are not
already encumbered for the purpose of paying outstanding contracts shall revert
to the City.
      (3)   Gateway and the County shall prepare and submit to the Director of
Finance of the City and the Clerk of City Council, or cause the preparation and
submission to the Director of Finance of the City and the Clerk of City
Council, such returns and reports regarding the amounts paid to the Series 2017
Bonds Trustee pursuant to division (h)(1) of this section as the Directors of
Law and Finance shall reasonably require to demonstrate Gateway's compliance
with this section.
      (4)   Gateway and the County shall make or cause to be made such other
assurances and commitments as the City's Director of Finance and Director of
Law deem necessary, and appropriate to protect the City's entitlements under
this division (h) and provide copies of such other assurances and commitments
to the Clerk of the Council.
(Ord. No. 305-17. Passed 4-24-17, eff. 4-25-17)
§ 195.04 Collection of Tax, Monthly Reports, Payment of Tax
   (a)   Every person receiving any payment on which a tax is levied under this
chapter shall collect the amount of the tax imposed by Section
195.02 from the person making the admission payment. The tax required to be
collected under this chapter shall be deemed to be held in trust for the
benefit of the City and deemed to be trust funds in the hands of the person
required to collect the tax until all such tax collected is paid to the
Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses as herein provided. Any person
required to collect the tax imposed under this chapter who fails, refuses or
neglects to collect the tax, or having collected the tax, fails, refuses or
neglects to remit the tax to the Commissioner in the manner prescribed by this
chapter and the Rules and Regulations, whether such failure, refusal or neglect
is the result of his or her own act or the result of acts or conditions beyond
his or her control, shall nevertheless be personally liable to the City for the
amount of such tax, whether or not such tax has been collected.
   (b)   (1)   The tax imposed by this chapter shall be collected at the time
the admission charge is paid by the person seeking admission to any place and
shall be reported and remitted by the person receiving the tax to the
Commissioner in monthly installments and remittances therefor on or before the
thirtieth (30th) day of the month next succeeding the end of the monthly period
in which the tax is collected or received. Payment or remittance of the tax
collected may be made by check, unless payment or remittance is otherwise
required by the Commissioner, but payment by check shall not relieve the person
collecting the tax from liability for payment and remittance of the tax to the
Commissioner, unless the check is honored and is in the full and correct
amount. The person receiving any payment for admissions shall make out a return
upon such forms prescribed by or acceptable to the Commissioner and set forth
such information as the Commissioner may require, showing the amount of the tax
collected upon admissions for which he or she is liable for the preceding
monthly period, and shall sign and transmit the same to the Commissioner with a
remittance for the amount of tax due. Failure to receive or procure any form
prescribed by the Commissioner shall not excuse any person from timely filing
the return due or from paying any admissions tax due.
      (2)   The Commissioner may in his or her discretion require verified
annual returns from any person receiving admission payments setting forth such
additional information as he or she may deem necessary to determine correctly
the amount of tax collected and payable. Whenever any theater, circus, show,
exhibition, entertainment or amusement makes an admission charge which is
subject to the tax herein levied, and the same is of a temporary or transitory
nature, of which the Commissioner shall be judge, the Commissioner may require
the report and remittance of the admission tax immediately upon the collection
of the tax, at the conclusion of the performance or exhibition, or at the
conclusion of the series of performances or exhibitions or at such other times
as the Commissioner shall determine. Failure to comply with any requirement of
the Commissioner as to report and remittance of the tax shall be a violation of
this chapter.
(Ord. No. 1955-07. Passed 12-3-07, eff. 12-4-07)
§ 195.05 Assessments of Tax
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b), no assessment shall be
made or issued against any person charged with the duty of collecting,
receiving and remitting the tax levied and imposed under this chapter, more
than three (3) years after the return date for the period in which the
admission charge was paid, or more than three (3) years after the return for
such period is filed, whichever is later.
   (b)   Division (a) shall not bar or limit an assessment beyond three (3)
years where the taxpayer fails to file any report or return required by this
section; files a fraudulent report or return; or where the Commissioner has
evidence that admissions tax collected have not been remitted to the City.
(Ord. No. 1955-07. Passed 12-3-07, eff. 12-4-07)
§ 195.06 Price to be Marked on Ticket
   The price, inclusive of any federal and city tax, at which every admission
ticket or card is sold shall be conspicuously and indelibly printed, stamped or
written on the face or back of that part of the ticket which is to be taken up
by the management of the theater, opera, or other place of amusement, together
with the name of the vendor if sold other than at a ticket office of the place
of amusement.
(Ord. No. 1955-07. Passed 12-3-07, eff. 12-4-07)
§ 195.07 Form and Content of Return
   The admissions tax return shall be filed by the person receiving payment of
any admission charge with the Commissioner on a form prescribed by or
acceptable to the Commissioner, setting forth:
   (a)   The aggregate amounts of all admissions paid by persons seeking
admission to any place for the end of the monthly period in which the tax is
collected and received;
   (b)   The total tax imposed by this chapter for the end of the monthly
period in which the tax is collected and received; and
   (c)   Such other pertinent statements, schedules, records or information as
the Commissioner may require to correctly determine the amount of tax collected
and due.
   (d)   The failure of any person to receive or procure any form prescribed by
the Commissioner shall not excuse such person from filing the return due.
(Ord. No. 1955-07. Passed 12-3-07, eff. 12-4-07)
§ 195.08 Amended Returns
   Where necessary an amended return shall be immediately filed in order to
report additional admission received but not reported and additional tax due.
Such amended return shall be on a form prescribed by or acceptable to the
Commissioner.
(Ord. No. 1955-07. Passed 12-3-07, eff. 12-4-07)
§ 195.09 Payment of Tax on Filing of Return
   Persons filing returns required by this chapter shall, at the time of the
filing thereof, pay to the Commissioner the total amount of tax shown as due
thereon.
(Ord. No. 1955-07. Passed 12-3-07, eff. 12-4-07)
§ 195.10 Certificate of Registration Required; Application
   Any person conducting or operating any place for entrance to which an
admission charge is made shall, prior to the commencement of any such activity,
and on a form prescribed by the Commissioner make application to and procure
from the Commissioner a certificate of registration to conduct such amusement,
entertainment or exhibition, etc. No person who is the owner, lessee or
custodian of any building, lots, or place where an amusement, entertainment,
exhibition, etc. shall take place within the City and to which an admission
shall be paid, shall allow any such activity to occur without first obtaining a
certificate of registration therefore as provided in this section. Any such
owner, lessee or custodian who leases or permits such premises to be used for
any amusement, entertainment, exhibition, etc. by a person who is not the
owner, shall be jointly and severally liable with the person conducting the
amusement, entertainment, exhibition, etc. for collection and remittance of the
admissions tax levied under Section
195.02 of this chapter. An application for the certificate of registration
required under this section shall be made on forms prescribed by and obtainable
upon request from the Commissioner and shall be made whether or not the person
conducting the activity has received an exemption from collection of the
admissions tax under Section
195.03 of this chapter. The certificate of registration or duplicate original
copies thereof to be issued by the Commissioner, shall be posted in a
conspicuous place in each ticket or box office where tickets of admission are
sold.
(Ord. No. 1955-07. Passed 12-3-07, eff. 12-4-07)
§ 195.11 Certificate of Registration for Temporary Amusement
   Whenever a certificate of registration is obtained for the purpose of
operating or conducting a temporary or transitory amusement, entertainment or
exhibition by persons who are not the owners, lessees or custodians of the
building, lots or place where the amusement is to be conducted, the tax imposed
by this chapter shall be reported and remitted as provided in Section
195.04 by the owner, lessee or custodian, unless paid by the person conducting
such temporary or transitory activity. No person who is the owner, lessee or
custodian of any building, lots, or place where an amusement, entertainment,
exhibition, etc. shall take place within the City and to which an admission
shall be paid, shall allow any such activity to occur without first requiring
the person conducting the temporary or transitory amusement, entertainment,
exhibition, etc. to obtain a certificate of registration therefor. An
application for the certificate of registration required under this section,
shall be made on forms prescribed by and obtainable upon request from the
Commissioner. The applicant for a license and certificate of registration for
such purpose shall furnish with the application the name and address of the
owner, lessee or custodian of the premises upon which the amusement is to be
conducted. Such owner, lessee or custodian shall be jointly and severally
liable with the person conducting the temporary or transitory amusement,
entertainment, exhibition, etc. for collection and remittance of the admissions
tax levied under Section
195.02 of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 1955-07. Passed 12-3-07, eff. 12-4-07)
§ 195.12 Authority to Make and Enforce Rules and Regulations
   (a)   The Commissioner is charged with the enforcement of the provisions of
this chapter including the interpretation and enforcement of the Rules and
Regulations adopted hereunder and is hereby empowered, subject to the approval
of the Board of Review, to adopt and to enforce rules and regulations relating
to any matter or thing pertaining to the collection of admissions tax and the
administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, including
provisions for the re-examination and correction of returns. A copy of such
rules and regulations shall be published in the City Record at least once
before they become effective. Copies shall be printed and made available in the
office of the Commissioner.
   (b)   Upon the request of a taxpayer subject to this chapter, the
Commissioner is empowered to issue Administrative rulings interpreting this
chapter and the Rules and Regulations. Such Administrative rulings shall be
binding and effective upon issuance as to the taxpayer requesting the ruling.
No Administrative ruling shall be issued unless request therefore is made in
writing to the Commissioner. Administrative rulings may be appealed to the
Board of Review.
(Ord. No. 1955-07. Passed 12-3-07, eff. 12-4-07)
§ 195.13 Receipt and Records of Tax
   The Commissioner shall collect and receive the tax imposed by this chapter
in the manner prescribed herein from taxpayers, keep an accurate record
thereof, and report all monies so received.
(Ord. No. 1955-07. Passed 12-3-07, eff. 12-4-07)
§ 195.14 Enforcement of Collection
   The Commissioner shall enforce payment of all admissions tax owing to the
City, keep accurate records for a minimum of six (6) years, showing the amount
due from each taxpayer required to file and make any return and show the dates
and amounts of payments thereof.
(Ord. No. 1955-07. Passed 12-3-07, eff. 12-4-07)
§ 195.15 Effective Date
   The tax levied and imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be collected and
paid on and after April 1, 1991.
(Ord. No. 1955-07. Passed 12-3-07, eff. 12-4-07)
§ 195.16 Board to Approve Regulations and Hear Appeals; Right to Appeals
   All Rules and Regulations and amendments or changes thereto, which are
adopted by the Commissioner under the authority conferred by this chapter, must
be approved by the Board of Review before the same become effective. The Board
shall hear and pass on appeals from any Administrative Ruling issued by the
Commissioner.
   In accordance with procedures established by the Board of Review, any person
dissatisfied with any Administrative Ruling issued by the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses that is made under the authority conferred by this
chapter may appeal therefrom to the Board of Review within thirty (30) days
from the issuance of such Ruling. The Board shall, upon hearing, have
jurisdiction to affirm, reverse or modify any such Administrative Ruling, or
any part thereof. Such appeal shall be deemed filed when postmarked by the
United States Postal Service or the date of receipt recorded by authorized
delivery service as defined in RC 5703.056. Appeals otherwise delivered to the
Commissioner during normal business hours shall be deemed filed on the date
received.
   Any person and/or the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses may appeal
decisions of the Board of Review to a court of common pleas as provided by law.
(Ord. No. 1955-07. Passed 12-3-07, eff. 12-4-07)
§ 195.17 Confidential Nature of Information; Disclosure of Returns, Return
Information and Reports
   (a)   Any information gained as a result of returns, investigations,
hearings or verifications required or authorized by this chapter shall be
confidential and no person shall disclose such information except in accordance
with a proper judicial order or in connection with the performance of that
person’s official duties or the official business of the City as authorized by
this chapter.
   (b)   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses may furnish copies of
returns filed under this chapter to the Internal Revenue Service and to the
State Tax Commissioner.
(Ord. No. 1955-07. Passed 12-3-07, eff. 12-4-07)
§ 195.18 Interest on Unpaid Tax
   All admissions tax imposed by this chapter, remaining unpaid after they
become due shall bear interest at the rate of one and one-half percent (1.5%)
per month or fraction thereof from the date that the tax became due until paid.
(Ord. No. 1955-07. Passed 12-3-07, eff. 12-4-07)
§ 195.19 Penalties on Unpaid Tax
   In addition to interest as provided in Section
195.18, penalties are hereby imposed on all admissions tax remaining unpaid
from the date that the tax became due until paid as follows:
   (a)   For failure to pay admissions tax due: one and one-half percent (1.5%)
of such outstanding tax per month or fraction thereof that the tax remains
outstanding;
   (b)   For failure to file monthly tax returns or other reports under this
chapter by the due date or for failure to file an annual report when required
by the Commissioner, twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each such return or
report not timely filed; and
   (c)   For failure to remit admissions tax collected or required to be
collected, ten percent (10%) per month or fraction thereof that the unremitted
tax remains outstanding.
   (d)   In accordance with the Rules and Regulations, the Commissioner may
impose such other interest and penalty assessment as the Commissioner deems
necessary for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. No. 1955-07. Passed 12-3-07, eff. 12-4-07)
§ 195.20 Additional Penalties
   In addition to any other penalty imposed by this chapter, the following
penalties shall be imposed:
   (a)   If a taxpayer files what purports to be a report required by this
chapter that does not contain information upon which the substantial
correctness of the report may be judged or contains information that on its
face indicates that the report is substantially incorrect, and the filing of
the report in that manner is due to a position that is frivolous or a desire
that is apparent from the report to delay or impede the administration of the
tax levied by this chapter, a penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall
be imposed.
   (b)   If a taxpayer makes a fraudulent attempt to evade the reporting or
payment of the tax required to be shown on any report or return required under
this chapter, a penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or one hundred
percent (100%) of the tax required to be shown on the report, whichever is
greater, shall be imposed.
   (c)   If a taxpayer makes a false or fraudulent claim for refund under this
chapter, a penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or one hundred percent
(100%) of the claim, whichever is greater, shall be imposed.
   (d)   In accordance with the Rules and Regulations, the Commissioner may
impose such other interest and penalty assessment as the Commissioner deems
necessary for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. No. 1955-07. Passed 12-3-07, eff. 12-4-07)
§ 195.21 Exceptions to Penalties
   Interest and penalties shall not be assessed on an additional tax assessment
made by the Commissioner when an admissions tax return has been filed in good
faith and the tax due thereon has been paid within the time prescribed by
Section
195.04 provided that, the additional tax assessment is paid within the time
prescribed by the Commissioner. Failure to pay the additional tax assessment
within the time prescribed by the Commissioner shall result in interest and
penalty assessments on the additional tax assessment remaining unpaid.
(Ord. No. 1955-07. Passed 12-3-07, eff. 12-4-07)
§ 195.22 Abatement of Interest and Penalty
   Upon recommendation of the Commissioner, the Board of Review may abate
penalty, interest or both. Or, upon a written appeal by the taxpayer upon the
refusal of the Commissioner to recommend abatement of penalty, interest, or
both, the Board may nevertheless abate penalty or interest, or both, for
reasonable cause shown.
   The Rules and Regulations may authorize the Commissioner to abate penalty,
interest, or both, for reasonable cause shown.
(Ord. No. 1955-07. Passed 12-3-07, eff. 12-4-07)
§ 195.23 Limitation of Prosecution
   Except as otherwise provided in this section, prosecutions for an offense
made punishable under this chapter shall be commenced within three (3) years
after commission of the offense.
   In the case of fraud, failure to pay or remit tax due, failure to file a
return, substantial understatement and omission of tax due, no limitation on
prosecution shall apply.
(Ord. No. 1955-07. Passed 12-3-07, eff. 12-4-07)
§ 195.24 Unpaid Taxes Recoverable as Other Debts
   All taxes imposed by this chapter shall be collectible, together with any
interest and penalties thereon, as other debts of like amount are recoverable,
including, but not limited to, collection by suit. Any suit shall be brought
within three (3) years after the admissions tax was due or the return was
filed, whichever is later. Except in the case of fraud, substantial
understatement and/or omission of twenty- five percent (25%) or more of
admissions tax required to be reported, or of failure to file a return, no
additional assessment shall be made after three (3) years from the time the
admissions tax was due or the tax return was filed, whichever is later.
(Ord. No. 1955-07. Passed 12-3-07, eff. 12-4-07)
§ 195.25 Claims for Credit or Refund of Tax Paid
   (a)   When, pursuant to this chapter, a person charged with collecting the
tax levied under this chapter has paid such collected tax to the Commissioner,
if such person refunds to a consumer the admission upon which the tax levied
under this chapter has been paid, such person may request a refund or credit of
the amount of admissions tax so refunded. If a person charged with collecting
the tax levied under this chapter has erroneously paid to the Commissioner an
amount in excess of the admissions tax due based on the total admissions
reported during a monthly reporting period, such person may request a refund or
credit of the amount of admissions tax erroneously paid.
   (b)   No refund or credit for the tax refunded or overpayment of tax shall
be made unless such claim for refund or credit is made in writing and filed
with the Commissioner within three (3) years from the date on which such refund
was made or in the case of overpayment, within three (3) years from the date on
which such payment was made or the return was due, whichever is later, on a
form prescribed by and obtainable upon request from the Commissioner. Upon the
filing of an application for refund or credit, the Commissioner shall determine
the amount of refund or credit to which the applicant may be entitled and may
require any such information and documentation as he or she deems necessary in
making that determination.
   (c)   No interest shall be paid on any tax refunded or credited over-
payment.
   (d)   In the event any person who is entitled to a refund or credit is
indebted to the City for any tax or fee administered by the Commissioner that
is paid to the City, or any charge, penalty or interest arising from such a tax
or fee, the amount refundable shall first be applied in satisfaction of that
debt. If the amount refundable is less than the amount of the debt, it may be
applied in partial satisfaction of the debt. If the amount refundable is
greater than the amount of the debt, the amount remaining after satisfaction of
the debt shall be credited as provided in this section. If the person has more
than one (1) such debt, any debt subject to Sections
195.04,
195.10, and
195.11 dealing with personal liability for admissions tax owed shall be
satisfied first.
(Ord. No. 1955-07. Passed 12-3-07, eff. 12-4-07)
§ 195.26 Authority to Determine Amount of Tax Due
   If a person whose duty it is to collect and pay the tax imposed by this
chapter shall neglect or refuse to file any return required by this chapter, or
having tendered a return shall neglect or refuse to pay the amount of tax
imposed by this chapter as shown by such return, the Commissioner shall make an
estimated assessment of the probable amount of the tax payable by the
delinquent to which shall be added a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount
assessed. The Commissioner shall promptly thereafter give or send by regular
U.S. mail notice of such estimated assessment and penalty to the person against
whom the same shall have been made.
(Ord. No. 1955-07. Passed 12-3-07, eff. 12-4-07)
§ 195.27 When Taxes by Assessment are Due and Payable
   All taxes, interest and penalties resulting from any assessment made by the
Commissioner shall be due and payable fifteen (15) days after notice thereof is
given or sent by regular U.S. mail to the person against whom such assessment
shall have been made.
(Ord. No. 1955-07. Passed 12-3-07, eff. 12-4-07)
§ 195.28 Investigations
   The Commissioner, or any authorized agent, representative or employee, is
hereby authorized to examine the books, papers, records and other information
of any person subject to, or whom the Commissioner believes is subject to the
provisions of this chapter, for the purpose of verifying the accuracy of any
return made, or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax due under this
chapter. Every person is hereby directed and required to furnish within fifteen
(15) days upon written request by the Commissioner, or his or her duly
authorized agent, representative, or employee, the means, facilities and
opportunities for making such examinations and investigations as are hereby
authorized.
(Ord. No. 1955-07. Passed 12-3-07, eff. 12-4-07)
§ 195.29 Authority to Compel Production of Records
   The Commissioner is hereby authorized to order any person presumed to have
knowledge of the facts to appear before him or her and may examine such person,
under oath, concerning any tax which was or should have been reported for
admissions tax purposes or any transaction tending to affect such tax, and for
this purpose may compel the production of books, papers, records and other
information and the attendance of all persons before him or her, whether as
parties or witnesses, whenever he or she believes such persons have knowledge
pertinent to any inquiry of any admissions paid or admissions tax charged,
collected or received or required to have been charged, collected or received.
(Ord. No. 1955-07. Passed 12-3-07, eff. 12-4-07)
§ 195.30 Refusal to Produce Records
   The refusal to produce books, papers, records and other information, or the
refusal to submit to the examination authorized by Section
195.29 by any person charged with the duty of charging, collecting and
remitting the tax or presumed to be charged with the duty of charging,
collecting and remitting the tax, or by any officer, agent or employee of a
person charged with such duty, or the failure of any person to comply with the
provisions of Section
195.29 or with an order or subpoena of the Commissioner authorized hereby,
shall be deemed a violation of this chapter punishable in accordance with
Section
195.99.
(Ord. No. 1955-07. Passed 12-3-07, eff. 12-4-07)
§ 195.31 Taxpayer Required to Retain Records
   Every person responsible for collecting and remitting the admissions tax
imposed under this chapter shall retain all records necessary to compute the
admissions tax liability for a period of five (5) years from the date the
admissions tax return is filed or the admissions tax is paid, whichever is
later.
(Ord. No. 1955-07. Passed 12-3-07, eff. 12-4-07)
§ 195.32 Declaration of Legislative Intent
   If any sentence, clause, section or part of this chapter, or any tax imposed
against or exemption from collecting tax granted to any person is found to be
unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality or
invalidity shall affect only such clause, sentence, section or part of this
chapter so found and shall not affect or impair any of the remaining
provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or other parts of this chapter. It is
hereby declared to be the intention of Council that this chapter would have
been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, clause,
section or part thereof not been included in this chapter.
(Ord. No. 1955-07. Passed 12-3-07, eff. 12-4-07)
§ 195.33 Collection of Tax after Termination of Chapter
   This chapter shall continue effective insofar as the levy of taxes is
concerned until repealed, and insofar as the collection of taxes levied
hereunder and actions and proceedings for collecting any tax so levied or
enforcing any provisions of this chapter is concerned, it shall continue
effective until all of the taxes levied in the aforesaid period are fully paid
and any and all prosecutions for the collection of taxes or for the punishment
of violations of this chapter or collection by suits have been fully
terminated, subject to the conditions and limitations contained in Sections
195.05,
195.23,
195.24,
195.25, and Section
195.99.
   Returns due for all or any part of the last effective year of this chapter
shall be due as provided in Sections
195.04,
195.08,
195.09 and
195.27, as though the same were continuing.
(Ord. No. 1955-07. Passed 12-3-07, eff. 12-4-07)
§ 195.99 Violations; Penalty
   No person shall:
   (a)   Conduct any form of amusement at any permanent or temporary place of
amusement or any itinerant form of amusement without having a certificate of
registration therefor, as required by this chapter;
   (b)   When charged by any section of this chapter with the duty of
collecting or paying the tax imposed, willfully fail, neglect or refuse to
charge, collect or remit the tax, penalties or interest imposed by this
chapter; or
   (c)   Fail, neglect or refuse to make any return to the Commissioner
required by this chapter; or
   (d)   Knowingly make any incomplete, false, or fraudulent return; or
   (e)   Refuse to permit the Commissioner or any duly authorized agent or
employee to examine books, records, papers or other information, in or upon any
premises where the same are kept, to the extent necessary to verify any return
made or to ascertain and assess the tax imposed by this chapter, where a return
is filed or if no return was filed; or
   (f)   Refuse to produce books, records, papers or other information to the
Commissioner or any duly authorized agent or employee when requested, to verify
any return made or to ascertain and assess the tax imposed by this chapter,
when a return is filed or if no return was filed;
   (g)   Fail to appear before the Commissioner or any duly authorized agent or
employee and to produce books, records, papers or other information relating to
the admissions charged, collected or received or required to be charged,
collected or received upon administrative order or subpoena of the
Commissioner; or
   (h)   Fail to comply with any provision of this chapter or any order or
subpoena of the Commissioner authorized hereby; or
   (i)   Fail to maintain and keep for six (6) years or such lesser or greater
time as may be permitted or required by the Commissioner such records, ticket
stubs and other documents pertaining to the sale or other disposition of
admissions, as may be required by the Commissioner;
   (j)   Display any certificate of registration, at the place for which such
certificate of registration was issued, during a period of suspension or after
revocation of the same by the Commissioner, and during a period of ticket sale
and conduct of amusement; or
   (k)   Sell an admission ticket or card on which the name of the vendor and
price is not printed, stamped, or written in accordance with Section
195.06; or
   (l)   Attempt to do or do anything whatsoever to avoid the charging,
collecting, remitting or payment of the whole or any part of the tax, penalties
or interest imposed by this chapter.
   (m)   For purposes of this section, any violation that does not specify a
culpable mental state or intent, shall be one of strict liability and no
culpable mental state or intent shall be required for a person to be guilty of
such violation.
   (n)   For purposes of this section, the term “person” shall, in addition to
the meaning prescribed in division (f) of Section
195.01, includes in the case of a corporation, association, pass-through entity
or unincorporated business entity not having any resident owner or officer
within the city, any employee or agent of such corporation, association, pass-
through entity or unincorporated business entity who has control or supervision
over or is charged with the responsibility of filing the admissions tax returns
and making the payments of the admissions tax as required by Section
195.04,
195.08 and Section
195.09.
   (o)   For purposes of this section, if any corporation, limited liability
company, or business trust required to file returns and to remit tax due to the
City under this chapter fails for any reason to make the filing or payment, any
of its employees having control or supervision of or charged with the
responsibility of filing returns and making payments, or any of its officers,
members, managers, or trustees who are responsible for the execution of the
corporation’s, limited liability company’s or business trust’s fiscal
responsibilities shall be personally liable for the failure. The dissolution,
termination, or bankruptcy of a corporation, limited liability company, or
business trust shall not discharge a responsible officer’s, member’s,
manager’s, employee’s, or trustee’s liability for a failure of the corporation,
limited liability company, or business trust to file returns or remit tax due.
The sum due for the liability may be collected by assessment in the manner
provided in Section
195.05 of this chapter.
   (p)   For purposes of this section, if any person liable for the tax levied
and imposed pursuant to this chapter, sells his or her place of business where
any admissions subject to tax was collected and received or required to be
collected and received, the tax, interest and penalty imposed by this chapter
shall become due and payable immediately within fifteen (15) days after the
date of selling or quitting such business. Any successor owner shall withhold a
sufficient amount of the purchase money to cover the amount of taxes, interest
and penalties due and unpaid until the former owner produces evidence
demonstrating that the taxes, interest and penalties have been paid. If the
purchaser of the business fails to withhold purchase money, he or she shall be
personally liable for the payment of the taxes, interest and penalties accrued
and unpaid during operation of the place by the former owner.
   (q)   Whoever, being a person charged by this chapter with the duty of
collecting and remitting the taxes imposed by this chapter, violates any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree. Each violation constitutes a separate offense.
   (r)   Whoever violates Section
195.17 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree for each such
disclosure. Each disclosure shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to
the above penalty, any employee of the City who violates Section
195.17 shall be guilty of an offense punishable by immediate dismissal.
(Ord. No. 1955-07. Passed 12-3-07, eff. 12-4-07)
CHAPTER 196 – PARKING OCCUPANCY TAX
196.01   Title
196.02   Definitions
196.03   Tax Imposed
196.04   Application of Payment
196.05   Time Allowed for Receipt
196.06   Application
196.07   Remittance of Tax
196.08   Burden of Proof
196.09   Notice
196.10   Maintenance of Records
196.11   Responsible Parties
196.12   Transfer or Termination
196.13   Commissioner’s Authority
196.14   Assessment of Tax
196.15   Enforcement
196.16   Refund of Tax
196.17   Appeals
196.18   Statute of Limitations
196.19   Confidential Information
196.20   Penalties
196.21   Interest
196.99   Violations
§ 196.01 Title
   This chapter shall be known as the “parking occupancy tax chapter” and the
tax herein imposed shall be known as the “parking occupancy tax.”
(Ord. No. 878-09. Passed 7-1-09, eff. 7-8-09)
§ 196.02 Definitions
   As used in this chapter, the following words, terms, or phrases shall have
the meaning and construction ascribed to them in this section:
   (a)   “City” means the City of Cleveland. Ohio.
   (b)   “Commissioner” means the Commissioner of the Division of Assessments
and Licenses, or his or her authorized representative.
   (c)   “Daily interest rate” means the annual interest rate specified in
Section
196.21(b) divided by three hundred-sixty (360), rounded to the nearest
millionth.
   (d)   “Day” means a calendar day.
   (e)   “Deficiency” means any amount of tax, penalty, or interest due to the
City under this chapter, whether reported or otherwise, that has not been paid
within the time allowed for remittance.
   (f)   “Facility owner” means the person vested with legal title to any
parcel of real property, or any portion thereof, that is used as a parking
facility.
   (g)   “Fiscal officer” means the person designated as such on any license
listed under division (c)(2) of Section
196.15 that is required of the operator under the Codified Ordinances for
conducting a parking service. If no such license is required or obtained, the
fiscal officer shall be deemed to be the employee or agent of the operator who
performs financial management functions in the ordinary course of their
employment with the operator, including, but not limited to, the person
attesting to any return or other document submitted to the City pursuant to
this chapter.
   (h)   “Final assessment” means an assessment issued by the Commissioner that
is no longer subject to an appeal by the party assessed.
   (i)   “Month” means a calendar month.
   (j)   “Motor vehicle” means any vehicle as defined in division (B) of RC
4501.01.
   (k)   “Net receipts” means the total amount of all revenue from transactions
less (i) refunded transactions and (ii) transactions exempt under division (d)
of Section
196.03.
   (l)   “Operator” means a person who conducts a parking service, whether in
the capacity of owner, principal, agent, lessee, mortgagee in possession,
licensee, or any other capacity.
   (m)   “Parking facility” means any lot, land, building, garage, structure,
enclosure, premises, parcel, yard, indoor or outdoor area, or any portion
thereof, except a public way, within the City offering three (3) or more
parking spaces.
   (n)   “Parking fee” means the total consideration required to be paid by a
patron to a parking service in exchange for parking occupancy. The total
consideration shall be valued in money, and shall include the value of all
receipts including, but not limited to, cash, credits, property or services of
any kind or nature, whether or not such consideration was actually received by
the operator of the parking service. A required charge shall not avoid
classification as a parking fee by its designation as an ancillary charge for
any other purported purpose separate from parking occupancy.
   (o)   “Parking occupancy” or “occupancy” means the use, or the right of use,
of parking space in or on a parking facility for parking, housing, or storing a
motor vehicle or other related act thereof, whether such use is by way of
lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use, or other agreement.
   (p)   “Parking service” means the act of offering parking space in or on a
parking facility for purposes of occupancy by a patron in exchange for a
parking fee. The term includes, but is not limited to, valet services, self-
park services, honor lot parking, parking garages, attended parking lots, or
any other form of service or facility offering parking space in or on a parking
facility for purposes of occupancy by a patron in exchange for a parking fee.
   (q)   “Parking space” means any space where or in which a single motor
vehicle may be parked, housed, stored, or kept at any one (1) time, regardless
if that space is designated or designed for such use.
   (r)   “Patron” means a person who pays a parking fee to an operator in
exchange for parking occupancy by the person or another by way of validation or
otherwise.
   (s)   “Person” means any natural person, partnership, joint venture, joint
stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver,
administrator, executor, assignee, trustee in bankruptcy, firm, company,
association, club, syndicate, society, municipal corporation, the State of
Ohio, political subdivision of the State of Ohio, the United States,
instrumentality of the United States, or any group or combination acting as a
unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit or otherwise.
   (t)   “Reporting period” or “reporting month” means a single month.
   (u)   “Responsible party” means any person who is jointly and severally
liable with the taxpayer for the payment of any tax, interest, or penalties, or
the performance of any duty imposed by this chapter.
   (v)   “Tax” means the parking occupancy tax imposed under Section
196.03.
   (w)   “Taxpayer” means an operator who has or is responsible for paying any
tax, interest, or penalties, or performing any duty imposed by this chapter.
   (x)   “Transaction” means the exchange of a parking fee for the privilege of
parking occupancy between a patron and operator. No transaction shall be
construed to include a parking fee where parking occupancy is not a material
part of the transaction or where parking space is provided to the patron as a
compliment from a merchant not regularly engaged in the business of conducting
a parking service and who receives no consideration from any person in exchange
for the occupancy of the parking space provided.
   (y)   “Valet” or “valet service” means a parking service requiring the
surrender of custody or control of a patron’s motor vehicle to the operator for
the purpose of parking occupancy at a location different from the place of
surrender.
(Ord. No. 878-09. Passed 7-1-09, eff. 7-8-09)
§ 196.03 Tax Imposed
   (a)   Purpose. An excise tax is imposed by this chapter for the purpose of
providing funds for the following:
      (1)   The payment of costs of permanent improvements, including costs of
acquiring, constructing, reconstructing, rehabilitating, remodeling,
renovating, enlarging, improving, equipping or furnishing facilities by
contract, lease, lease-purchase, or otherwise; and
      (2)   The elimination of deficits in City funds and the payment of costs
of general municipal operations; and
      (3)   Recreational, cultural and extracurricular programs of the
Cleveland Public Schools; and
      (4)   All other lawful purposes, including the payment of lease rentals,
lease-purchase amounts, debt charges, deposits to reserves or other funds or
other obligations.
   (b)   Order of Application of the Tax. The annual collections shall be used
to fund any lawful municipal purposes, including payment of costs of general
municipal operations, permanent improvements, and the elimination of deficits
in City funds, all subject to provisions governing the collection, investment
and disbursement of collections from the tax contained in the proceedings for
any bonds, notes, leases, lease- purchase agreements or other obligations
issued or incurred for those purposes.
   (c)   Tax. An excise tax is imposed upon the privilege of parking occupancy
within the City. Such tax is imposed upon the patron for each transaction and
shall be in the amount of eight percent (8%) of the parking fee charged for
parking occupancy. The tax herein imposed is in addition to any other taxes
imposed by law on or relating to transactions or the income or gross receipts
therefrom.
   (d)   Exemptions.
      (1)   The tax shall not apply to transactions with respect to which:
         A.   The operator is the United States government or a division or
department thereof; or
         B.   The patron is a resident of a single-family home, multiple-family
dwelling unit, apartment, boarding house, condominium, or mobile home for
living or sleeping purposes for at least thirty (30) consecutive days and
occupies parking space for the purpose of parking onsite at that place of
residence or at an off-site parking facility that meets the following
conditions: (1) the off-site parking facility is within a half-mile radius of
that place of residence, except for a place of residence within the downtown
parking area defined in Codified Ordinance Section
403.04(c); (2) the owner or operator of the off-site parking facility has
entered into a written agreement with either the patron, after verifying the
patron’s residency, or the patron’s place of residence; and (3) the
Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses has issued a non-transferable
residential parking tax exemption certificate to such patron. A patron shall be
eligible for no more than one (1) parking tax exemption certificate per year;
or
         C.   The patron is a licensed valet, provided that the parking space
being occupied is made available pursuant to a written agreement with the
facility operator and is being occupied in the ordinary course of providing
parking services to a patron of the valet.
      (2)   No exemption from tax shall be granted without a valid exemption
certificate completed by the party claiming to be exempt. The exemption
certificate shall be prescribed by the Commissioner and include all information
deemed necessary for the identification of the parties to the transaction and
the authority from which an exemption is claimed. A transaction shall be
presumed to be taxable in the absence of a complete exemption certificate
executed at the time of the transaction. The operator shall remit the original
exemption certificates with the remittance return in which the exempt
transaction is reported and retain copies of all exemption certificates on file
for a period of time consistent with this chapter.
   (e)   Collection of Tax. An operator is required to collect the tax at the
time of the transaction and to pay the amount collected or amount that should
have been collected over to the Commissioner as provided herein. The tax shall
be paid and the operator held liable, whether or not such tax has been in fact
collected from the patron.
(Ord. No. 387-2024. Passed 4-15-24, eff. 4-17-24)
§ 196.04 Application of Payment
   (a)   Order of Application. Payments shall be applied first to interest due,
then penalties due, and finally taxes due.
   (b)   Reporting Period. Payments shall be applied to the reporting period
specified on the remittance return accompanying payment. If a payment is not
accompanied by a remittance return or the payment exceeds the balance due for
the relevant reporting period, then payment, or remainder thereof, shall be
applied to the earliest reporting period in which a balance is due and
outstanding.
(Ord. No. 878-09. Passed 7-1-09, eff. 7-8-09)
§ 196.05 Time Allowed for Receipt
   (a)   Due Date. Any filing required by this chapter must be received by the
date specified.
   (b)   Time of Receipt. The date of receipt shall be the earlier of the date
physically received by the Commissioner; or the postmark date on the filing,
provided such filing is physically received by the Commissioner by the tenth
day following the postmark date on the filing.
   (c)   Delay. No extension shall be granted for an untimely filing,
regardless if such delay was caused by an error of the carrier, misrouted mail,
or improperly addressed mail.
   (d)   Automatic Extension.
      (1)   Where timely receipt is a condition of compliance with any
provision of this chapter and the last day for such receipt falls on a Saturday
or Sunday, the last day for compliance shall be extended to the following
Monday.
      (2)   Where timely receipt is a condition of compliance with any
provision of this chapter and the last day for such receipt falls on a federal
holiday or a day that City Hall is not open for business, the last day for
compliance shall be extended to the following day.
(Ord. No. 878-09. Passed 7-1-09, eff. 7-8-09)
§ 196.06 Application
   (a)   Effective Date. This chapter shall be effective as of September 1,
2009.
   (b)   Savings Clause. If any sentence, clause, section or part of this
chapter is found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such
unconstitutionality, illegality or invalidity shall affect only such clause,
sentence, section or part of this chapter so found and shall not affect or
impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or other
parts of this chapter. It is the intention of Council that this chapter would
have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence,
clause, section or part thereof not been included in this chapter.
   (c)   Collection of Tax after Termination of Chapter. This chapter shall
continue effective insofar as the levy of taxes is concerned until repealed,
and insofar as the collection of taxes levied hereunder and actions and
proceedings for collecting any tax so levied or enforcing any provisions of
this chapter is concerned, it shall continue effective until all of the taxes
levied in the aforesaid period are fully paid and any and all prosecutions for
the collection of taxes or for the punishment of violations of this chapter or
collection by suits have been fully terminated, subject to the conditions and
limitations contained herein. Returns due for all or any part of the last
effective year of this chapter shall be due in accordance with the provisions
provided in this chapter, as though the same were continuing.
(Ord. No. 878-09. Passed 7-1-09, eff. 7-8-09)
§ 196.07 Remittance of Tax
   (a)   Return Required. All taxes due shall be remitted to the Commissioner
on a monthly basis, by the twentieth day of the month following the reporting
period in which the transactions occurred. A remittance return shall accompany
the payment of all taxes due. The form of such remittance return shall be
prescribed by the Commissioner, and shall at a minimum include:
      (1)   The gross receipts that were collected from transactions during the
reporting period;
      (2)   The total number of vehicles parked during the reporting period;
      (3)   The amount of taxes due; and
      (4)   Such other pertinent information as the Commissioner deems
necessary.
   (b)   Certification Required. The remittance returns required by this
section shall be prepared and filed by the operator’s fiscal officer
responsible for compliance with this chapter. Such officer shall sign and
attest to the accuracy of the information contained on the remittance return.
   (c)   Amended Returns. An amended remittance return may be filed to correct
any remittance return previously filed with the Commissioner within three (3)
years from the date of the original filing. The form of such amended remittance
return shall be prescribed by the Commissioner and at a minimum contain all
adjusted amounts separately stated, the reason for the adjustment, and the
period in which the transactions were or should have been originally reported.
Upon examination, the Commissioner shall issue an appropriate assessment of
tax, penalties, and interest, if any.
   (d)   Frivolous Returns. Any return required by this chapter, or the rules
and regulations promulgated hereunder, that is determined to be filed in bad
faith, substantially incomplete, or providing information without a reasonable
basis for such position stated shall be deemed frivolous.
   (e)   Electronic Filing. The Commissioner is authorized to require
electronic filing of all remittance returns and tax payments, and to charge a
reasonable processing fee as set by the Board of Control for those remittance
returns submitted by any other means in violation of such electronic filing
requirements.
(Ord. No. 878-09. Passed 7-1-09, eff. 7-8-09)
§ 196.08 Burden of Proof
   (a)   General Rule. Except as otherwise provided in this section, any
determination and assessment made by the Commissioner shall be prima facie
correct and the operator shall have the burden of proof with respect to any
factual issue relevant to ascertaining the liability of the operator imposed by
this chapter.
   (b)   Limitations.
      (1)   The Commissioner shall have the burden of proof in any proceeding
with respect to any transactions which were reconstructed by the Commissioner
solely through the use of statistical information on unrelated operators.
      (2)   Division (b)(1) of this section shall apply with respect to an
issue only if the operator has maintained all records required under this
chapter and has cooperated with all requests by the Commissioner for witnesses,
information, documents, meetings, and interviews.
(Ord. No. 878-09. Passed 7-1-09, eff. 7-8-09)
§ 196.09 Notice
   (a)   Method.
      (1)   Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, whenever notice is
required, such notice shall be given by United States Certified Mail, addressed
to the person concerned at his or her last known address, and proof of such
mailing shall be sufficient for the purposes of this chapter.
      (2)   If the method of delivery in division (a)(1) of this section is
returned or refused, notice shall be given by United States First-Class Mail,
addressed to the person concerned at his or her last known address, and proof
of such mailing shall be sufficient for the purposes of this chapter.
      (3)   Notice served upon a facility owner shall be deemed sufficient
where such notice is delivered to the primary owner at the property address
designated on the records of the Cuyahoga County Auditor pertaining to such
parking facility.
   (b)   Time for Hearing. Notice of any hearing provided for by this chapter
shall be given not less than seven (7) days prior to the date fixed for
hearing. All hearings provided for in this chapter shall be at a location
determined by the Commissioner.
(Ord. No. 878-09. Passed 7-1-09, eff. 7-8-09)
§ 196.10 Maintenance of Records
   (a)   Record Keeping.
      (1)   Every operator must keep separately, with respect to each parking
service operated by such operator, complete and accurate records which shall
include:
         A.   Primary records including, but not limited to, sales invoices,
periodic contracts, tickets or claim checks, exemption certificates, tax
payment receipts, and cash register tapes; and
         B.   Secondary records including, but not limited to, remittance
returns, federal and state tax returns, bank deposit receipts, day books,
Journals, or any other records in which accumulated data is recorded.
      (2)   Any secondary record in which accumulated data is recorded by the
operator must be supported by complete primary records from which such data was
accumulated.
      (3)   The Commissioner is authorized to further regulate the maintenance
of records and prescribe rules as to the substance and form of all information
required to be maintained by each operator.
   (b)   Retention of Records. Every person responsible for collecting and
remitting the parking occupancy tax imposed under this chapter shall retain all
records necessary to compute the tax liability for a period of six (6) years
from latter of the date the tax return is filed or the tax is paid; unless the
Commissioner consents, in writing, to their destruction within that period or
by order requires that they be kept for a longer period.
   (c)   Failure to Maintain Records. For purposes of determining the amount of
tax due where an operator fails to maintain complete primary records which may
be utilized in verifying the accuracy of the figures reflected in their
secondary records and/or reported on their tax remittance returns, the
Commissioner will determine and use the net receipts from a representative
period as the basis for application of the tax levied in division (c) of
Section
196.03. The determination will be based upon one (1) or more of the following:
(1) the operator’s income tax records, (2) a sampling of the operator’s
business activity for a representative period, (3) previous tax remittance
returns submitted by the operator, and/or (4) other information relating to the
business activity of such operator. The net receipts for the representative
period will be projected for all periods under review.
(Ord. No. 878-09. Passed 7-1-09, eff. 7-8-09)
§ 196.11 Responsible Parties
   (a)   Agency. Where an operator performs his or her functions through a
managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing
agent shall also be deemed an operator for purposes of this chapter and shall
have the same duties and liabilities as his or her principal. Where the
managing agent collects parking occupancy tax on behalf of his or her
principal, such principal shall be jointly responsible for reporting and
remitting the tax to the City. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter
by either the principal or the managing agent shall be considered to be
compliance by both.
   (b)   Exempt Only as to Tax Liability. Any person who qualifies as an
operator shall not, by reason of being exempt from the tax liability imposed
under this chapter, be exempt from the duties of an operator imposed under this
chapter.
   (c)   Joint and Several Liabilities for Tax, Interest, and Penalties.
      (1)   The operator shall be liable for the payment of all taxes required
to be collected under this chapter, including interest and penalties thereon.
      (2)   Any fiscal officer of an operator who willfully fails to collect
the tax, file required returns, or make tax payments when due to the
Commissioner shall be jointly and severally liable with the operator for all
taxes due under this chapter, including interest and penalties thereon. This
personal liability of the fiscal officer shall survive the merger, acquisition,
liquidation, or dissolution of the operator.
      (3)   Any facility owner who knowingly permits its parking facility to be
used by an operator in the ordinary course of such operator’s parking service
shall be jointly and severally liable with the operator for all taxes due under
this chapter, including interest and penalties thereon. Any amounts due
hereunder shall be reduced to a lien on the parking facility.
(Ord. No. 878-09. Passed 7-1-09, eff. 7-8-09)
§ 196.12 Transfer or Termination
   (a)   Notice of Transfer Required.
      (1)   Any operator who transfers fifty percent (50%) or more ownership of
its parking service, or any substantial part of the operations or assets of
such parking service, must file a notice of transfer with the Commissioner at
least forty-five (45) days prior to the date of such transfer, setting forth
the legal name and address of the transferor-operator, legal name and address
of the transferee, date of transfer, description of the parking service or
assets being transferred, the amount of the transfer price, and any such other
information as the Commissioner may require.
      (2)   Within thirty (30) days of receipt of the transfer notice required
in division (a)(1), the Commissioner will issue a statement of account as
provided in division (e) to both the transferor and transferee. The transferee
shall withhold the amount due from the transfer price and remit the same to the
Commissioner.
         A.   If the transferee fails to withhold and remit the amount shown on
the statement of account, such transferee shall be jointly and severally liable
for all amounts indicated on the statement of account up to the fair market
value of the consideration transferred, or the transfer price, whichever is
greater.
         B.   Any amount due pursuant to division (a)(2)A. of this section
shall constitute a lien on the property being transferred.
         C.   The transferee shall be relieved of any duty to withhold from the
transfer price and shall have no transfer-liability for taxes, interest, or
penalties due hereunder from the transferor if the Commissioner fails to issue
a statement of account within thirty (30) days of receipt of the notice of
transfer.
         D.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to relieve the
transferor of its liability for taxes, interest, and penalties except that any
payments received from the transferee as provided herein shall reduce such
liability payable to the Commissioner.
      (3)   Within twenty (20) days from the transfer date, the transferor
shall file a remittance return and pay any tax due in accordance with division
(f).
   (b)   Notice of Termination Required.
      (1)   Any operator who intends to cease operating a parking service
within the City or dispose of a majority of the assets of such parking service,
must file a notice of such termination with the Commissioner at least forty-
five (45) days prior to the date of termination, setting forth the legal name
and address of the operator, a description of the operations being terminated,
the date of termination, and such other information as the Commissioner may
require.
      (2)   Within twenty (20) days from the termination date, the operator
shall file a remittance return and pay any tax due in accordance with division
(f).
   (c)   Notice of Change of Facility Owner Required.
      (1)   Any transferee of property used as a parking facility shall file a
notice of change with the Commissioner at least forty-five (45) days prior to
the date of such transfer, setting forth the legal name and address of the
transferor, legal name and address of the transferee, date of transfer,
description of the real property, and any such other information as the
Commissioner may require.
      (2)   Within thirty (30) days of receipt of the transfer notice required
in division (c)(1) of this section, the Commissioner will issue a statement of
account as provided in division (e) to both the transferor and transferee. The
transferee shall be required to withhold the amount due from the transfer price
and remit the same to the Commissioner.
         A.   If the transferee fails to withhold and remit the amount shown on
the statement of account, such transferee shall be jointly and severally liable
for all amounts indicated on the statement of account up to the fair market
value of the property transferred, or the transfer price, whichever is greater.
         B.   Any amount due pursuant to division (c)(2)A. of this section
shall constitute a lien on the property being transferred.
         C.   The transferee shall be relieved of any duty to withhold from the
transfer price and shall have no transfer-liability for taxes, interest, or
penalties due hereunder from the transferor if the Commissioner fails to issue
a statement of account within thirty (30) days of receipt of the notice of
change.
         D.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to relieve the
transferor of its liability for taxes, interest, and penalties except that any
payments received from the transferee as provided herein shall reduce such
liability payable to the Commissioner.
   (d)   Notice of Change of Fiscal Officer. Any person serving as a fiscal
officer of an operator may, upon termination of its services to such operator,
file a notice of change with the Commissioner. Such notice shall serve to limit
any personal liability that may be imposed under this chapter for reporting
periods beginning after the effective date of the notice.
   (e)   Statement of Account. When required by this chapter or upon any other
proper request, the Commissioner shall issue a statement of account for a
requested operator which shall include all taxes, interest, and penalties due
as of the close of the previous deadline for remittance as prescribed by
division (a) of Section
196.14.
   (f)   Final Reporting Period. A final reporting period shall be any partial
reporting period resulting from the transfer or termination of a parking
service. Such period shall begin the day following the close of the last
reporting period and shall close on the date of transfer or termination,
inclusive. The remittance return for a final reporting period shall be due by
the twentieth day following the close of such period and be in a form as any
other remittance return to be filed, except that it shall indicate “Final
Report Period” across the top of the first page.
(Ord. No. 878-09. Passed 7-1-09, eff. 7-8-09)
§ 196.13 Commissioner’s Authority
   (a)   Rulemaking. The Commissioner is empowered to adopt, promulgate, and
enforce rules and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the
administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, including,
but not limited to, provisions relating to transactions and record keeping.
Rules and regulations shall be effective upon publication in the City Record or
at a later date specified by the Commissioner.
   (b)   Rulings. The Commissioner is empowered to hear requests for rulings on
the application of the provisions of this chapter and the rules and regulations
promulgated hereunder and to render a decision on the same. Such rulings will
be at the discretion of the Commissioner and binding only with respect to the
party requesting the ruling. Any entity may request a ruling upon application
and payment of an administrative fee to be prescribed by the Commissioner.
   (c)   Investigations. The Commissioner is empowered to conduct
investigations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration and
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
   (d)   Subpoena Power. The Commissioner is empowered to compel the production
of books, papers, records and other information and the attendance of all
persons before him or her, whether as parties or witnesses, whenever he or she
believes such persons have knowledge pertinent to any inquiry of any tax paid,
charged, collected or received or required to have been charged, collected or
received. The Commissioner is empowered to examine any person appearing before
him or her under oath, concerning any transaction which was or should have been
reported for any purpose under this chapter or any activity or occurrence
tending to affect the tax levied under this chapter. All costs of production
shall be born by the respondent.
   (e)   Access to Records.
      (1)   An operator or suspected operator shall provide the Commissioner
and/or his or her designated agent access to all records and evidence at all
reasonable times and shall provide verification or authentication of the same,
as the Commissioner may require.
      (2)   An operator or suspected operator is required to provide to the
Commissioner and/or his or her designated agent the means, facilities and
opportunity to conduct any examination or investigation upon reasonable notice.
      (3)   The Commissioner and/or his or her designated agent are authorized
to examine the books, bank statements, deposit slips, third-party statements,
papers and other records of any operator or suspected operator in order to
verify the accuracy of any return made, or, if no return has been made, to
determine compliance with this chapter and any tax due hereunder.
   (f)   Authority Not Limited. No authority granted to the Commissioner by any
other provision of this chapter shall be limited by virtue of not being
included in this section.
   (g)   Abatement of Certain Penalties. Upon good cause, the Commissioner may
waive penalties otherwise owing under Section
196.20(b) for a taxpayer’s failure to pay amounts due.
(Ord. No. 878-09. Passed 7-1-09, eff. 7-8-09)
§ 196.14 Assessment of Tax
   (a)   Commissioner Shall Make Assessments. The Commissioner shall determine
and assess all deficiencies of tax, interest, and penalties due from any
taxpayer or responsible party charged with liability for such amounts under
this chapter.
   (b)   Evidence and Use of Estimates. The Commissioner may use all available
information in determining an assessment. Information derived from a limited
period of time or volume may be used to estimate data for a larger period of
time or volume. Such information used in estimations may be derived from
sources relating to the operator being assessed or one (1) or more other
operators. The lack of admissibility under any applicable rules of evidence
shall not bar such use of information in the determination of an assessment.
   (c)   Notice of Deficiency. The Commissioner shall serve notice on the
person being assessed, communicating his or her determination and assessment
and shall include a demand for all taxes, interest, and penalties that are due
and unpaid. The assessment by the Commissioner shall become final upon the
expiration of twenty (20) days from the date notice is provided to the person,
unless prior thereto the person files a protest in accordance with division (a)
of Section
196.17.
   (d)   Multiple Assessments Permitted. The Commissioner may concurrently
assess any persons who have, by reason of an act or omission or by operation of
law, become liable for the payment of any taxes, interest, or penalties which
were not originally incurred by that person. The amount of recovery from such
persons shall be limited to the total deficiency due.
   (e)   Application of Penalties and Interest. Penalties and interest shall
accrue from the date the taxes assessed should have been paid in accordance
with this chapter. A protest and/or appeal of the Commissioner’s assessment
shall not toll the application and accrual of penalties and interest.
(Ord. No. 878-09. Passed 7-1-09, eff. 7-8-09)
§ 196.15 Enforcement
   (a)   Suit Authorized. Upon an assessment becoming final and after the
expiration of time for all proper appeals, the Director of Law shall, by
request of the Commissioner on behalf of the City, bring or cause to be brought
an action to enforce the payment of the assessment in any court of competent
jurisdiction against any party liable for payment.
   (b)   Assessments Collectable as Other Debts. All final assessments no
longer subject to appeal shall be collectible as any other debts owed to the
City.
   (c)   Revocation of License.
      (1)   Upon an assessment becoming final and after the expiration of time
for all proper appeals, the Commissioner may, at his or her discretion, revoke
any license granted under the Codified Ordinances to an operator responsible
for payment of such assessment upon seven (7) days notice to the license
holder.
      (2)   Licenses subject to revocation shall include:
         A.   Parking Facility License granted under Section
457.03; and/or
         B.   Any Valet Service License granted under any provision of the
Codified Ordinances or as hereinafter may be enacted.
   (d)   Lien Authorized. A final assessment no longer subject to appeal may be
reduced to a lien on all real and/or personal property of the taxpayer or other
responsible party.
   (e)   Offset Authorized. Any credit, refund or other money due to be paid by
the City or any division thereof, to a person who is liable for the payment of
a final assessment shall be offset by such liability and paid to the
Commissioner in satisfaction of the same.
   (f)   Enforcement Not Limited.
      (1)   No authority granted to the Commissioner or any other officer of
the City by any other provision of the Codified Ordinances shall be limited by
virtue of not being included in this section.
      (2)   Remedies available to the Commissioner for the enforcement of this
chapter shall not be limited by virtue of not being included in this section.
      (3)   The exercise of one (1) form of remedy by the Commissioner shall
not preclude the concurrent or successive use of another remedy.
(Ord. No. 878-09. Passed 7-1-09, eff. 7-8-09)
§ 196.16 Refund of Tax
   (a)   Claim Required. A taxpayer or responsible party claiming a refund must
file a claim with the Commissioner on forms provided by the Commissioner for
that purpose. No refund shall be allowed for any amount paid by any taxpayer or
responsible party unless such person bore the burden of such amount and did not
shift the burden to another person.
   (b)   Filing of Claim. A claimant may file a claim for refund for any amount
of tax, interest or penalty paid by such claimant in relation to any reporting
period ending within the previous three (3) years from the date of filing a
claim, provided such amount was paid through a mistake of fact or an error of
law other than an error resulting from the tax, any of its provisions, or its
application, being declared invalid or unconstitutional.
   (c)   Content of Claim. A claim for refund shall be stated by reporting
period and include amended returns for each such period along with an
explanation supporting the amended position and amount claimed for refund.
   (d)   Disposition of Claim. Where a claim for refund is properly filed, the
Commissioner, shall examine the same and determine the amount of refund due, if
any. Before issuing a determination, the Commissioner may request additional
information or conduct any investigation necessary in the ascertaining the
validity of the claim. After a determination has been made, the Commissioner
shall issue a notice of determination, granting a full or partial refund, or
denying the claim. The determination by the Commissioner shall become final
upon the expiration of twenty (20) days from the date notice is provided to the
claimant, unless prior thereto the claimant files a protest in accordance with
division (a) of Section
196.17.
   (e)   Amount Refunded. Any refund granted under this section shall be
without interest and offset by any other indebtedness of the claimant to the
City.
(Ord. No. 878-09. Passed 7-1-09, eff. 7-8-09)
§ 196.17 Appeals
   (a)   Protest and Hearing.
      (1)   A person served with a notice of deficiency or determination may
file a written protest with the Commissioner and request a hearing on the same.
Upon timely receipt of a protest, the Commissioner shall fix the time and place
for a hearing and shall notify the petitioner thereof, giving notice to the
person of not less than seven (7) days. The Commissioner shall hear evidence
and testimony presented by the petitioner and may amend, vacate, or affirm the
original decision.
      (2)   At any hearing held as provided under this section, the
determination and assessment by the Commissioner shall be prima facie correct
and the burden shall be on the petitioner to prove otherwise.
      (3)   The Commissioner may prescribe rules and regulations governing the
form and procedure for protests and hearings.
      (4)   The decision of the Commissioner shall become final upon the
expiration of twenty (20) days from the date notice is provided to the
petitioner, unless prior thereto the petitioner files an appeal to the board in
accordance with division (b).
   (b)   Review by Board.
      (1)   Any decision of the Commissioner rendered under subsection (a) of
this section may be appealed by timely filing an appeal to the board of appeals
established pursuant to Charter Section
76-6 in the same manner as other appeals to the board. The board shall have
authority to amend, vacate, or affirm any such decision appealed from, in
conformity with the intent and purpose of this chapter.
      (2)   Decisions of the board shall become final after thirty (30) days
following the date of publication, unless prior thereto the Commissioner or any
proper party, appeal the board’s decision pursuant to RC Chapter 2506.
(Ord. No. 878-09. Passed 7-1-09, eff. 7-8-09)
§ 196.18 Statute of Limitations
   (a)   Assessment of Tax.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, an assessment shall
be issued within three (3) years from the date the return was due or the date
the return was filed, whichever is later.
      (2)   Where an operator underreports more than twenty-five percent (25%)
of the total tax due, an assessment shall be issued within six (6) years from
the date the return was due or the date the return was filed, whichever is
later.
      (3)   No limitation in the time for assessment of taxes and associated
interest and penalties shall apply in the case of a false or fraudulent return.
      (4)   An amended return filed pursuant to Section
196.07(c) shall not extend the time provided by any provision of this section.
   (b)   Offenses.
      (1)   Except as so provided in paragraph (2) of this section,
prosecutions for an offense made punishable under this chapter shall be
commenced within three (3) years after commission of the offense.
      (2)   Prosecutions for an offense made punishable under this chapter
relating to the willful failure to pay any tax due or file a required return or
attempt to evade the application of the tax shall be commenced within six (6)
years after the commission of the offense.
   (c)   Collection. Any action or suit for collection of taxes assessed shall
be commenced within ten (10) years from the date of assessment.
   (d)   Persons Other than the Taxpayer. The time allowed for any action
against a person liable for the payment of any tax, interest, or penalty other
than the taxpayer shall be the same as in the case such action was being taken
against the taxpayer.
(Ord. No. 878-09. Passed 7-1-09, eff. 7-8-09)
§ 196.19 Confidential Information
   (a)   General Rule. Except as otherwise provided in this section,
information provided to the Commissioner by a taxpayer or revealed by such in
the course of an investigation or private hearing shall be confidential and no
person shall disclose such information except in compliance with a proper
judicial order from a court of competent jurisdiction, or in the connection
with the performance of that person’s official duties or the official business
of the City as authorized under the Codified Ordinances.
   (b)   Disclosure to Other Tax Authorities. The Commissioner may furnish any
information obtained under this chapter to the Internal Revenue Service and to
the State Tax Commissioner upon request.
   (c)   Disclosure to Responsible Parties. The Commissioner may disclose any
information to any responsible party charged with liability under Section
196.11 for the purpose of monitoring and discharging their obligations there
under, including, but not limited to, providing a notice of deficiency issued
to a taxpayer.
   (d)   Disclosure in the Course of Proceeding. The Commissioner may disclose
information in the course of any public proceeding or action to collect taxes
assessed by the Commissioner.
(Ord. No. 878-09. Passed 7-1-09, eff. 7-8-09)
§ 196.20 Penalties
   (a)   Failure to File.
      (1)   A penalty of five percent (5%) of the tax collected for the
relevant reporting period shall be assessed for each month, or portion thereof,
that the return is not filed after becoming due, up to a maximum penalty of
twenty-five percent (25%) of the tax collected for that reporting period.
      (2)   The tax collected for the relevant reporting period shall be the
amount of tax that should have been reported without deduction of any payments
for the period that were received in advance of filing.
   (b)   Failure to Pay. A penalty of one percent (1%) of the amount of tax
remaining unpaid after become due shall be assessed for each month, or portion
thereof, that such tax is not paid in full.
   (c)   Timing of Penalty. Any penalty assessed by this section shall be first
applied on the first day the return or tax becomes past due and on every first
day on the following months thereafter under the terms of such penalty.
   (d)   Penalties Not Compounded. Penalty amounts due pursuant to this section
shall not be compounded by adding any such penalty to the balance of unpaid tax
due.
   (e)   Penalties Not Applied to Interest. Penalties assessed under this
section shall not apply to the portion of the unpaid balance comprised of
accumulated interest assessed under this chapter.
(Ord. No. 878-09. Passed 7-1-09, eff. 7-8-09)
§ 196.21 Interest
   (a)   Interest on Unpaid Balance. Any unpaid balance due, including all tax,
penalties, and accumulated interest, shall accrue interest on a daily basis
until paid in full.
   (b)   Rate. The annual rate of interest shall be five percent (5%).
   (c)   Calculating Interest. Interest shall be assessed daily by multiplying
the unpaid balance due by the daily interest rate. Interest shall be compounded
daily by adding the daily interest calculated to the unpaid balance due as
accumulated interest.
   (d)   Interest Additional to Penalties. Interest assessed pursuant to this
section is in addition to any other penalty amount imposed under this chapter.
(Ord. No. 878-09. Passed 7-1-09, eff. 7-8-09)
§ 196.99 Violations
   (a)   Offenses. It shall be a violation of this chapter if any person
charged with the duty of collecting and/or remitting the tax imposed:
      (1)   Fails to file a required remittance return;
      (2)   Fails to timely pay taxes due;
      (3)   Files a false or frivolous return;
      (4)   Attempts to evade the application of the tax;
      (5)   Fails to perform any duty imposed by this chapter;
      (6)   Fails to comply with any provision of this chapter;
      (7)   Knowingly makes a false statement on any return, or in the course
of a hearing, or investigation conducted by the Commissioner or his or her
designated agent;
      (8)   Fails to comply with an investigation or subpoena of the
Commissioner; or
      (9)   Denies the lawful request of the Commissioner for access to
records.
   (b)   Penalty. Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of
this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. A separate and
distinct offense shall be regarded as committed each day on which said person
shall commit any such violation or after notification thereof permit any such
violation to exist.
(Ord. No. 878-09. Passed 7-1-09, eff. 7-8-09)
CHAPTER 197 – MOTOR VEHICLE LICENSE TAX
197.01   Levy of Annual Tax on Motor Vehicles
197.02   Duration of the Tax
197.03   Payment of the Tax
197.04   Disposition of Proceeds
Statutory reference:
   Local Motor Vehicle License Tax, RC Ch. 4504
§ 197.01 Levy of Annual Tax on Motor Vehicles
   (a)   There is hereby levied an annual license tax upon the operation of
motor vehicles on the public roads or highways pursuant to RC 4504.172 for the
purposes of paying the costs and expenses of enforcing and administering the
tax provided for in this section to provide additional revenue for the purposes
set forth in RC 4504.04, 4504.06, 4504.17, 4504.171, and 4504.172 and to
supplement revenue already available for such purposes.
   (b)   Such tax shall be at the rate of five dollars ($5.00) per motor
vehicle on each and every motor vehicle the district of registration of which,
as defined in RC 4503.10, is in the City of Cleveland.
   (c)   As used in this chapter, the term “motor vehicle” means any and all
vehicles included within the definition of motor vehicles in RC 4501.01 and
4505.01.
(Ord. No. 1765-87. Passed 9-21-87, eff. 10-31-87)
§ 197.02 Duration of the Tax
   The tax levied by Section
197.01 shall apply to and be in effect for the registration year commencing
January 1, 1988 and shall continue in effect and application during each
registration year thereafter.
(Ord. No. 1765-87. Passed 9-21-87, eff. 10-31-87)
§ 197.03 Payment of the Tax
   The tax imposed by this chapter shall be paid to the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles of the State of Ohio or to a Deputy registrar at the time application
for registration of a motor vehicle is made as provided in RC 4503.10.
(Ord. No. 1765-87. Passed 9-21-87, eff. 10-31-87)
§ 197.04 Disposition of Proceeds
   All moneys derived from the tax hereinbefore levied shall be used by the
City of Cleveland for the purposes specified in Section
197.01. Further, all moneys received from the levy of this tax shall be used
for the infrastructure repair and rehabilitation program and shall not be used
directly or indirectly for operating expenses.
(Ord. No. 1765-87. Passed 9-21-87, eff. 10-31-87)
CHAPTER 198 – MOTOR VEHICLE LESSOR TAX
198.01   Title
198.02   Definitions
198.03   Tax Imposed
198.04   Tax Not Paid; Interest; Late Filing Penalty
198.05   Record keeping; Burden of Proof
198.06   Commissioner’s Authority
198.07   Commissioner’s Power and Duties; Apparent Violation
198.08   Credit or Refund; Claim Procedures
198.09   Notice
198.10   Employees Liable When
198.11   Sale or Transfer; Notification Procedures
198.12   Appeals
198.13   Deposit of Funds
198.14   Effective Date
198.99   Violation; Penalty
   Note: Pursuant to Section 1 of Ord. No. 532-91, Chapter
198 shall take effect April 1, 1991.
§ 198.01 Title
   This chapter shall be known and cited as the “motor vehicle lessor tax
chapter” and the tax herein imposed shall be known and cited as the “motor
vehicle lessor tax.”
(Ord. No. 532-91. Passed 3-18-91, eff. 3-22-91)
§ 198.02 Definitions
   (a)   For the purposes of this chapter, when any of the following words or
terms are used herein they shall have the meaning or construction ascribed to
them in this section:
      (1)   “City” means the City of Cleveland, Ohio.
      (2)   “Commissioner” means the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses
or his or her authorized representative.
      (3)   “Division” means the Division of Assessments and Licenses of the
City of Cleveland.
      (4)   “Leasing” or any similar term means any transfer of the possession
(regardless of whether or not such possession is exclusive) or the right to
possession of a motor vehicle to a user for a valuable consideration.
      (5)   “Lessor” means any person who, in connection with a trade or
business conducted by such person, leases a motor vehicle directly to lessee.
In a multiparty transaction, the lessor is the person who transfers the motor
vehicle to the lessee. A person who merely finances or underwrites a leasing
transaction, without doing more, is not a lessor for purposes of this chapter.
      (6)   “Limousine for hire” means any motor vehicle which is used in the
business of operating for hire as a chauffeur-driven vehicle that secures or
accepts passengers within the City and that does not secure or accept
passengers for hire on the public streets or in public or quasi-public places.
      (7)   “Motor vehicle” means any motor vehicle as defined in division (B)
of RC 4501.01, except motor vehicles of gross weight of six thousand (6,000)
pounds or greater.
      (8)   “Public hack” means any motor vehicle whose owner or driver secures
or accepts passengers for hire within the City on the public streets or quasi-
public places.
      (9)   “Rental period” means the term of the lease as specified in the
lease. A lease renewal denotes an additional rental period. A lease extension
does not denote an additional rental period.
      (10)   “Tax” means the motor vehicle license tax imposed pursuant to
Section
198.03.
   (b)   In this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, words in the
singular number include the plural, and in the plural include the singular,
words of the masculine gender include the feminine and the neuter, and when the
sense so indicates, words of the neuter gender may refer to any gender.
(Ord. No. 532-91. Passed 3-18-91, eff. 3-22-91)
§ 198.03 Tax Imposed
   (a)   For the purpose of providing funds for general municipal operations,
procurement of fixed assets or permanent improvements, payment of debt charges,
the elimination of deficits in City funds, contributions for recreational,
cultural, and extracurricular programs in the Cleveland Public Schools, and for
all other lawful purposes, an excise tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege
of leasing motor vehicles within the City to a lessee. Such tax shall be
imposed upon the lessor and shall be in the amount of three dollars ($3.00) per
vehicle per rental period for any lease entered into or renewed after April 1,
1991 and before April 1, 1992; four dollars ($4.00) per vehicle per rental
period for any lease for which the total lease amount exceeds sixteen dollars
($16.00) entered into or renewed after April 1, 1992, and before August 1,
1995; and six dollars ($6.00) per vehicle per lease for which the total lease
amount exceeds twenty- five dollars ($25.00) for any lease entered into or
renewed on or after August 1, 1995. The lessor shall not divide a transaction
into multiple leases to avoid tax liability under this division.
   (b)   Any tax herein imposed is in addition to any other taxes authorized by
law.
   (c)   The lessor shall be required to pay this tax to the Commissioner as
provided in division (e) of this section. The lessor shall be allowed to pass
this tax along to his or her lessees as a separate charge on his or her rental
bills or invoices.
   (d)   This tax shall not apply to any lessor who is a governmental body; nor
shall it apply to any lessor upon whom the imposition of the tax would violate
the United States Constitution or the Constitution of the State of Ohio; nor
shall it apply to the lease of limousines for hire or public hacks.
   (e)   Except as provided herein, the lessor shall pay this tax on a monthly
basis, with the tax due on motor vehicles leased within the month by the last
day of the following month. A remittance return shall accompany each monthly
payment. The format of such remittance return shall be prescribed by the
Commissioner, and such return shall include the number of motor vehicles leased
within that month and any other reasonable information the Commissioner deems
necessary. The remittance returns shall be filed and signed by the Lessor under
penalty as provided in Section
198.99 of this chapter. If in the second quarter of a given calendar year, the
lessor’s tax liability pursuant to this division averages less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) per month, then the lessor may, at the lessor’s option, in
lieu of filing monthly tax returns and making monthly tax remittances, pay in
each of the three (3) subsequent quarters an amount equal to the tax liability
in the second quarter. A remittance form prescribed by the Commission, with
requirements similar to the monthly remittance return referred to above, shall
be signed and filed by the lessor with his or her annual payment.
(Ord. No. 1025-A-95. Passed 6-29-95, eff. 6-29-95)
§ 198.04 Tax Not Paid; Interest; Late Filing Penalty
   (a)   Any tax not paid when due shall bear interest at the rate of two
percent (2%) per month, or fraction thereof, until the tax is paid.
   (b)   In addition to any interest charges, any tax not paid when due shall
subject the lessor failing to pay such tax to a ten percent (10%) late payment
penalty, unless a late filing penalty is due as provided in division (c) below.
This penalty shall be calculated upon the amount of tax underpaid.
   (c)   In addition to any interest charges, any remittance return not filed
when due shall subject the lessor failing to file such to a ten percent (10%)
late filing penalty calculated upon the total tax liability due for such filing
period.
   (d)   Any payment or return not physically received by the Commissioner by
the due date shall be considered late.
   (e)   All payments received shall first be applied to penalty due, then
interest due and finally the tax due for the period the payment is made for.
   (f)   The lessor shall be required to pay all tax, interest and penalty due
from him or her, except that if the Commissioner finds that any late payment or
late filing was due to reasonable cause, the penalty for such shall not apply.
(Ord. No. 532-91. Passed 3-18-91, eff. 3-22-91)
§ 198.05 Record keeping; Burden of Proof
   (a)   Every lessor subject to the tax imposed herein shall keep accurate and
complete books and records of his or her leasing business which will include
invoices, rental agreements, annual inventories of motor vehicles available for
rental and other pertinent papers and documents. All such books and records
which are required to be kept by this chapter shall be kept in the English
language and shall, at all times during business hours of the day, be subject
to inspection by the Commissioner or his or her duly authorized agents and
employees.
   (b)   It shall be presumed that all leases of motor vehicles occur at the
lessor’s place of business and are subject to tax under this chapter until the
contrary is established. The burden of proving that a lease is not taxable
hereunder shall be upon the lessor.
(Ord. No. 532-91. Passed 3-18-91, eff. 3-22-91)
§ 198.06 Commissioner’s Authority
   The Commissioner is hereby empowered to adopt, promulgate, and to enforce,
rules and regulations relating to any matter or thing pertaining to the
administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, including
provisions for the reexamination, correction and amendment of all returns. The
Commissioner, or any agent or employee designated in writing by him or her, is
hereby authorized to examine the books and records of any lessor during regular
business hours, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no
return was made to ascertain the tax imposed by this chapter.
(Ord. No. 532-91. Passed 3-18-91, eff. 3-22-91)
§ 198.07 Commissioner’s Power and Duties; Apparent Violation
   (a)   If it shall appear to the Commissioner that any person has violated
any provision of this chapter or any rule or regulation promulgated hereunder,
or if the amount of any tax payment is incorrect in that it does not include
all taxes payable for such calendar month or period, or if the Commissioner
shall find that the collection of any taxes which have accrued but are not yet
due will be jeopardized by delay, and declares said taxes to be immediately due
and payable, or if it shall appear to the Commissioner that he or she has made
any final assessment which did not include taxes payable for the periods
involved, or if it appears to the Commissioner that any person has, by reason
of any act or omission or by operation of law, become liable for the payment of
any taxes, interest or penalties not originally incurred by him or her, the
Commissioner may in any of the above events determine and assess the amount of
such taxes or deficiency, as the case may be, together with the interest and
penalties due and unpaid, and immediately serve notice upon such person of such
determination and assessment and make a demand for payment of the tax together
with interest and penalties thereon. If the person incurring any such liability
has died, such assessment may at the discretion of the Commissioner be made
against his or her personal representatives. Such determination and assessment
by the Commissioner shall be final at the expiration of twenty (20) days from
the date of the service of such written notice thereof and demand for payment,
unless such person shall have filed with the Commissioner a written protest and
a petition for a hearing, specifying its objections thereto. Upon the receipt
of such petition within the twenty (20) days allowed, the Commissioner shall
fix the time and place for a hearing and shall notify the petitioner thereof.
The Commissioner may amend his or her determination and assessment at any time
before it becomes final. In the event of such amendment the person affected
shall be given notice thereof and an opportunity to be heard in connection
therewith. At any hearing held as herein provided, the determination and
assessment that has been made by the Commissioner shall be prima facie correct
and the burden shall be upon the protesting person to prove that it is
incorrect. Upon the conclusion of such hearing a decision shall be made by the
Commissioner either cancelling, increasing, modifying or affirming such
determination and assessment and notice thereof given to the petitioner.
   (b)   Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax as herein provided, the
Director of Law shall, upon the request of the Commissioner, bring or cause to
be brought an action to enforce the payment of said tax on behalf of the City
in any court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. No. 532-91. Passed 3-18-91, eff. 3-22-91)
§ 198.08 Credit or Refund; Claim Procedures
   (a)   Whenever it appears that an amount of tax, interest or penalty has
been paid in error to the division by the person paying such tax (hereinafter
referred to as “taxpayer”), whether such amount be paid through a mistake of
fact or an error of law other than an error resulting from the tax, any of its
provisions or its application being declared invalid or unconstitutional, not
later than three (3) years from the date upon which such payment was made, such
taxpayer may file a claim for credit or refund with the division on forms
provided by the Commissioner for that purpose. No credit or refund shall be
allowed for any amount paid by such taxpayer unless it appears that he or she
bore the burden of such amount and did not shift the burden to another person.
   (b)   Any credit or refund that is allowed under this section shall be
without interest.
   (c)   A claim for credit or refund shall be considered to have been filed
with the division on the date upon which it is received by the division, and
receipt of any claim for credit or refund filed under this section shall be
acknowledged by the Commissioner or any designated person on his or her behalf,
said receipt to describe the claim in sufficient detail as to identify it, and
to state the date upon which the claim was received by the Commissioner.
   (d)   As soon as practicable after a claim for credit or refund is filed,
the Commissioner, or his or her designee, shall examine the same and determine
the amount of credit or refund due, if any, and shall issue a notice of
tentative determination of claim and notify the claimant of such determination.
If the claimant disagrees with the determination, he or she shall file a
protest and challenge thereto within twenty (20) days after the date of notice
of tentative determination of claim has been mailed to him or her. Upon receipt
of such protest within the twenty (20) days allowed, the Commissioner, or his
or her designee, shall fix the time and place for a hearing thereof, giving
notice to the claimant thereof, not less than seven (7) days prior thereto. At
any hearing held as herein provided, the tentative determination of claim shall
be prima facie correct and the burden shall be upon the claimant to prove that
it is incorrect. Upon the conclusion of the hearing, a decision shall be made
by the Commissioner and notice thereof given to the claimant. In the event no
protest or challenge to the tentative determination of claim is filed within
the twenty (20) day period hereinabove set forth, said notice shall thereafter
become and operate as a final determination.
(Ord. No. 532-91. Passed 3-18-91, eff. 3-22-91)
§ 198.09 Notice
   Whenever notice is required by this chapter, such notice may be given by the
United States registered or certified mail, addressed to the person concerned
at his or her last known address, and proof of such mailing shall be sufficient
for the purposes of this chapter. Notice of any hearing provided for by this
chapter shall be so given not less than seven (7) days prior to the day fixed
for a hearing. Following the initial contact of a person represented by an
attorney, the division shall not contact the person concerned but shall only
contact the attorney representing the person concerned.
   All hearings provided for in this chapter shall be at a location determined
by the Commissioner.
(Ord. No. 532-91. Passed 3-18-91, eff. 3-22-91)
§ 198.10 Employees Liable When
   Any officer or employee of any corporation subject to the provisions of this
chapter who has the control, supervision or responsibility of filing returns
and making payment of the amount of tax herein imposed and who wilfully fails
to file such return or to make such payment to the division shall be personally
liable for such amounts, including interest and penalties thereon, in the event
that after proper proceedings for the collection of such amounts, as provided
in this chapter, such corporation is unable to pay such amounts to the
division; and the personal liability of such officer or employee as provided
herein shall survive the dissolution of the corporation.
(Ord. No. 532-91. Passed 3-18-91, eff. 3-22-91)
§ 198.11 Sale or Transfer; Notification Procedures
   Any person required to pay the tax imposed by this chapter and who sells or
transfers his or her business of leasing motor vehicles or a major part of the
assets of such business, other than a sale of assets (including inventory) in
the ordinary and usual course of such business, is required to file a notice of
such intended sale or transfer with the division at least forty- five (45) days
prior to the date of such sale or transfer, setting forth the name of the
seller or transferor, purchaser or transferee, a description of the property or
business sold, the amount of the purchase or transfer price and such other
information as the Commissioner may reasonably request. Within thirty (30) days
after such sale or transfer, such seller or transferor shall file any
remittance returns and pay any tax due and not paid up to the date of sale or
transfer. At least forty-five (45) days before the sale or transfer referred to
above takes place, the purchaser or transferee shall also file a notice of
intended sale or transfer with the division, setting forth the same information
as required in the seller’s or transferor’s notice and further requesting that
the division perform an audit of the seller’s or transferor’s books and records
or do whatever else is necessary to determine how much tax is due up to the
date of sale or transfer. The purchaser’s or transferee’s notice may be made in
conjunction with the seller’s or transferor’s notice. If the purchaser or
transferee fails to file the notice as required herein, the purchaser or
transferee shall be personally liable to the division for the amount of tax,
interest and penalty owed by the seller or transferor to the division up to the
amount of the reasonable value of the property acquired by the purchaser or
transferee. If a notice is filed, the division shall notify both the seller (or
transferor) and the purchaser (or transferee) of the amount to be withheld from
the purchase or transfer price to cover all taxes, interest and penalties due
under this chapter and unpaid up to the date of sale or transfer. The purchaser
or transferee shall withhold this amount from the purchase or transfer price or
if payment of money or property is not involved, he or she shall withhold the
performance that constitutes consideration for the sale or transfer, until the
seller or transferor produces a receipt from the division showing that such
tax, interest and penalty had been paid or a certificate from the division
showing no tax is due. The purchaser or transferee is relieved of any duty to
withhold from the purchase or transfer price and shall have no liability for
tax, interest or penalty due hereunder from the seller or transferor, if the
division fails to notify the purchaser or transferee of such amount claimed due
at least five (5) days before the date of such sale or transfer. If the
purchaser or transferee is notified by the division of the amount to be
withheld for the purchase or transfer price and does withhold such amount, the
purchaser’s or transferee’s liability for any tax, interest or penalty
hereunder shall be limited to the amount withheld. If the purchaser or
transferee fails to withhold from the purchase or transfer price the amount
requested by the division, the purchaser or transferee shall be liable for any
tax, interest or penalty due in excess of any amount withheld, but not
exceeding the amount of the reasonable value of the property acquired by him or
her. The purchaser or transferee shall pay over to the division any amount
withheld hereunder upon notification of the refusal of the seller or transferor
to pay any tax, interest or penalty due hereunder and upon notification of the
division’s claim against the purchaser or transferee for any such month.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to relieve the seller or transferor
of his or her liability for tax, interest and penalty due from him or her,
except that any payments received from the purchaser or transferee as provided
herein shall reduce such liability payable to the division.
(Ord. No. 532-91. Passed 3-18-91, eff. 3-22-91)
§ 198.12 Appeals
   Appeals from any ruling of the Commissioner hereunder shall be made to the
Board of Appeals established pursuant to Charter Section
76-6 in the same manner as other appeals to the Board. The Board shall have
authority to annul, modify or affirm any such ruling appealed from, in
conformity with the intent and purpose of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 532-91. Passed 3-18-91, eff. 3-22-91)
§ 198.13 Deposit of Funds
   All proceeds resulting from the imposition of this tax including interest
and penalties shall be deposited in the general fund of the City.
(Ord. No. 532-91. Passed 3-18-91, eff. 3-22-91)
§ 198.14 Effective Date
   This chapter shall apply to any lease entered into or renewed after April 1,
1991.
(Ord. No. 532-91. Passed 3-18-91, eff. 3-22-91)
§ 198.99 Violation; Penalty
   Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, neglecting, or refusing to
comply with any of the provisions of this chapter except when otherwise
specifically provided, upon conviction thereof shall be fined not less than
fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the
first offense and not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) nor more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the second and each subsequent offense in
any one hundred and eighty (180) day period. A person who commits repeated
offenses in excess of three (3) within any one hundred and eighty (180) day
period is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. A separate and distinct
offense shall be regarded as committed each day upon which said person shall
combine any such violation, or permit any such violation to exist, after
notification thereof.
(Ord. No. 532-91. Passed 3-18-91, eff. 3-22-91)
CHAPTER 199 – TAX ON COIN OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES
199.01   Definitions
199.02   Imposition of Tax; Purpose
199.03   Exemptions
199.04   Records to be Kept
199.05   Returns
199.06   Payment of Tax
199.07   Stamps
199.08   Determination of Tax
199.09   Refunds
199.10   Appeals
199.11   Proceedings to Recover Tax
199.12   General Powers of the Commissioner
199.13   Interest and Penalties
199.14   Returns to be Secret
199.15   Notices and Limitations of Time
199.16   Disposition of Revenues
199.99   Penalty
   Note: Pursuant to Section 1 of Ordinance No. 518-91, Sections
199.01 through
199.16 and Section
199.99 took effect on April 1, 1991.
§ 199.01 Definitions
   When used in this chapter the following terms shall mean or include:
   (a)   “City” means the City of Cleveland, Ohio.
   (b)   “Coin operated amusement devices” means any machine, contrivance,
apparatus, booth or other device which is operated, played, or permitted to
function by the insertion or deposit of any coin, currency, slug, token or
thing of value, and which provides amusement, diversion or entertainment.
   (c)   “Commissioner” means the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses of
the City of Cleveland.
   (d)   “Digger device” means any coin operated amusement device where, by the
use of a crane, scoop, lever or other method, the player attempts to obtain a
prize or other thing of value.
   (e)   “Division” means the Division of Assessments and Licenses of the City
of Cleveland.
   (f)   “Game” means any coin operated amusement device whereby the player
tests his or her skill or strength or chance, or competes against himself,
herself or other persons, including but not limited to pinball machines; video
ball machines or other electronic video games; machines whereby one tests one’s
driving, racing, flying, shooting or other skills; rifles and other devices for
shooting at targets; skeeball; bowling games; poker roll; pokerino and similar
games; pool or billiard games; and shuffleboard. The foregoing enumeration is
illustrative and is not intended to in any way limit the kind of game within
this definition.
   (g)   “Juke box or similar musical device” means any coin operated amusement
device designed primarily to provide recorded music by electrical or mechanical
means, or which, by such means, provides music, whether or not a portion of the
device is on or off the premises where the music is heard and whether or not
somebody starts the operation of the device after the coin, slug, token or
thing of value is inserted in the device.
   (h)   “Live viewing booth” means any coin operated amusement device to which
the public may gain admittance wherein a live performance is presented to five
(5) or fewer persons at one time.
   (i)   “Maintain” means to permit or authorize the placing or keeping of a
coin operated amusement device on the premises of another person or on one’s
own premises where it will be available for use or operation.
   (j)   “Owner” means any person who owns a coin operated amusement device.
   (k)   “Person” means an individual, partnership, society, association,
joint-stock company, corporation, estate, receiver, lessee, trustee, assignee,
referee, or any other person acting in a fiduciary or representative capacity,
whether appointed by a court or otherwise, and any combination of individuals.
   (l)   “Picture arcade” means any coin operated amusement device to which the
public may gain admittance wherein still or motion picture machines or
projectors or video monitors are operated or maintained for the purpose of
showing still or motion pictures or videos to five (5) or fewer persons per
machine, projector or monitor at one time.
   (m)   “Return” means any return required to be filed as provided in this
chapter.
   (n)   “Tax” means the tax imposed pursuant to this chapter, which shall be
known as the “coin operated amusement device tax”.
   (o)   “Tax year” means April first of any calendar year through March
thirty-first of the following calendar year.
(Ord. No. 518-91. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 6-20-91)
§ 199.02 Imposition of Tax; Purpose
   (a)   For the privilege of maintaining coin operated amusement devices,
including but not limited to games of every kind, digger devices, juke boxes or
similar musical devices, live viewing booths and picture arcades, whether
manually, mechanically, electrically or otherwise operated, within the City
during each tax year, or any part thereof, every owner shall pay a tax for each
such coin operated amusement device in the amount of thirty dollars ($30.00).
   (b)   This tax is imposed for the purpose of providing funds for general
municipal operations, procurement of fixed assets or permanent improvements,
payment of debt charges, the elimination of deficits in City funds and for all
other lawful purposes.
   (c)   A person who allows an owner to maintain a coin operated amusement
device which is subject to this tax on premises owned or occupied by such
person shall, where such device does not bear the required stamp or other
indicia prescribed by the Commissioner to show payment of the tax, be treated
as and deemed an owner of the device, and shall be subject to the tax.
   (d)   If the first maintenance within the City of any coin operated
amusement device subject to tax under this chapter occurs on or after November
first and before January first in any tax year, the tax for that tax year shall
be one-half (1/2) of the tax hereinabove provided, and, if the first such
maintenance occurs on or after January first in any tax year, the tax for that
tax year shall be one-fourth (1/4) of the tax hereinabove provided. For the
purpose of this division the first maintenance within the City of a replaced
device, on which the tax was paid prior to its replacement, shall be deemed to
be the first such maintenance of the device after its replacement.
   (e)   Where a coin operated amusement device, with respect to which the tax
has been paid, is replaced by another similar device, no additional tax shall
be payable with respect to the replacement device during the period for which
the tax has been paid. However, the tax shall be payable with respect to the
replaced device if it is subsequently maintained within the City. Where the tax
has been paid with respect to a device which has not been so replaced, a change
of location, or of ownership, of such device shall not subject it to additional
tax, provided returns are filed as required by division (a) of Section
199.05 of this chapter.
   (f)   The tax shall not apply to a coin operated amusement device when it is
kept or displayed solely for purposes of sale, kept in a storage warehouse or
kept in premises which are not open for business.
(Ord. No. 518-91. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 6-20-91)
   Note: Pursuant to Section 1 of Ordinance No. 518-91, Section
199.02 took effect on April 1, 1991.
§ 199.03 Exemptions
   The tax imposed by this chapter shall not apply to the following:
   (a)   The state of Ohio, or any of its agencies, instrumentalities, public
corporations (including a public corporation created pursuant to agreement or
compact with another state or Canada) or political subdivisions.
   (b)   The United States of America, and any of its agencies and
instrumentalities, insofar as they are immune from taxation.
   (c)   Any corporation, or association, or trust, or community chest, fund or
foundation, organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable, or
educational purposes, or for the prevention of cruelty to children or animals,
and no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any private
shareholder or individual, and no substantial part of the activities of which
is carrying on propaganda or otherwise attempting to influence legislation;
provided, however, that nothing in this division shall include an organization
operated for the primary purpose of carrying on a trade or business for profit,
whether or not all of its profits are payable to one (1) or more organizations
described in this division; and
   (d)   Nothing in this section shall exempt from tax under this chapter any
owner of a coin operated amusement device subject to tax under this chapter
despite the fact that it is maintained on premises occupied by a person
exempted from tax by this section or that any such exempt person is entitled to
any part of the proceeds from the device.
(Ord. No. 518-91. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 6-20-91)
§ 199.04 Records to be Kept
   Every owner of a coin operated amusement device taxable under this chapter
shall keep such records of such owner’s business and in such form as the
Commissioner may by regulation require. Such records shall be offered for
inspection and examination at any time upon demand by the Commissioner, or the
Commissioner’s duly authorized agent or employee, and shall be preserved for a
period of three (3) years, except that the Commissioner may consent to their
destruction within that period or may require that they be kept longer.
(Ord. No. 518-91. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 6-20-91)
§ 199.05 Returns
   (a)   On or before the twentieth day of April in each year, every owner of a
coin operated amusement device taxable under this chapter shall file a return
with the Commissioner, on a form prescribed by the Commissioner, showing the
number and type of any coin operated amusement devices subject to tax under
this chapter owned and/or being maintained by such person, and such other
information as the Commissioner may require. The Commissioner may provide by
regulation that returns be filed at other times, and upon such dates as the
Commissioner may specify, and may provide that a return be filed within a
stated time after any such device is replaced, or moved from the premises where
it has been located, or after any change in the ownership of such device.
   (b)   If a return required by this section is not filed, or if a return when
filed is incorrect or insufficient on its face, the Commissioner shall take the
necessary steps to enforce the filing of such a return or of a corrected
return.
(Ord. No. 518-91. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 6-20-91)
§ 199.06 Payment of Tax
   At the time of filing a return the owner shall pay to the Commissioner the
tax imposed hereunder. Such tax shall be due and payable on the last day on
which such return is required to be filed, regardless of whether a return is
filed or whether the return which is filed correctly indicates the amount of
tax due.
(Ord. No. 518-91. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 6-20-91)
§ 199.07 Stamps
   The payment of the tax imposed by this chapter shall be evidenced by a
suitable stamp or other indicia of payment in a form prescribed by the
Commissioner and every owner shall place and keep conspicuously posted on the
device the stamps or other indicia denoting payment of the tax for the current
year.
(Ord. No. 518-91. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 6-20-91)
§ 199.08 Determination of Tax
   If a return required by this chapter is not filed, or if a return when filed
is incorrect or insufficient, the Commissioner shall determine the amount of
tax due from such information as may be obtainable and, if necessary, may
estimate the tax on the basis of external indices. Notice of such determination
shall be given to the person liable for the payment of the tax. Such
determination shall finally and irrevocably fix the tax unless the person
against whom it is assessed, within thirty (30) days after the giving of notice
of such determination, shall apply in writing to the Commissioner for a hearing
or unless the Commissioner on his or her own motion shall redetermine the same.
After such hearing the Commissioner shall give notice of the Commissioner’s
determination to the person against whom the tax is assessed.
(Ord. No. 518-91. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 6-20-91)
§ 199.09 Refunds
   (a)   In the manner provided in this section, the Commissioner shall refund
or credit, without interest, any tax, penalty or interest erroneously,
illegally or unconstitutionally collected or paid, if written application to
the Commissioner for such refund shall be made within one (1) year from the
payment thereof. Whenever a refund or credit is made, the Commissioner shall
state his or her reason therefor in writing. The Commissioner may, in lieu of
any refund required to be made, allow credit therefor on payments due from the
applicant.
   (b)   An application for a refund or credit made as herein provided shall be
deemed an application for a revision of any tax, penalty or interest complained
of and the Commissioner may receive evidence with respect thereto. After making
his or her determination, the Commissioner shall give notice thereof to the
applicant.
   (c)   A person shall not be entitled to a revision, refund or credit under
this section of a tax, interest or penalty which had been determined to be due
pursuant to the provisions of Section
199.08 of this chapter where such person has had a hearing or an opportunity
for a hearing, as provided in said section, or has failed to avail himself or
herself of the remedies therein provided.
(Ord. No. 518-91. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 6-20-91)
§ 199.10 Appeals
   Appeals from any ruling of the Commissioner hereunder shall be made to the
Board of Appeals established pursuant to Charter Section
76-6 in the same manner as other appeals to the Board. The Board shall have
authority to annul, modify or affirm any such ruling appealed from, in
conformity with the intent and purpose of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 518-91. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 6-20-91)
§ 199.11 Proceedings to Recover Tax
   Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax, or penalty or interest
imposed by this chapter as herein provided, the Director of Law shall, upon the
request of the Commissioner, bring or cause to be brought an action to enforce
payment of the same against the person liable for the same on behalf of the
City in the appropriate court of the state of Ohio or of any other state or of
the United States.
(Ord. No. 518-91. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 6-20-91)
§ 199.12 General Powers of the Commissioner
   In addition to all other powers granted to the Commissioner in this chapter,
the Commissioner is hereby authorized and empowered:
   (a)   To make, adopt and amend rules and regulations appropriate to the
carrying out of this chapter and the purposes thereof, and to prescribe the
form of blanks, reports and other records relating to the enforcement and
administration of this chapter;
   (b)   To extend, for cause shown, the time for filing any return for a
period not exceeding sixty (60) days;
   (c)   To delegate the Commissioner’s functions hereunder to any employee or
employees of the Division; and
   (d)   To assess, reassess, determine, revise and readjust the taxes imposed
under this chapter.
(Ord. No. 518-91. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 6-20-91)
§ 199.13 Interest and Penalties
   (a)   Interest on Underpayments. If any amount of tax is not paid on or
before the last date prescribed for payment (without regard to any extension of
time granted for payment), interest on such amount at the rate of one and one-
half percent (1.5%) per month, shall be paid for the period from such last date
to the date of payment. In computing the amount of interest to be paid, such
interest shall be compounded daily. Interest under this division shall not be
paid if the amount thereof is less than one dollar ($1.00).
   (b)   (1)   Failure to File Return.
         A.   In case of failure to file a return under this chapter on or
before the prescribed date (determined with regard to any extension of time for
filing), unless it is shown that such failure is due to reasonable cause and
not due to willful neglect, there shall be added to the amount required to be
shown as tax on such return five percent (5%) of the amount of such tax if the
failure is for not more than one (1) month, with an additional five percent
(5%) for each additional month or fraction thereof during which such failure
continues, not exceeding twenty-five percent (25%) in the aggregate.
         B.   In the case of a failure to file a return of tax within sixty
(60) days of the date prescribed for filing of such return (determined with
regard to any extension of time for filing), unless it is shown that such
failure is due to reasonable cause and not due to willful neglect, the addition
to tax under division (b)(1)A. of this section shall not be less than the
lesser of one hundred dollars ($100.00) or one hundred percent (100%) of the
amount required to be shown as tax on such return.
         C.   For the purposes of this division (b)(1), the amount of tax
required to be shown on the return shall be reduced by the amount of any part
of the tax which is paid on or before the date prescribed for payment of the
tax and by the amount of any credit against the tax which may be claimed upon
the return.
      (2)   Failure to Pay Tax Shown on Return. In case of failure to pay the
amount shown as tax on a return required to be filed under this chapter on or
before the prescribed date (determined with regard to any extension of time for
payment), unless it is shown that such failure is due to reasonable cause and
not due to a willful neglect, there shall be added to the amount shown as tax
on such return one-half of one percent (0.5%) of the amount of such tax if the
failure is not for more than one (1) month, with an additional one-half of one
percent (0.5%) for each additional month or fraction thereof during which such
failure continues. For the purpose of computing the additions for any month the
amount of tax shown on the return shall be reduced by the amount of any part of
the tax which is paid on or before the beginning of such month and by the
amount of any credit against the tax which may be claimed upon the return. If
the amount of tax required to be shown on a return is less than the amount
shown as tax on such return, this division (b)(2) shall be applied by
substituting such lower amount.
      (3)   Failure to Pay Tax Required to Be Shown on Return. In case of
failure to pay any amount in respect of any tax required to be shown on a
return required to be filed under this chapter which is not so shown (including
a determination made pursuant to Section
199.08 of this chapter) within ten (10) days of the date of a notice and demand
therefor, unless it is shown that such failure is due to reasonable cause and
not due to willful neglect, there shall be added to the amount of tax stated in
such notice and demand one- half of one percent (0.5%) of such tax if the
failure is not for more than one (1) month, with an additional one-half of one
percent (0.5%) for each additional month or fraction thereof during which such
failure continues. For the purpose of computing the addition for any month, the
amount of tax stated in the notice and demand shall be reduced by the amount of
any part of the tax which is paid before the beginning of such month.
      (4)   Limitations on Additions.
         A.   With respect to any return, the amount of the addition under
division (b)(1) of this section shall be reduced by the amount of the addition
under division (b)(2) of this section for any month to which an addition
applies under both division (b)(1) and (b)(2). In any case described in
division (b)(1)B. of this section, the amount of the addition under such
division (b)(1) shall not be reduced below the amount provided in such division
(b)(1)B.
         B.   With respect to any return, the maximum amount of the addition
permitted under division (b)(3) of this section shall be reduced by the amount
of the addition under division (b)(2) of this section (determined without
regard to division (b)(1)B.) which is attributable to the tax for which the
notice and demand is made and which is not paid within ten (10) days of such
notice and demand.
   (c)   Underpayment Due to Negligence. If any part of an underpayment of tax
is due to negligence or intentional disregard of this chapter or any rules or
regulations hereunder (but without intent to defraud), there shall be added to
the tax a penalty equal to five percent (5%) of the underpayment.
   (d)   Underpayment Due to Fraud. If any part of an underpayment of tax is
due to fraud, there shall be added to the tax a penalty equal to fifty percent
(50%) of the underpayment.
   (e)   The interest and penalties imposed by this section shall be paid and
disposed of in the same manner as other revenues from this chapter. Unpaid
interest and penalties may be enforced in the same manner as the tax imposed by
this chapter.
(Ord. No. 518-91. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 6-20-91)
§ 199.14 Returns to be Secret
   Except in accordance with proper judicial order, or as otherwise provided by
law, it shall be unlawful for the Commissioner or any officer or employee of
the City to divulge or make known in any manner any information relating to the
business of a taxpayer contained in any return required under this chapter. The
officers charged with the custody of such returns shall not be required to
produce any of them or evidence of anything contained in them in any action or
proceeding in any court, except on behalf of the Commissioner in an action or
proceeding under the provisions of this chapter, or on behalf of any party to
any action or proceeding under the provisions of this chapter when the returns
or facts shown thereby are directly involved in such action or proceeding, in
either of which events the court may require the production of, and may admit
in evidence so much of said returns or of facts shown thereby, as are pertinent
to the action or proceeding and no more. Nothing herein shall be construed to
prohibit the delivery to a taxpayer or the taxpayer’s duly authorized
representative of a certified copy of any return filed in connection with his
or her tax nor to prohibit the publication of statistics so classified as to
prevent the identification of particular returns and the items thereof, or the
inspection by the Director of Law or other legal representatives of the City,
of the return of any taxpayer who shall bring action to set aside or review the
tax based thereon, or against whom an action or proceeding under this chapter
may be instituted. Returns shall be preserved for three (3) years and
thereafter until the Commissioner permits them to be destroyed.
(Ord. No. 518-91. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 6-20-91)
§ 199.15 Notices and Limitations of Time
   Any notice authorized or required under the provisions of this chapter may
be given by mailing the same to the person for whom it is intended in a
postpaid envelope addressed to such person at the address given in the last
return filed by such person pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or in
any application made by such person, or, if no return has been filed or
application made, then to such address as may be obtainable. The mailing of
such notice shall be presumptive evidence of the receipt of the same by the
person to whom addressed. Any period of time which is determined according to
the provisions of this chapter by the giving of notice shall commence to run
from the date of mailing of such notice.
(Ord. No. 518-91. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 6-20-91)
§ 199.16 Disposition of Revenues
   All revenues resulting from the imposition of the tax under this chapter
shall be paid into the treasury of the City and shall be credited to and
deposited in the general fund of the City.
(Ord. No. 518-91. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 6-20-91)
§ 199.99 Penalty
   (a)   Whoever, being a person charged by this chapter with the duty of
paying the taxes imposed by this chapter, willfully fails or refuses to charge
and collect or to pay such taxes, or to make return to the Commissioner as
required by this chapter, or to permit the Commissioner or his or her duly
authorized agent, to examine his or her books and other records in or upon any
premises where the same are kept, to the extent necessary to verify any return
made or to ascertain and assess the tax imposed by this chapter if no return
was made, or to maintain and keep such returns and records for three (3) years
or such lesser or greater time as may be permitted or required by the
Commissioner, shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor
more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), and for a second or other subsequent
offense shall, if a corporation, be fined not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or, if an individual or
member of a partnership, firm or association, be fined not less than twenty-
five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or imprisoned
not more than sixty (60) days, or both.
   (b)   Whoever violates Section
199.14 shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or
imprisoned not more than thirty (30) days, or both, for each violation, and
shall thereafter be disqualified from acting in any official capacity in
connection with the assessment or collection of taxes under this chapter.
(Ord. No. 518-91. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 6-20-91)
PART TWO: HEALTH CODE
Title I: Nuisances and General Provisions
   Chapter
201   Enforcement and Penalty
   Chapter
203   Nuisance Abatement
   Chapter
204   Nuclear Materials
   Chapter
205   Animals and Fowl
   Chapter
207   Marinas
   Chapter
209   Property Nuisance
   Chapter
211   Vermin and Rodent Infestation
   Chapter
213   Swimming Pools, Spas and Special Use Pools
   Chapter
215   Transient Residential Buildings
   Chapter
217   Trailer Parks
   Chapter
219   Pest Control Operators
   Chapter
221   Food Rendering Establishments
   Chapter
223   Public Laundries
   Chapter
225   Barber Shops, Body Piercing, and Tattooing Establishments
   Chapter
227   Day Care Centers
   Chapter
229   Nursing and Rest Homes
   Chapter
231   Abortions
   Chapter
233   Deaths
   Chapter
234   Construction and Demolition Debris Facility Tipping Fees
   Chapter
235   Smoking Ban – City Property
   Chapter
235A   Tobacco Product Sales Licensing
   Chapter
236   Requirements to Implement Dine Safe Ohio Order
   Chapter
237   Adult Video Arcades and Adult Live Entertainment Arcades
   Chapter
238   Sanitization after COVID-19 Positive Employee
   Chapter
239   Posting of Signs Warning Against Consuming Alcoholic Beverages During
Pregnancy
   Chapter
240   Lead Hazards
Title III: Food and Food Products
   Chapter
241   Food Shops
   Chapter
243   Ohio Uniform Food Safety Code
   Chapter
245   Frozen Desserts
Title V: Air Pollution Control
   Chapter
251   Definitions
   Chapter
253   Ambient Air Quality Standards
   Chapter
255   Administrative
   Chapter
257   Installation and Modification Permits
   Chapter
259   Operation Permits and Variances
   Chapter
261   Exemptions
   Chapter
263   Fees
   Chapter
265   Visible Air Contaminant Limitations
   Chapter
267   Odors
   Chapter
269   Particulate Limitations
   Chapter
271   Sulfur Compounds Limitations
   Chapter
273   Hydrocarbon Limitations
   Chapter
275   Carbon Monoxide Limitations
   Chapter
277   Miscellaneous Limitations
   Chapter
279   Procedures and Other Requirements
   Chapter
281   Hazardous Air Pollutants
   Chapter
283   Emergency Episodes
   Chapter
285   Testing and Monitoring Equipment
   Chapter
287   Penalties
   Chapter
289   Constitutionality
   Chapter
291   Advisory Committee
   Appendices A, B, C, D
TITLE I: NUISANCES AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
201   Enforcement and Penalty
   Chapter
203   Nuisance Abatement
   Chapter
204   Nuclear Materials
   Chapter
205   Animals and Fowl
   Chapter
207   Marinas
   Chapter
209   Property Nuisance
   Chapter
211   Vermin and Rodent Infestation
   Chapter
213   Swimming Pools, Spas and Special Use Pools
   Chapter
215   Transient Residential Buildings
   Chapter
217   Trailer Parks
   Chapter
219   Pest Control Operators
   Chapter
221   Food Rendering Establishments
   Chapter
223   Public Laundries
   Chapter
225   Barber Shops, Body Piercing, and Tattooing Establishments
   Chapter
227   Day Care Centers
   Chapter
229   Nursing and Rest Homes
   Chapter
231   Abortions
   Chapter
233   Deaths
   Chapter
234   Construction and Demolition Debris Facility Tipping Fees
   Chapter
235   Smoking Ban – City Property
   Chapter
235A   Tobacco Product Sales Licensing
   Chapter
236   Requirements to Implement Dine Safe Ohio Order
   Chapter
237   Adult Video Arcades and Adult Live Entertainment Arcades
   Chapter
238   Sanitization after COVID-19 Positive Employee
   Chapter
239   Posting of Signs Warning Against Consuming Alcoholic Beverages During
Pregnancy
   Chapter
240   Lead Hazards
CHAPTER 201 – ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY
201.01   Enforcement and Inspections; Right of Entry
201.02   License Suspension or Revocation
201.03   Appeal
201.04   Civil Tickets
201.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Appeals from Air Pollution Code decisions, CO
255.03
   Bureau of Environmental Health, CO
141.20
   Investigations of nuisances, CO
203.01
§ 201.01 Enforcement and Inspections; Right of Entry
   The Commissioner of Environmental Health and any officer or employee
designated for that purpose by the enforcement of this Health Code, and any
such person shall have the right upon presentation of proper credentials to
enter and inspect any building or premises for enforcement purposes at all
reasonable times, or at such times as may be necessary in an existing
emergency. No person shall refuse, obstruct or delay any inspection or fail to
answer all reasonable questions relative to the purpose of the inspection.
(Ord. No. 511-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
§ 201.02 License Suspension or Revocation
   Except as otherwise provided for, the Commissioner of Licenses and
Assessments shall suspend or revoke any permit or license issued pursuant to
this Health Code, upon the recommendation and order of the Commissioner of
Environmental Health for violation or failure to comply with any State statute,
City ordinance or regulation applicable to the conduct or maintenance of the
operation, business or premises for which the permit or license is issued, or
when material information in the application is found to be false or
misleading.
(Ord. No. 511-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
§ 201.03 Appeal
   Except as otherwise provided, any person may appeal the denial, suspension
or revocation of any permit or license issued pursuant to this Health Code to
the Board of Zoning Appeals, established pursuant to Charter section
76-6, provided that written appeal is filed with the Board Secretary within ten
(10) days of the date the decision being appealed was made. The Board shall
conduct a hearing and render a decision in accord with City ordinances and
regulations governing its conduct and procedure.
(Ord. No. 511-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
§ 201.04 Civil Tickets
   Any city officer or employee authorized to enforce the City’s Health Code
may also enforce Chapter
3104 and issue a notice of civil offense and civil fine under the procedures in
that Chapter.
(Ord. No. 1039-2023. Passed 2-5-24, eff. 2-6-24)
§ 201.99 Penalty
   (a)   Whoever fails to comply with a written order issued under this Health
Code is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day of noncompliance
shall constitute a separate offense. Whoever violates any provision of this
Health Code, where another penalty is not otherwise provided, is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor on a first offense and shall be fined not more than one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00); on a second or subsequent offense, such person
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not more than
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisoned not more than six (6) months, or
both. Each day of a continuing violation or non-compliance constitutes a
separate offense.
   (b)   Whoever violates Sections
203.07,
203.08,
205.02,
209.01,
209.02(a),
211.01 or
211.02 shall be fined not more than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). In
addition to any other method of enforcement provided for in this chapter, the
above listed minor misdemeanors may be enforced by the issuance of a citation
in compliance with Rule 4.1 of the Ohio Rules of Criminal Procedure.
(Ord. No. 1039-2023. Passed 2-5-24, eff. 2-6-24)
CHAPTER 203 – NUISANCE ABATEMENT
203.01   Investigations; Remedial Measures
203.02   Notice to Abate; Exception
203.03   Compliance; Abatement by City; Costs a Lien
203.04   Destruction of Unsanitary Articles
203.05   Other Legal or Equitable Relief
203.06   Lot Drainage; Stagnant Water
203.07   Accumulations of Garbage, Refuse and Waste
203.08   Parking Waste Collection Vehicles
203.09   Heating Business Buildings
203.10   Illegal Distribution of Cigarettes
203.11   Nuisance Operations, Structures, Real Property or Vehicles
Cross-reference:
   Cleanliness and ventilation of public laundries, CO
223.05
   Drifting debris prohibited on City waters, CO
483.03
   Food shop sanitation, CO
241.08
   Nuisances in City waters; abatement, CO
483.05
   Right of entry to enforce Health Code, CO
201.01
   Sanitary rules and regulations for barber shops, CO
225.06
   Sanitation of day nurseries, CO
227.15,
227.23
   Vacant lot nuisances, CO
209.02
Statutory reference:
   Powers of Board of Health to abate nuisances, RC 3707.01 et seq.
   Prohibitions against nuisances, RC 3767.13 et seq.
§ 203.01 Investigations; Remedial Measures
   The Commissioner of Environmental Health or any authorized City officer or
employee, upon complaint or information of the existence of any condition or
thing which amounts to a nuisance which may affect or endanger the life, health
or senses of the inhabitants of the City, shall investigate and take such
measures as may be necessary to cause the abatement of any nuisance found to
exist, by or at the expense of the person in charge or responsible therefor, or
otherwise if circumstances so require.
   A condition amounts to a nuisance whenever any provisions identified in this
Chapter or in Chapter
630 has been violated and the real property, structure, or vehicle identified
with the violation is not corrected or is corrected but recurs and/or continues
as a recurrent problem.
   The “person responsible” includes any individual, firm, corporation,
association, partnership, agent, operator, trust, estate, syndicate,
cooperative, or any entity recognized by law: (i) in charge or in control of
the land, a structure, or a chattel where there is a public nuisance; (ii)
responsible for the creation, existence, commission, and/or maintenance of a
condition or action in violation of the provisions identified in this Chapter
or in Chapter
630; (iii) who causes an action that adversely affects the health, safety, or
welfare of any person; or (iv) responsible for the creation, existence,
commission, and/or maintenance of a condition or activity lacking a required or
necessary permit or license.
(Ord. No. 633-2025. Passed 8-13-25, eff. 8-18-25)
§ 203.02 Notice to Abate; Exception
   (a)   Whenever the Commissioner of Environment or any authorized City
officer or employee ascertains, either upon information or by observation or
inspection, that any condition amounting to a nuisance or defined by law or
ordinance as a nuisance exists on any premises, which nuisance affects or
endangers the public health, either of them shall, in writing, notify the owner
or the person responsible requiring the abatement or removal of the nuisance
within a reasonable time, unless no such owner or person responsible can be
found, or unless the circumstances are such, in their opinion, as to require
the immediate abatement or removal of the nuisance, without waiting to give
notification.
   In the case of a vacant lot or a lot on which the main building or structure
is vacant, either of which lot contains a nuisance as described in Section
209.01, the procedures outlined in Chapter
209 may be followed. In case of a nuisance as described in Section
209.01, the abatement shall last for the remainder of the growing season.
   (b)   A notice of violation under this Section
203.02 shall be served by one (1) or more of the following methods.
      (1)   Personal service. The City department issuing the notice may use
any method that causes the Notice of Violations to be actually delivered to the
owner or the person responsible. Actual delivery shall constitute legal service
of the Notice of Violations.
      (2)   Residence service at the address of the owner or the person
responsible by leaving a copy of the notice of violation with a person of
suitable age and discretion then residing therein.
      (3)   Certified mail to an address where it is reasonably calculated
under the circumstances to reach the owner or the person responsible. When
determining such an address, the City shall examine:
         A.   Information the owner or person responsible provided to the City,
such as rental registration information or the address used on an appeal or an
application; or
         B.   Information that a City representative, such as an inspector, has
discovered during the performance of their duties; or
         C.   Information from common and readily available sources such as
printed or online directories, credit bureaus, county property records, board
of election records, motor vehicle records, court records or other state,
county, municipal or federal records.
      (4)   Regular mail and posting as follows:
         A.   Regular mail to the owner or the person responsible, at an
address found under division (b)(3) above, which may be the address of the
property that is the subject of the violation; and
         B.   Regular mail service to the property address that is the subject
of the violation notice, if that address is different from the address in
division (b)(4)A. above; and
         C.   Posting of the notice of violation in a conspicuous location on
the building, premises or real estate or appurtenance thereto that is the
subject of the violation notice.
      (5)   Service by publication electronically or once in a newspaper of
general circulation in the City.
   The City is not required to use all of these methods and is not required to
use any one of them; the City must use whatever combination of them is
reasonably expected to be successful. The address found can be the property or
premises which is the subject of the violation.
(Ord. No. 633-2025. Passed 8-13-25, eff. 8-18-25)
§ 203.03 Compliance; Abatement by City; Costs a Lien
   (a)   No person shall fail or refuse to comply with any provision of this
Health Code or fail to comply with any lawful order issued under this Health
Code.
   (b)   In addition to any penalty for a violation of this Health Code, the
Commissioner or any authorized City officer or employee may, by their
authorized representatives, remove, abate, suspend, alter or otherwise improve
or purify such nuisance and certify, as allowed by law, the costs and expense
thereof to the County Auditor, to be assessed against the property and thereby
made a lien upon it and collected as other taxes.
(Ord. No. 1039-2023. Passed 2-5-24, eff. 2-6-24)
§ 203.04 Destruction of Unsanitary Articles
   The Commissioner of Environmental Health may, with the consent of the
Director of Public Health and Welfare and the Director of Law, order any
furniture, clothing or other property to be destroyed, removed or disinfected,
whenever he or she deems it necessary for the health of the City.
(Ord. No. 511-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
§ 203.05 Other Legal or Equitable Relief
   Notwithstanding any notice provision in Section
203.02 above, in the event of any actual or threatened violation of this
Chapter or in Chapter
630 or an emergency situation, the Director of Law, in addition to other
remedies provided by law, may institute proper suit in equity or at law to
prevent or terminate such violation or remedy such situation. In addition to
other remedies provided by this Chapter, the Director of Law may bring or cause
to be brought a civil action and recover costs, damages, equitable relief,
attorneys’ fees and any available civil penalties.
(Ord. No. 633-2025. Passed 8-13-25, eff. 8-18-25)
§ 203.06 Lot Drainage; Stagnant Water
   (a)   Every person owning or having possession, charge or control of any
cellar, excavation, yard, court, lot or area where water stands or accumulates
shall drain the same or cause the same to be drained. Whenever the premises
containing such cellar, excavation, yard, court, lot or area abuts upon a
street containing a public sewer, such water shall be conducted into such
sewer. Nothing herein shall prevent the construction or maintenance of a pool
or fountain if such is constructed and provided with drainage in accordance
with law, and if the water in such pool or fountain does not become stagnant.
   (b)   No person shall allow any water from any well, spring, fire plug,
hydrant or other place over which he or she has control, to run so that it
forms a stagnant pool or mud hole, on his or her premises or on land under his
or her control, or in any street or other public grounds or abutting lands.
(Ord. No. 511-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
§ 203.07 Accumulations of Garbage, Refuse and Waste
   The owner, occupant or person in charge of any property within the City
shall maintain such property free from any accumulation of garbage, rubbish,
refuse or other waste which is not confined in approved receptacles for
collection or so as to prevent rodent infestation. The permitting of any
premises within the City to be littered with garbage, rubbish, refuse or other
waste is hereby declared to be a nuisance and unlawful.
(Ord. No. 511-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
§ 203.08 Parking Waste Collection Vehicles
   No person shall park a truck or motor vehicle whether loaded or unloaded,
which is used for the collection and transportation of garbage, trash, rubbish
or the contents of private sewage tanks, on any public street, alley or other
public place except for loading purposes or emergency repairs.
(Ord. No. 511-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
§ 203.09 Heating Business Buildings
   (a)   Every person who has contracted or undertaken, or is bound to heat or
to furnish heat for any building or portion thereof, occupied as a business
establishment where one (1) or more persons are employed, shall heat or furnish
heat for every occupied room in such building or portion thereof, so that a
minimum temperature of seventy degrees Fahrenheit (70°F) may be maintained
therein at all occupied times.
   (b)   Whenever a building is heated by means of a furnace, boiler or other
apparatus under the control of the owner, agent or lessee of such building,
such owner, agent or lessee, in the absence of a written or verbal contract or
agreement to the contrary, shall be deemed to have contracted, undertaken or
bound himself or herself to furnish heat in accordance with the provisions of
this section.
   (c)   As used in this section, “at all occupied times” means all times at
which a building or a portion thereof is occupied during the usual working
hours established or maintained for such business establishment, of each day
whenever the outer or street temperature falls below fifty degrees Fahrenheit
(50°F).
   (d)   Nothing herein shall apply to buildings or portions thereof, used and
occupied by trades, business or occupations where high or low temperatures are
essential and unavoidable.
(Ord. No. 511-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
§ 203.10 Illegal Distribution of Cigarettes
   The sale or distribution of cigarettes and other tobacco products in a
smaller quantity than that placed in the pack or other container by the
manufacturer is hereby declared to be a nuisance which affects and endangers
the public health. The Commissioner of Environmental Health or any authorized
City officer or employee who, upon information or by observation ascertains a
violation of this section, may impose the penalties set forth in this chapter
and in Section
201.99. Enforcement of this section is in addition to any other method of
enforcement provided in these Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 1512-10. Passed 12-6-10, eff. 12-6-10)
§ 203.11 Nuisance Operations, Structures, Real Property or Vehicles
   The permitting of any operation, structure, real property or vehicle to be
or remain in the following conditions is declared a nuisance:
   (a)   Operations, structures, real properties or vehicles that are in
dilapidated, decayed, unsafe or unsanitary conditions that are detrimental to
the public health, safety, welfare or well-being;
   (b)   Operations, structures, real properties or vehicles that are a fire
hazard;
   (c)   Any building that is or should be condemned as unfit for human
habitation in violation of or pursuant to Section
369.21 of the Housing Code;
   (d)   Land, real estate, houses, buildings, residences, apartments, or
premises of any kind which are used for the commission of a felony drug abuse
offense in violation of RC 2925.13; or
   (e)   Any operation, structure, real property or vehicle that is not in
compliance with any building, housing, zoning, fire, safety, air pollution,
health or sanitation ordinance or provision of the Codified Ordinances of
Cleveland, Ohio, 1976, the Ohio Administrative Code and/or the Ohio Revised
Code.
(Ord. No. 633-2025. Passed 8-13-25, eff. 8-18-25)
CHAPTER 204 – NUCLEAR MATERIALS
204.01   Definitions
204.02   Storing Nuclear Materials in or Under Lake Erie
204.03   Feasibility Tests
204.04   Nuisance Abatement
204.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Notice to State and local officials prior to shipments of nuclear materials
into or through Ohio, RC 4163.01, 4163.07, 4163.99
§ 204.01 Definitions
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   “Byproduct material” means any radioactive material (except special
nuclear material) yielded in or made radioactive by exposure to the process of
producing or utilizing special nuclear material.
   (b)   “Special nuclear material” means (1) plutonium, uranium 233, uranium
enriched in the isotope 233 or in the isotope 235 and any other material which
the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, pursuant to law, determines to be special
nuclear material. “Special nuclear material” does not include source material.
   (c)   “Spent fuel” means irradiated nuclear fuel that has undergone at least
one (1) year’s decay since being used as a source of energy in a power reactor.
“Spent fuel” includes special nuclear fuel material, byproduct material, source
material and other radioactive material associated with fuel assemblies.
(Ord. No. 394-82. Passed 2-22-82, eff. 2-25-82)
§ 204.02 Storing Nuclear Materials in or Under Lake Erie
   (a)   No person shall store or dispose of any byproduct material, special
nuclear material or spent fuel, in, on or under the lake bed of Lake Erie lying
within the prolongation of the boundaries of the City.
   (b)   No person shall ship or transport any byproduct material, special
nuclear material or spent fuel into or within the City for the purpose of
storing or disposing of the same in, on or under the lake bed of Lake Erie.
(Ord. No. 394-82. Passed 2-22-82, eff. 2-25-82)
§ 204.03 Feasibility Tests
   No person shall conduct any test or demonstration project, with or without
using any byproduct material, special nuclear material or spent fuel, which
test or demonstration project is intended to or conducted to determine the
feasibility of storing or disposing of such materials in, on or under the lake
bed of Lake Erie lying within the prolongation of the boundaries of the City.
(Ord. No. 394-82. Passed 2-22-82, eff. 2-25-82)
§ 204.04 Nuisance Abatement
   Any violation of Section
204.02 or
204.03 shall constitute a nuisance within the meaning of Chapter
203, and the Commissioner of Environmental Health is hereby charged with the
duty of taking immediate steps to abate such nuisance.
(Ord. No. 394-82. Passed 2-22-82, eff. 2-25-82)
§ 204.99 Penalty
   Whoever violates Section
204.02 or
204.03 is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not
more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisoned not more than one (1)
year, or both, for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. No. 394-82. Passed 2-22-82, eff. 2-25-82)
CHAPTER 205 – ANIMALS AND FOWL
205.01   Animal Bites; Report and Quarantine
205.02   Nuisance Conditions
205.03   Regulation of Carrier Pigeons; Fee
205.04   Restrictions on the Keeping of Farm Animals and Bees
Cross-reference:
   Dog nuisances, CO
603.04
Statutory reference:
   Owner or keeper liable for damages, RC 951.10
§ 205.01 Animal Bites; Report and Quarantine
   Whenever any person is bitten by a dog or other animal, report of such bite
shall be made to the Commissioner of Environmental Health within twenty-four
(24) hours. At the direction of the Commissioner, the dog or other animal shall
either be confined by its owner or harborer to his or her premises away from
the public at large, or be placed under supervision of a veterinarian at the
owner’s or harborer’s expense. The isolation or observation period shall not be
less than ten (10) days from the date the person was bitten, at which time
report of the condition of the animal shall be made to the Commissioner.
   No person shall fail to comply with the requirements of this section or with
any order of the Commissioner made pursuant thereto, nor fail to immediately
report to the Commissioner any symptom or behavior suggestive of rabies.
(Ord. No. 511-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
§ 205.02 Nuisance Conditions
   No person shall keep or harbor any animal or fowl in the City so as to
create noxious or offensive odors or unsanitary conditions which are a menace
to the health, comfort or safety of the public.
(Ord. No. 511-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
§ 205.03 Regulation of Carrier Pigeons; Fee
   (a)   As used in this section “carrier pigeons” include homing and racing
pigeons and shall be limited to pigeons which have the name of the owner
stamped upon the wing or tail or banded on the leg with the name or initials of
the owner, or with an identification or registration number stamped on the
band.
   (b)   When a permit has been issued by the Commissioner of Environmental
Health or his or her authorized representative, the owner or person in charge
or possession of not more than twenty-five (25) pairs of carrier pigeons shall
be allowed to fly the pigeons for necessary exercise and training under the
restraint and control of the owner or other person.
   (c)   Permits for carrier pigeons shall be issued only on compliance with
the following requirements:
      (1)   The identification mark or marks to be stamped on each pigeon or
band shall be recorded with the Commissioner;
      (2)   Upon inspection, the structure in which the pigeons are housed is
found to be in compliance with regulations prescribed by the Commissioner and
is maintained in a clean, sanitary condition and in good repair; and
      (3)   The payment of an annual inspection fee of thirty dollars ($30.00).
   (d)   The keeping of carrier pigeons under a City permit shall not
constitute a violation of permitting fowl at large within the City.
   (e)   The requirements of the zoning regulations relating to restrictions on
location of stables and poultry enclosures shall not apply to the structure in
which carrier pigeons are housed, when a permit has been issued as provided in
this section.
(Ord. No. 2393-02. Passed 2-3-03, eff. 2-3-03)
§ 205.04 Restrictions on the Keeping of Farm Animals and Bees
   Anyone proposing to keep farm animals or bees on a property in the City of
Cleveland shall apply for a two (2) year license from the City of Cleveland
through its Department of Public Health on a form provided by that office, with
payment of a fee set by the Board of Control.
   (a)   Application Contents. The application for such license shall include,
at a minimum, the following information.
      (1)   The name, phone, phone number and address of the applicant;
      (2)   The location of the subject property;
      (3)   The size of the property;
      (4)   The number of animals or bee hives to be kept on the property;
      (5)   A description of any proposed cages, coops, beehives, fences or
enclosures;
      (6)   A scaled drawing showing the precise location of cages, coops,
enclosures, beehives, stables and fences in relation to property lines and to
houses on adjacent properties;
      (7)   A description of the manner by which feces and other waste
materials will be removed from the property or will be treated so as not to
result in unsanitary conditions or in the attraction of insects or rodents;
      (8)   In the case of a lot that is vacant or has no occupied residence,
documentation demonstrating that the use will be managed in a manner that
prevents the creation of nuisances or unsanitary or unsafe conditions;
      (9)   A signed statement from the property owner, if the applicant is not
the property owner, granting the applicant permission to engage in the keeping
of farm animals or bees as described in the registration; and
      (10)   The addresses of all properties directly adjoining the subject
property.
   (b)   License Approval. The Director of Public Health shall take action on a
license application for the keeping of farm animals or bees in accordance with
the following provisions:
      (1)   Approval Standards. In evaluating an application for an initial
license or a license renewal, the Public Health Director shall consider any
evidence ascertained through inspections of the property or through the
submission of evidence regarding nuisances or conditions that are unsafe or
unsanitary relative to the subject property and, in particular, any recorded
violations. The Director of Public Health may deny a license on consideration
of such evidence.
      (2)   Notification in Residential Districts. Upon receipt of an initial
license application for a property located in a Residential zoning district,
the Department of Public Health shall send a copy of the license application,
along with a comment form, to the owner of each property directly adjoining the
property that is the subject of the license application. A copy of these
notifications shall be transmitted to the City Councilmember in whose ward the
subject property is located. In reviewing the license application, the Director
shall consider any evidence submitted by neighbors regarding issues pertinent
to the regulations and approval standards for issuance of the license. The
Director shall not take action on such license application prior to twenty-one
(21) days from the date on which the notice was mailed to the owners of
adjoining properties.
      (3)   Building and Housing Approval. The Public Health Director shall not
approve any initial license application for the keeping of farm animals or bees
prior to approval of the site plan by the Department of Building and Housing in
accordance with the provisions of Section
347.02 of the Zoning Code.
   (c)   License Expiration. Such license shall expire at the end of a calendar
year and shall be renewed once every two (2) years during November or December
before the end of the calendar year. The application for renewal of a license
need not include drawings and other information regarding conditions that have
not changed since submission of such information in a prior license
application.
   (d)   Lots Without a Residence. In the case of an application to keep farm
animals or bees on a lot that is vacant or has no occupied residence, a License
shall be granted only if the applicant submits written documentation
satisfactory to the Public Health Director demonstrating that the use will be
managed in a manner that prevents the creation of nuisances or unsanitary or
unsafe conditions. Where the applicant is not the property owner, a license
shall be granted only where the application is accompanied by a signed
statement from the property owner granting the applicant permission to engage
in the keeping of farm animals or bees.
   (e)   Enforcement. The Director of the Department of Public Health or any
authorized City employee shall have the authority to inspect any property to
determine compliance with the regulations of Section
347.02 of the Zoning Code regarding sanitation and nuisances and operational
practices in the keeping of farm animals or bees and shall have the authority
to enforce the regulations of that Section as they apply to such matters.
   (f)   Penalties. If the Director of Public Health determines that an
individual is in violation of the provisions of this section or Section
347.02 with respect to the enforcement responsibilities of the Department of
Public Health, the Director shall issue a violation notice to the individual,
noting the nature of the violation(s). If the violation is not corrected within
seven (7) days of issuance of the violation notice, the recipient of the notice
shall be subject to the following penalties and enforcement actions.
      (1)   For a first offense, a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00);
      (2)   For a second offense occurring within four (4) months of the first
offense, a fine of seventy- five dollars ($75.00);
      (3)   For a third and any subsequent offense occurring within the period
of the current two (2) year license, any farm animals or bee hives associated
with the violation shall be removed from the property by the individual or
shall be removed and impounded by the Department of Public Health.
(Ord. No. 1562-08. Passed 2-2-09, eff. 2-5-09)
CHAPTER 207 – MARINAS
207.01   License and Fee
Statutory reference:
   Marinas, RC 3733.21 et seq.
§ 207.01 License and Fee
   (a)   Each owner, operator or other responsible person before beginning and
during operation of a marina shall make an application for and receive approval
of a license under the requirements of RC 3733.24 to the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses.
   (b)   Each application for a marina license shall be accompanied by a
license fee according to the following schedule:
 
Number of Docks or Moorings Fee
7 - 24                      $122.00
25 - 59                     $167.00
60 - 149                    $192.00
150 - 299                   $262.00
300 - 499                   $314.00
500 or more                 $377.00
 
   (c)   The Commissioner shall submit all applications for a license required
under RC Chapter 3733 to the Director of Public Health for approval or
disapproval of the application.
   (d)   The Commissioner is authorized to collect license fees and deposit the
fees into the Marina Fund created under RC 3733.25.
   (e)   The Commissioner shall transmit the appropriate amount of each license
fee collected under this section to the Director of Health for the State of
Ohio for deposit in the General Operations Fund created by RC 3701.83, under
the requirements of RC Section 3733.25.
(Ord. No. 2393-02. Passed 2-3-03, eff. 2-3-03)
CHAPTER 209 – PROPERTY NUISANCE
209.01   Nuisance Plants, Refuse, and Surface Water
209.02   Notice Regarding Care of Vacant Lots and Lots with Vacant Building
209.03   Powers of the Commissioner Regarding Vacant Lots
209.04   Powers of the Commissioner Regarding All Other Property
209.05   Costs of Abatement; Liens on Property
209.06   Appeals
209.99   Enforcement; Penalties
Cross-reference:
   Destruction of unsanitary articles, CO
203.04
   Garbage, refuse and waste accumulations, CO
203.07
   Litter on vacant lands, CO
613.15
   Lot drainage; stagnant water, CO
203.06
Statutory reference:
   Destruction of weeds, RC 971.33 et seq.
   Notice to cut noxious weeds or remove litter, RC 731.51 et seq.
§ 209.01 Nuisance Plants, Refuse, and Surface Water
   (a)   The following conditions provide harborage and breeding grounds for
pests or are otherwise conducive to the creation of human health problems, and
are therefore declared to be nuisances which shall be removed or abated from
any property on which they are found:
      (1)   Grass over eight (8) inches in height;
      (2)   Noxious weeds including Russian, Canadian, common, or musk thistle;
shatter cane; Johnsongrass; wild lettuce; wild mustard; wild parsley; wild
parsnip; wild carrot; giant hogweed; ragweed; wild plants that can cause skin
reaction upon contact or produce or aggravate hay fever, asthma, allergic
respiratory reaction, or similar conditions; and all other noxious weeds,
including those listed as prohibited noxious weeds in OAC 901:5-37-01, as it
may be amended;
      (3)   Refuse including trash, junk, garbage and food waste, offal, animal
wastes, tires, and all other waste materials;
      (4)   Stagnant surface water.
   (b)   The owner, operator, or person in possession or control of the
property shall remove or otherwise abate any nuisance described in this
section.
   (c)   The Director of Public Health or Commissioner of Environment may post
a seventy-two (72) hour notice to abate any nuisance under this section. If the
nuisance is not abated within seventy-two (72) hours, the Director of Public
Health or Commissioner of Environment may request that the Department of Public
Works immediately abate the nuisance without further notice, and bill the owner
for the costs of any abatement.
   (d)   If the nuisance for which the Director of Public Health or
Commissioner of Environment has posted a notice to abate is for the nuisance of
high grass, noxious weeds, or related overgrowth or brush, or if notice has
been posted for the same under Section
3103.09(b)(3), the Director of Public Health or Commissioner of Environment may
cause such nuisance to be abated or removed during the remainder of the growing
season without further posting of notice. Such notice may be appealed during
the remainder of the growing season under Section
209.06.
   (e)   Noxious weeds shall be abated by removal, by turning under the soil,
by destruction through the use of herbicides, or by any other means approved by
the Commissioner of Environment.
(Ord. No. 1039-2023. Passed 2-5-24, eff. 2-6-24)
§ 209.02 Notice Regarding Care of Vacant Lots and Lots with Vacant Building
   (a)   At least annually, the Commissioner of Environment shall cause a
notice to be mailed to the last known address of the owner of each vacant
parcel of land, or shall publish a notice in a newspaper of general
circulation, advising owners, operators, and persons in possession or control
of vacant parcels of the requirements of this chapter regarding the care of
property.
   (b)   The Commissioner of Environment may cause a notice to be mailed to the
last known address of the owner of each parcel of land on which the main
building or structure is vacant, or may publish a notice in a newspaper of
general circulation, advising owners, operators and persons in possession or
control of parcels of land on which the main building or structure is vacant,
of the requirements of this chapter regarding the care of the property. Vacant
means that no person actually and legally resides in any part of the building
or that no person conducts a lawful business in any part of the building.
   (c)   The notice shall describe each of the nuisances described in Section
209.01 and shall state that one (1) or more of the following may occur
beginning thirty (30) days after the notice is mailed or published:
      (1)   That, if any nuisances exist and are not removed or otherwise
abated, the Department of Parks and Recreation, or its designee, may take any
action necessary to abate the nuisance, and that the owner will be billed for
all costs of the abatement;
      (2)   That property nuisances may be ticketed and that the violation is a
minor misdemeanor;
      (3)   That other civil or criminal legal actions may be filed by the
Commissioner of Environment to enforce nuisance violations, without additional
notice.
   (d)   The above-described notice may be appealed to the Commissioner of
Environment.
(Ord. No. 318-06. Passed 3-20-06, eff. 3-24-06)
§ 209.03 Powers of the Commissioner Regarding Vacant Lots
   Upon the finding of any nuisance described in this chapter on a vacant
parcel of land, the Commissioner of Environment may do one (1) or more of the
following:
   (a)   If the nuisance presents an imminent threat to public health, request
that the Department of Parks and Recreation immediately abate the nuisance
without notice, and bill the owner for the costs of any abatement;
   (b)   If it is thirty (30) days after the notice described in Section
209.02 is mailed or published, request that the Department of Parks and
Recreation abate the nuisance without further notice, and bill the owner for
the costs of any abatement;
   (c)   Order the owner, operator, or person in possession or control of the
property to abate the nuisance, giving a time frame for compliance. If the
abatement does not occur within the stated time frame or if the action taken
does not completely abate the nuisance, the Commissioner may request the
Department of Parks and Recreation, or its designee, to abate the nuisance and
bill the owner for the costs of any abatement;
   (d)   Order the owner, operator, or person in possession or control of the
property to install and maintain fencing or another similar barrier, in such a
manner that the nuisance will be abated or will be kept from re-occurring;
   (e)   Issue a citation for the violation, under Rule 4.1 of the Ohio Rules
of Criminal Procedure;
   (f)   Pursue any civil or criminal legal actions that may be necessary for
the protection of the public health, safety, or welfare.
(Ord. No. 318-06. Passed 3-20-06, eff. 3-24-06)
§ 209.04 Powers of the Commissioner Regarding All Other Property
   Upon the finding of any nuisance described in this chapter on a parcel of
land that has a building or other structure on it, the Commissioner of
Environment may do one (1) or more of the following:
   (a)   If the nuisance represents an imminent threat to the public health,
request that the Department of Parks and Recreation immediately abate the
nuisance without notice, and bill the owner for the costs of any abatement;
   (b)   If it is thirty (30) days after the notice described in Section
209.02 is mailed or published, request that the Department of Parks and
Recreation abate the nuisance without further notice, and bill the owner for
the costs of any abatement;
   (c)   Order the owner, operator, or person in possession or control of the
property to abate the nuisance, giving a time frame for compliance. If the
abatement does not occur within the stated time frame or if the action taken
does not completely abate the nuisance, the Commissioner may request the
Department of Parks and Recreation, or its designee, to abate the nuisance and
bill the owner for the costs of any abatement;
   (d)   Order the owner, operator, or person in possession or control of the
property to install and maintain fencing or another similar barrier, in such a
manner that the nuisance will be abated or will be kept from re-occurring;
   (e)   Issue a citation for the violation, under Rule 4.1 of the Ohio Rules
of Criminal Procedure;
   (f)   Pursue any civil or criminal legal actions that may be necessary for
the protection of the public health, safety, or welfare.
(Ord. No. 318-06. Passed 3-20-06, eff. 3-24-06)
§ 209.05 Costs of Abatement; Liens on Property
   (a)   The Director of Parks and Recreation, or his or her designee, after
abating a nuisance under this chapter shall bill the owner of the property for
reimbursement of the costs of abatement. The bill shall be mailed to the
owner’s last known address, when the name and address of the owner are known.
   (b)   Costs that may be billed include inspection, records research,
notification, collection agency fees, if any, and billing. A schedule of the
costs shall be on file in the office of the Director of Parks and Recreation,
open for public inspection, and shall be published at least once in the City
Record.
   (c)   If a bill is not paid within thirty (30) days, or if the name or
address of the owner is not known, the Director of Parks and Recreation may
certify that fact to the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses. The
Commissioner may make a written return to the County Auditor of the action
under this chapter, including a statement of the costs of the abatement
services and a description of the property sufficient to allow the costs to
become a lien on the property. If the Commissioner makes a return to the County
Auditors, then the lien on the property shall be collected in the same manner
as other taxes and returned to the City general fund in accordance with RC
Chapter 731.
   (d)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the Director of Law from taking
any other action necessary to collect the costs of abatement described by this
section.
(Ord. No. 903-06. Passed 5-22-06, eff. 5-26-06)
§ 209.06 Appeals
   (a)   A notice or order issued by the Commissioner of Environment may be
appealed to the Commissioner within ten (10) days after receipt of the notice
or order. The Commissioner shall grant the appeal or conduct a hearing within
thirty (30) days. The Commissioner shall have jurisdiction to affirm, reverse
or modify the notice or order. A person aggrieved by a final decision of the
Commissioner may further appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals within thirty
(30) days after the Commissioner’s decision.
   (b)   A bill received from the Department of Parks and Recreation may be
appealed to the Director of the Department of Parks and Recreation within ten
(10) days after receipt of the bill. The Director shall grant the appeal or
conduct a hearing within thirty (30) days. The Director shall have jurisdiction
to affirm, reverse or modify the bill. A person aggrieved by a final decision
of the Director may further appeal the decision to the Board of Zoning Appeals
within thirty (30) days after the Director’s decision.
(Ord. No. 1017-97. Passed 6-16-97, eff. 6-24-97)
§ 209.99 Enforcement; Penalties
   (a)   This Chapter may be enforced through civil or criminal legal
proceedings. These remedies are in addition to any right the City may have
under this chapter to abate a nuisance and to recover the costs of the
abatement.
   (b)   No person shall fail to abate a nuisance described in this chapter.
   (c)   A violation of this chapter shall be a minor misdemeanor.
   (d)   In addition to any other method of enforcement provided in this
chapter, this chapter may be enforced by the issuance of a citation in
compliance with Rule 4.1 of the Ohio Rules of Criminal Procedure.
(Ord. No. 318-06. Passed 3-20-06, eff. 3-24-06)
CHAPTER 211 – VERMIN AND RODENT INFESTATION
211.01   Declaration of Nuisance
211.02   Prevention and Eradication Order
211.03   Abatement by City Forces; Cost Recovery
211.04   Rules and Regulations
Cross-reference:
   Food handling premises to be free of insects and rodents, CO
241.09
   Garbage, refuse, waste accumulations prevented from causing rodent
infestation, CO
203.07
§ 211.01 Declaration of Nuisance
   The permitting of any premises or place to become vermin or rodent infested
is hereby declared a nuisance and unlawful.
(Ord. No. 511-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
§ 211.02 Prevention and Eradication Order
   (a)   All building materials, lumber, boxes, machinery, containers, raw
material, junk and any other substance which may provide harborage for insects
or rodents shall be kept, stored or handled in a manner acceptable to the
Commissioner of Environmental Health.
   (b)   When any area, building, lot, premises or other place is infected by
insects or rodents, the Commissioner shall issue a written order requiring the
owner, agent, or lessee or person in control of such building or premises to
take such measures as the Commissioner deems necessary to eradicate and prevent
such infestation.
(Ord. No. 511-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
§ 211.03 Abatement by City Forces; Cost Recovery
   If the owner, agent, lessee or person in control of such building or
premises fails, neglects or refuses to comply with the order of the
Commissioner of Environmental Health to abate such nuisance, the Commissioner
may cause the abatement of such nuisance. In addition to any penalty provided
by law, the costs incurred by the City in the abatement of such nuisance shall
be recoverable in appropriate legal action instituted by the Director of Law.
(Ord. No. 511-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
§ 211.04 Rules and Regulations
   The Commissioner of Environmental Health, with the approval of the Director
of Public Health and Welfare, is hereby authorized to adopt such rules and
regulations as may be necessary for the proper interpretation and enforcement
of this chapter. Such rules and regulations, upon adoption, shall be published
in the City Record for two (2) consecutive weeks and shall be in effect on and
after fifteen (15) days from the second publication therein. Such rules and
regulations shall have the force and effect of this chapter and continue in
effect until revoked by the Commissioner, the Director or by ordinance of
Council.
(Ord. No. 511-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
CHAPTER 213 – SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND SPECIAL USE POOLS
213.01   Public Swimming Pools, Public Spas and Special Use Pools; License and
Fee
213.02   Private Residential Swimming Pools and Private Residential Spas
213.03   License Application and Fee – Repealed
§ 213.01 Public Swimming Pools, Public Spas and Special Use Pools; License and
Fee
   (a)   Every person who intends to operate or maintain a new or existing
public swimming pool, public spa, or special-use pool, as defined in OAC 3701-
31-01, shall, during the month of April of each year, apply for, and receive, a
license, in accordance with requirements of the OAC Chapter 3701-31 and RC
Chapter 3749. The application shall be made to the Commissioner of Assessments
and Licenses.
   (b)   No person shall operate or maintain a public swimming pool, public
spa, or special-use pool without a license issued by the Director of Public
Health.
   (c)   In addition to the license fee required under RC 3749.04 for public
swimming pools, public spas, and special-use pools, each application for a
license shall be accompanied by a local combined license and inspection fee.
Where there are multiple pools or spas located at the same address a separate
fee shall be charged for each pool or spa located at that address. The fee for
each pool and spa is as follows:
 
2023
Each Pool or Spa     Fee
Public Swimming Pool $195.00
Public Spa           $195.00
Special Use Pool     $195.00
 
 
2024
Each Pool or Spa     Fee
Public Swimming Pool $368.00
Public Spa           $318.00
Special Use Pool     $322.00
 
   (d)   For a public swimming pool, public spa, or special use pool, that is
owned or operated by the federal government, the State government, the County,
the City, or tax-supported primary or secondary public school, the fee for each
pool and spa is as follows:
 
2023
Each Pool or Spa     Fee
Public Swimming Pool $40.00
Public Spa           $40.00
Special Use Pool     $40.00
 
 
2024
Each Pool or Spa     Fee
Public Swimming Pool $184.00
Public Spa           $158.00
Special Use Pool     $160.00
 
   (e)   If payment of a fee established under this section is not received by
the day on which payment is due, the fee shall include a late penalty. The
amount of the penalty shall be equal to twenty-five percent (25%) of the
applicable fees.
   (f)   The Commissioner shall submit all applications for a license required
under RC Chapter 3749 and under this chapter to the Director of Public Health
for approval or disapproval of the application.
   (g)   The Commissioner is authorized to collect license fees under this
chapter and under RC 3749.04 and deposit such fees collected under RC 3749.04
into the Swimming Pool Fund created under division (E) of RC 3749.04.
   (h)   The Commissioner shall transmit the appropriate amount of each license
fee collected under RC 3749.04 to the Treasurer of the State of Ohio under the
requirements of the Ohio Revised Code for deposit in the General Operations
Fund created by RC 3701.83, under the requirements of RC 3749.04.
(Ord. No. 1186-2023. Passed 10-23-23, eff. 10-25-23)
§ 213.02 Private Residential Swimming Pools and Private Residential Spas
   Any application for the construction, installation or alteration and
maintenance of a private residential swimming pool or private residential spa
shall be made to the Director of Building and Housing under Section
3117.02 of the Codified Ordinances, and shall also be reviewed by the
Commissioner of Environment. No permit shall be issued unless the method of
disinfection and bactericidal treatment to be used and the type and range of
water testing equipment have first been approved by the Commissioner of
Environment.
(Ord. No. 1234-12. Passed 12-3-12, eff. 12-6-12)
§ 213.03 License Application and Fee – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1234-12. Passed 12-3-12, eff. 12-6-12)
CHAPTER 215 – TRANSIENT RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS
215.01   Definition
215.02   License Required; Term and Transfer
215.03   License Application and Fee
215.04   Inspection Prior to License Issuance
215.05   License Issuance
215.06   Posting License
215.07   Register of Guests
Cross-reference:
   Heating business buildings, CO
203.09
Statutory reference:
   Hotel license, RC 3731.03
   Hotel sanitation, RC 3731.09 et seq.
§ 215.01 Definition
   As used in this chapter, “transient residential building” means any building
or structure kept, used or maintained as a place where sleeping accommodations
are offered for pay to transient guests and the general public. The term
includes all buildings known as hotels, motels or motor hotels, and also
includes industrial camps where people are temporarily lodged by their
employer.
(Ord. No. 511-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
§ 215.02 License Required; Term and Transfer
   No transient residential building shall be occupied or permitted to be
occupied unless the owner, lessee or person in charge has first applied for and
obtained the required license. A license issued for a transient residential
building shall expire not later than the calendar year for which issued,
irrespective of the date of its issuance, and shall not be transferable.
   Whenever the interest of a licensee in a transient residential building
ceases, the license shall immediately become void. However, upon the death of a
licensee, the license shall be valid for thirty (30) days from the date of
death in favor of the legal representatives of the licensee, or of the person
to whom such transient residential building passed by law, but in no case shall
such days extend beyond the end of the calendar year for which the license was
issued.
(Ord. No. 511-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
§ 215.03 License Application and Fee
   Every application for a transient residential building license shall be on a
City form and shall state the name and address of the applicant; the nature and
extent of his or her interest and, if the applicant is not the proprietor, then
the application shall also state the name and address of the proprietor. The
application shall further contain an accurate description of the transient
residential building, its location, the number of rooms, the maximum number of
guests to be accommodated at any one time and any other information as may be
required by the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses. The application shall
be accompanied by fees for each transient residential building under the
following schedule:
 
Number of Rooms Fee
0 - 50          $60.00
51 - 100        $115.00
101 - 200       $220.00
over 200        $310.00
 
(Ord. No. 2393-02. Passed 2-3-03, eff. 2-3-03)
§ 215.04 Inspection Prior to License Issuance
   The Commissioner of Environmental Health shall authorize the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses to grant to the applicant an operating license for the
transient residential building, provided it has been found, after a thorough
inspection, to comply in all respects with the provisions of this chapter, and
of all state laws and City ordinances applicable to the operation thereof.
(Ord. No. 511-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
§ 215.05 License Issuance
   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses shall grant to the applicant
therefor, an operating license, which license shall clearly specify the name
and address of the person to whom it is issued, and in addition, if such person
is other than the owner, the name and address of such owner, the location of
such transient residential building, the maximum number of guests permitted
therein at any one time, the date of expiration of such license and such other
information as the Commissioner shall prescribe.
(Ord. No. 511-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
§ 215.06 Posting License
   The transient residential building license shall be affixed to a wall of
such building in a conspicuous place, so that it may be seen by persons
entering such building.
(Ord. No. 511-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
§ 215.07 Register of Guests
   The owner, lessee and person in charge of any transient residential
building, except an industrial camp, shall keep a register or record containing
the name and place of residence of all guests, date of arrival and departure
and room occupied, along with the signature of all guests. Such register or
record shall always be open for inspection to police officers and other
authorized City officials.
(Ord. No. 511-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
CHAPTER 217 – TRAILER PARKS
217.01   License Required; Compliance
217.02   License and Fee
Statutory reference:
   State license plate fee, RC 4503.04(C)
   Tax levy on house trailers, RC 4503.06 et seq.
   Trailer parks and ports, RC Ch. 3733
§ 217.01 License Required; Compliance
   No person, firm or corporation shall maintain or operate a house trailer or
travel trailer park or travel trailer overnight port in the City without first
making application for a license to the Commissioner of Assessments and
Licenses, nor fail to comply with RC Chapter 3733, any City ordinance or the
Ohio Sanitary Code Chapter HE-27.
(Ord. No. 511-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
§ 217.02 License and Fee
   (a)   Each owner, operator or other responsible person before beginning and
during operation of a manufactured home park shall make an application for and
receive approval of a license under the requirements of RC 3733.03 to the
Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses.
   (b)   Each application for a license shall be accompanied by a combined
license and inspection fee as follows:
 
Trailer Park Capacity Fee
50 and under          $350.00
51 and more           $350.00, plus an additional $2.00 for each individual lot
                      in excess of 50
 
   The Commissioner may also collect a fee for the collection and
bacteriological examination of any water samples taken from a manufactured home
park in an amount equal to the cost of the collection and examinations as
determined by the Commissioner of Environment but in no event greater than five
dollars ($5.00). The license term shall be for a period of one (1) year from
January 1 to December 31 of each year, and the fee shall not be prorated for
any lesser period than one (1) year.
   (c)   The Commissioner shall submit all applications for a license required
under RC 3733.03 to the Director of Public Health for approval or disapproval
of such application.
   (d)   The Commissioner is authorized to collect fees and deposit the fees
into the Manufactured Home Park Fund created under RC 3733.04.
   (e)   The Commissioner shall transmit the appropriate amount of each license
fee collected under this section to the Treasurer of the State of Ohio for
deposit in the General Operations Fund in accordance with the requirements of
RC 3733.04.
(Ord. No. 2393-02. Passed 2-3-03, eff. 2-3-03)
CHAPTER 219 – PEST CONTROL OPERATORS
219.01 to 219.09   Pest Control Operators – Repealed
§§ 219.01 to 219.09 Pest Control Operators – Repealed
(Ord. 2530-77. Passed 12-19-77, eff. 12-21-77)
CHAPTER 221 – FOOD RENDERING ESTABLISHMENTS
221.01   License Required; Term
221.02   License Application, Fee and Record
221.03   Transportation of Rendering Material
Cross-reference:
   Parking waste collection vehicles to prevent leakage, CO
203.08
   Truck loads causing litter, CO
613.07
§ 221.01 License Required; Term
   (a)   No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of
operating any process, apparatus or device for the reduction of animal or
vegetable products, tankage or fertilizers, or in rendering grease or fats, or
manufacturing glue from animal or vegetable matter or in the business of
collecting butcher offal or inedible fats within the City, unless the owner or
person having control thereof or operating the same has first applied for and
obtained a license from the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses. Such
license shall cover the period from July 1 until June 30 or any portion of such
period, shall expire on June 30 of such period for which it was issued,
irrespective of the date of its issuance and shall not be transferable.
Whenever the interest of such licensee ceases, the license immediately becomes
void. However, upon the death of a licensee, the license shall be valid for
thirty (30) days from the date of death in favor of the legal representatives
of the licensee, provided that such thirty (30) days do not extend beyond June
30 of the period for which such license was issued.
   (b)   This section does not apply to any person, firm or corporation
rendering the products of animals slaughtered or processed in their own
establishment.
(Ord. No. 511-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
§ 221.02 License Application, Fee and Record
   Every application for a license required by Section
221.01 shall be on a form approved by the City, and shall state the name and
address of the applicant, the nature and extent of his or her interest in the
business for which the license is desired, and if the applicant is not the
owner of such business, then the applicant shall also state the name and
address of the owner. The application shall further state the location of the
business, and the nature of the business for which such license is desired,
together with such other information as may be required by the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses. The application must also be approved by the
Commissioner and shall be accompanied by a fee of three hundred dollars
($300.00) for each business establishment for which a license is desired. The
license, when granted, shall be conspicuously posted in the principal office or
business room in the plant or building wherein such business is conducted. The
Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses shall keep a record of all licenses
issued under this section and shall, immediately upon the issuing of a license,
furnish the Commissioner of Environmental Health with all the information
contained in the license.
(Ord. No. 511-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
§ 221.03 Transportation of Rendering Material
   No raw rendering material shall be conveyed unless the means of conveyance
is so constructed that no drippings or seepings can escape, and the raw
rendering material is covered.
(Ord. No. 511-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
CHAPTER 223 – PUBLIC LAUNDRIES
223.01   Definition
223.02   License Required; Fee and Term
223.03   License Application
223.04   Investigation; License Issuance and Posting
223.05   Cleanliness, Ventilation and Plumbing
223.06   Hours of Self-Service Laundries
Cross-reference:
   Venting of heaters and burners, CO
629.01
§ 223.01 Definition
   As used in this chapter, “public laundry” means any building, structure,
place, premises or establishment which is used for the purpose of laundering
wearing apparel, table linen or bed linen, curtains, rugs, towels or any or all
such articles for the general public or for business establishments for pay.
(Ord. No. 511-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
§ 223.02 License Required; Fee and Term
   No person, firm or corporation shall establish, maintain, or operate any
public laundry without first obtaining a license from the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses. Every applicant shall, upon being licensed, pay a fee
of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each year or fraction of a year. All licenses
shall expire on June 30 next following the date of issue.
(Ord. No. 2393-02. Passed 2-3-03, eff. 2-3-03)
§ 223.03 License Application
   Any applicant for a public laundry license shall make application in writing
to the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses upon City forms. The
application shall set forth the name of the applicant, and if a corporation,
the name and residence of the principal officers, and the location for which
the license is desired. The applicant shall also state such other information
as the Commissioner may require. Upon the filing of such application with the
Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses, he or she shall transmit the same to
the Commissioner of Environmental Health for investigation and report.
(Ord. No. 511-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
§ 223.04 Investigation; License Issuance and Posting
   Upon receipt of an application, the Commissioner of Environmental Health
shall make an examination of the premises described in the application. If the
Commissioner finds upon examination that the proposed laundry is so constructed
and located that it can be operated and maintained in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, he or she shall endorse his or her approval on such
application, and a license shall be issued to the applicant upon payment of the
license fee. Every license granted shall be posted in a conspicuous place in
the laundry for which issued.
(Ord. No. 511-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
§ 223.05 Cleanliness, Ventilation and Plumbing
   Every laundry shall be kept in a reasonably clean and sanitary condition as
to its floors, side walls, ceilings, woodworks, fixtures, tools, machinery and
utensils. All rooms used in connection with such laundry shall be provided with
adequate ventilation by means of windows, air shafts, air ducts or other
mechanical apparatus, so as at all times to insure a free circulation of fresh
air in such laundry. The laundry shall be arranged so that all water upon the
floor of any washroom will immediately run into drains or gutters, to be
connected with City sewers. Every laundry shall be provided with adequate
plumbing and drainage facilities, including suitable wash sinks and water
closets.
(Ord. No. 511-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
§ 223.06 Hours of Self-Service Laundries
   Any establishment which offers any self-service dry cleaning or laundering
equipment for use by the public shall not be open for business earlier than 6:
00 a.m. nor later than 12:00 midnight, unless there is an attendant on duty
during these hours. However, this section does not apply to equipment installed
in a residential building offered for use to only residents of such building.
(Ord. No. 511-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
CHAPTER 225 – BARBER SHOPS, BODY PIERCING, AND TATTOOING ESTABLISHMENTS
225.01   Definition
225.02   License Required
225.03   Application for License; Inspection and Issuance
225.04   Annual License Fees
225.05   Unobstructed View of Interior
225.06   Sanitary Rules and Regulations
225.07   Tattooing Prohibited; Exceptions – Repealed
225.08   Body Piercing and Tattooing Establishments; Fee
Statutory reference:
   General provisions for barbers, RC Ch. 4709
§ 225.01 Definition
   (a)   As used in this chapter, “barber shop” means any building, room, place
or establishment occupied, maintained or conducted as a barber shop, tonsorial
parlor, barber school or where shaving, hair cutting or any other tonsorial
work is carried on for revenue, pay, free or otherwise.
   (b)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to apply to any
establishment occupied, maintained or conducted as a beauty parlor, the
operators or employees of which are licensed to engage in the practice of
cosmetology as defined by RC 4713.01.
(Ord. No. 511-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
§ 225.02 License Required
   No person shall establish, maintain or operate a barber shop without first
having obtained a license as hereinafter provided.
(Ord. No. 511-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
§ 225.03 Application for License; Inspection and Issuance
   (a)   Any person desiring a license to establish, maintain or operate a
barber shop shall make written application for a license to the Commissioner of
Environmental Health, which shall set forth a description of the premises as
well as the location of the same.
   (b)   The application for a license shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The exact location, including street and number where the barber
shop is to be opened, conducted, maintained or operated;
      (2)   The name and the address of the owner of the premises in which such
barber shop is to be located;
      (3)   The name under which the barber shop will be opened, maintained,
operated or conducted;
      (4)   Such additional information as the Commissioner may require.
   (c)   The Commissioner shall then make or cause to be made an investigation
of the premises named in such application for the purpose of determining the
fitness and suitability of the premises for the conduct of such business from a
sanitary standpoint. He or she shall also cause an investigation to be made to
determine if all City ordinances and State law’s relative to the operation and
maintenance of barber shops have been complied with, and if all necessary
precautions are and will be taken to prevent the spread of contagious and
communicable diseases. The Commissioner upon completion of such investigation
shall transmit the application to the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses,
together with a recommendation for or against the issuance of such a license.
(Ord. No. 511-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
§ 225.04 Annual License Fees
   The annual license fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) for a barber shop and
one hundred seventy dollars ($170.00) for a barber school. All licenses shall
expire on December 31 following the date of issuance, and no license shall be
issued except for the full license period and for the full license fee.
Licenses shall not be transferable but shall be renewable under the same terms
and conditions as required for the original issuance.
(Ord. No. 2393-02. Passed 2-3-03, eff. 2-3-03)
§ 225.05 Unobstructed View of Interior
   No person shall operate, maintain or conduct a barber shop in which the view
to the interior is obstructed by the use of blinds, shades, screens, painted or
frosted glass or any other device to prevent a free and unobstructed view from
the outside of such barber shop.
(Ord. No. 511-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
§ 225.06 Sanitary Rules and Regulations
   No place shall be used, maintained or permitted to be used or maintained as
a place where barbering, manicuring or hair dressing is done for pay unless all
of the following requirements are complied with:
   (a)   Local Provisions.
      (1)   Every such place shall be supplied with running hot and cold water;
      (2)   No vessel, utensil, instrument, towel, cloth or other article
coming in contact with the skin of any person in the process of barbering,
manicuring or hair dressing shall be used until after it has been sterilized,
and no sponge, powder puff or other articles that are not so sterilized shall
be used in any such process. No alum or other material for stopping the flow of
blood shall be used, except in powdered or liquid form in any such process;
      (3)   No room where barbering, manicuring or hair dressing is done shall
be used for sleeping purposes, and no furniture adapted for sleeping room
purposes shall be in any such room;
      (4)   Every such place and all furniture, fixtures and equipment in such
place shall be maintained in a clean condition at all times;
      (5)   No person having any communicable disease shall engage in any of
the processes of barbering, manicuring or hair dressing. No proprietor, manager
or person in charge of any place where barbering, manicuring or hair dressing
is done for pay, shall permit a person so infected to be engaged in any such
process. Such proprietor or manager shall, within twelve (12) hours after the
discovery that any person engaged in any of the processes above referred to has
any communicable disease, report such fact to the Department of Health.
   (b)   State Provisions.
      (1)   All barber shops shall be open for inspection during business hours
to the members of the State Board of Barber Examiners or their inspectors and
authorized representatives of the State or City Departments of Health;
      (2)   The holder of a certificate of registration or permit shall post
the same, together with his or her photograph, in a conspicuous place adjacent
to or near his or her work chair, where it may readily be seen;
      (3)   No barber, apprentice or student shall continue the practice of
barbering in a barber shop while such person has an infectious or communicable
disease;
      (4)   Only a water supply approved by the Ohio or City Department of
Health shall be used in any barber shop. Both hot and cold water shall be piped
under pressure to a water basin. The waste water shall be discharged into an
approved sanitary sewage system or otherwise disposed of in a manner approved
by the Ohio or City Department of Health;
      (5)   Every barber shop shall be provided with toilet facilities,
including hot and cold running water and a water flushed toilet approved by the
Ohio or City Department of Health;
      (6)   The hands of the barber shall be thoroughly washed with soap and
water and dried on a clean, freshly laundered towel or paper towel, immediately
before serving each patron;
      (7)   All instruments shall be kept in a closed compartment and shall be
disinfected before each use on a patron by immersion in a five percent (5%)
solution of carbolic acid for not less than five (5) minutes, or by other
methods of disinfection which shall be equivalent to this standard.
      A dip disinfectant solution container, not less than eight (8) inches
tall and three (3) inches in diameter, shall be kept for each chair in
operation. Such container shall be kept filled at all times, and it shall be
completely emptied, cleaned and refilled with fresh solution at least once a
week.
      Since disinfecting solutions may injure the skin, instruments immersed in
these solutions shall be carefully rinsed in warm, running water before use;
      (8)   All laundered linen shall be kept in a closed compartment at all
times;
      (9)   All linen used on a patron shall be freshly laundered, including
dry and steam towels, before using;
      (10)   The head rest of a barber chair shall be covered with a freshly
laundered towel or fresh paper for each patron;
      (11)   In cutting the hair of any patron, a newly-laundered towel or
paper shall be placed about the neck to prevent the hair cloth from touching
the skin;
      (12)   All towels used on each patron shall be deposited in an enclosed
towel receptacle. Towels shall not be left lying on work bench or wash bowl.
Soiled or used towels found on work bench, barber chair or wash bowl constitute
prima facie evidence that the same are being used without being relaundered;
      (13)   Nothing but powdered or liquid astringents, applied in each case
on a clean towel, shall be used to check bleeding. The possession of styptic or
astringent pencils, lump alum, finger bowls or sponges is prima facie evidence
that the same are being used in that practice of barbering and are unlawful;
      (14)   No barber or other person in charge of any barber shop shall
undertake to treat any disease of the skin;
      (15)   No patron showing evidence of disease of the face or scalp shall
be served in any barber shop until he or she presents a statement from a
physician that the infection is not communicable;
      (16)   The use of a neck duster or hair brush from one (1) patron to
another is prohibited;
      (17)   The use of any room or place for barbering which is also used for
residential business purposes, except the sale of hair tonics, lotions, creams,
toilet articles, cigars, tobacco, confectionery, laundry and such other
commodities as are used and sold in barber shops, is prohibited by law, unless
a substantial partition of ceiling height separates the portion used for
residential or business purposes;
      (18)   All barber shop equipment, furniture, floors, walls, ceilings,
windows, bathrooms, toilets, adjoining rooms and all articles within the
immediate environment of a barber shop shall be kept clean and orderly at all
times. Cuspidors and waste paper baskets must be emptied and cleaned at least
every twenty-four (24) hours;
      (19)   Performing any of the services constituting barbering for pay,
free or otherwise on Sunday is expressly prohibited;
      (20)   No barber shop shall be opened for the business of barbering until
a certificate of approval is given by the State Board of Barber Examiners. Any
person or persons proposing to open a barber shop in a new location or to
change locations shall first make application to the State Board of Barber
Examiners for an inspection and approval of the premises.
(Ord. No. 511-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
§ 225.07 Tattooing Prohibited; Exceptions – Repealed
(Ord. No. 737-01. Passed 5-20-02, eff. 5-22-02)
§ 225.08 Body Piercing and Tattooing Establishments; Fee
   (a)   The Department of Public Health is hereby authorized to assess the
following license fees, for licenses issued under RC Chapter 3730:
 
Body Piercing Establishment only                           $250.00
Tattooing Establishment only                               $250.00
Body Piercing and Tattooing Establishment                  $325.00
Temporary Body Piercing Establishment only, under Section  $50.00, per day
225.07
Temporary Tattooing Establishment only                     $50.00, per day
Temporary Body Piercing and Tattooing Establishment        $75.00, per day
 
   All licenses issued for body piercing and/or tattooing establishments shall
expire on December 31st of the year in which the license is issued except those
licenses issued to temporary body piercing and/or tattooing establishments
which shall expire on the fifth day following issuance.
   (b)   RC Chapter 3730 is incorporated by reference, as it now exists and as
it may be amended in the future, and any violation of those state statutes or
of rules promulgated under those statutes shall also be violations of these
Codified Ordinances, and may be prosecuted by the Director of Law. The penalty
for such violations shall be as established in RC 3730.99.
(Ord. No. 1234-13. Passed 10-28-13, eff. 10-30-13)
CHAPTER 227 – DAY CARE CENTERS
227.01   Definition
227.02   Permit Required
227.03   Permit Application
227.04   Inquiry Preliminary to Granting Permit
227.05   Conditions on Which Permit is Granted; Fee
227.06   Posting of Valid State and City Licenses; Change of Ownership or
Change of Address
227.07   Right of Entry; Revocation of Permit
227.08   Staff Requirements
227.09   Admission Policies and Procedures
227.10   Parental or Guardian Access
227.11   Ventilation, Light, Heat and Screening
227.12   Floor Space
227.13   Rooms Above Ground Level
227.14   Outdoor Play Space and Playgrounds
227.15   Premises to be Kept Clean
227.16   Bedding
227.17   Care of Children’s Clothing and Diapering
227.18   Use of Common Items Prohibited
227.19   Toilet Facilities
227.20   Isolation Room or Area
227.21   Communicable Disease
227.22   Care and Selection of Food
227.23   Sanitary Condition of Day Care Centers
227.24   First Aid Supplies
227.25   Program and Equipment
227.26   Medical Examination Before Admission; Contagious Disease
227.27   Overcrowding and Children per Staff Member Ratio
227.28   Discipline of Children
227.29   Safety Policies
227.30   Child Enrollment, Attendance and Medical Records
227.31   Administration of Medications and Supplements
227.32   Medical and Dental Emergency Procedures
227.33   Reports to the Director of Public Health
227.34   Appeal
227.35   Violations
227.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Venting heaters and burners, CO
629.01
Statutory reference:
   Building, fire prevention and food service requirements, RC 5104.05
   Inspections, RC 5104.04
   Licensing provisions, RC 5104.02 et seq.
§ 227.01 Definition
   As used in this chapter, “Day Care Center” means an institution or place in
which seven (7) or more children not of common parentage, are received for
periods of not less than four (4) hours, nor more than twenty-four (24) hours
at one time, for care apart from their parents, whether for compensation,
reward or otherwise.
(Ord. No. 924-09. Passed 8-5-09, eff. 8-13-09)
§ 227.02 Permit Required
   No day care center shall be opened, maintained or conducted in the City of
Cleveland without a written permit having been first issued by the Commissioner
of Assessments and Licenses. No person, firm or corporation shall open,
maintain, conduct or assist in the opening, maintenance or conduct of a day
care center in the City, except after a permit has been issued, and then only
in full compliance with all the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 924-09. Passed 8-5-09, eff. 8-13-09)
§ 227.03 Permit Application
   (a)   Any person, firm, association or corporation desiring a permit to
open, maintain and conduct a day care center shall make written application to
the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses, and that application shall state
the name and residence of the applicant, and if the applicant is a corporation
or association, the name and residence of all the officers; the present or
proposed location of the day care center; the purpose for which it is to be
opened, maintained or conducted; the accommodations provided for the children
to be admitted to the day care center; the name and address of the
superintendent or of the person or persons to be in charge; and other
information as the Commissioner may request.
   (b)   Permits for the calendar year following the year in which the
application is being made shall be accepted no earlier than November 1.
(Ord. No. 1642-12. Passed 12-3-12, eff. 12-6-12; Ord. No. 20-13. Passed 1-7-13,
eff. 1-8-13)
§ 227.04 Inquiry Preliminary to Granting Permit
   The Director of Public Health, after a day care application is made, shall
make or cause to be made a strict investigation of the statements and
information contained in the application, and a thorough inspection of the
premises intended to be used for the day care center.
(Ord. No. 1642-12. Passed 12-3-12, eff. 12-6-12; Ord. No. 20-13. Passed 1-7-13,
eff. 1-8-13)
§ 227.05 Conditions on Which Permit is Granted; Fee
   (a)   If the Director of Public Health finds that the statements in the
application are correct; that the premises intended to be used as a day care
center are suitably located for a day care center and adequately equipped with
all necessary heating, ventilating and sanitary devices to ensure the health
and well-being of the children to be admitted to the day care center; that the
application is made in good faith for the care and betterment of the children;
that the superintendent or person to be in charge of the day care center is of
good moral character and of sufficient knowledge, experience and ability to
properly conduct, manage and maintain the day care center; that the proposed
day care center and the premises occupied by the same comply in all respects
with the requirements of this chapter; then, but not otherwise, the Director of
Public Health shall recommend to the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses
in writing, that a license be issued. The Commissioner of Assessments and
Licenses shall issue or cause to be issued a permit authorizing the applicant
or applicants in question to open and conduct a day care center at the place
specified, which permit shall state the maximum number of children that may be
admitted to or cared for in the day care center at one (1) time. The fee to be
paid annually to the City Treasurer for the permit shall be fifty dollars
($50.00) and no permit shall be issued except upon payment of the fee. Every
permit issued under this section shall expire on December 31 of the year in
which it is issued, and no second or succeeding permit shall be issued to any
person, firm, association, or corporation, except after a reinspection of the
premises, as provided for in the case of the issuance of an original permit.
   (b)   Upon full payment of a day care permit to the City Treasurer, the
City's Building Department shall verify through its records, that the location
has a valid certificate of occupancy. The Division of Fire and the Division of
Health shall also conduct an annual inspection after payment is received by the
City Treasurer. Upon certification that the day care center is in full
compliance by the City's Building Department, the Division of Fire and the
Division of Health, the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses shall issue a
permit to operate.
(Ord. No. 1642-12. Passed 12-3-12, eff. 12-6-12; Ord. No. 20-13. Passed 1-7-13,
eff. 1-8-13)
§ 227.06 Posting of Valid State and City Licenses; Change of Ownership or
Change of Address
   Each day care center shall post in a public area a valid state and city
license to operate a day care facility. Both licenses shall be located in an
area that is easily noticed upon inspection. Upon change of ownership or upon
change of address, day care centers must reapply to the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses for a new city license in order to maintain the
validity of the license.
(Ord. No. 924-09. Passed 8-5-09, eff. 8-13-09)
§ 227.07 Right of Entry; Revocation of Permit
   The Commissioner of Health or his or her designee shall inspect, or cause to
be inspected all day care centers in the City, whenever and as often as shall
be necessary for the adequate supervision, control and regulation of the same.
Whenever the Commissioner receives a written or verbal complaint to the effect
that any day care center in the City is not managed, maintained, operated or
conducted in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, or that the
physical or moral well-being of any child or children cared for in any day care
center is not being adequately and properly provided for, the Commissioner
shall, within ten (10) days after the written complaint has been delivered to
him or her, cause an investigation of the day care center complained of to be
made, and shall make or cause to be made a written report of the result of the
investigation. The Commissioner is authorized and empowered either by himself
or herself, or any representative designated by him or her for that purpose, to
enter any day care center in the City and the premises on which the same is
conducted, for the purpose of making full inspection. If upon any inspection
the Commissioner finds that any of the provisions of this chapter are being
violated in connection with the conduct and operation of any day care center,
or that the physical and moral well-being of any child or children cared for is
not being adequately provided for, then and in such event he or she may revoke
the permit issued for the operation of the day care center, and the operation
of the day care center shall become unlawful.
(Ord. No. 924-09. Passed 8-5-09, eff. 8-13-09)
§ 227.08 Staff Requirements
   (a)   All employees must be subject to a medical exam before being hired.
All employees must have updated tuberculosis vaccinations before being hired
and updated according to medical standards. The medical records and
tuberculosis vaccination records must be kept in the employees’ personnel files
and are subject to inspection by the Commissioner of Health or his or her
designee.
   (b)   All employees must subject themselves to a criminal records check in
accordance with RC Chapter 5104 and OAC Chapter 5101:2-12; the results of which
must be kept in the employees’ personnel files. Those persons found to have a
criminal record shall not be employed in any capacity in or own or operate a
school child day care center, unless permitted by RC Chapter 5104 or OAC
Chapter 5101:2-12.
   (c)   No employee shall abuse or neglect children and all employees shall
protect children from abuse and neglect while in the center’s care. All
employees have a legal duty to immediately report any act or suspected act of
child abuse or neglect to the local public children’s service agency as
provided for in RC Chapter 5104 or OAC Chapter 5101:2-12.
(Ord. No. 924-09. Passed 8-5-09, eff. 8-13-09)
§ 227.09 Admission Policies and Procedures
   (a)   Parents and Guardians of children at day care centers shall be
provided with written information concerning the program and activities of the
center. The information shall include the following:
      (1)   The center’s name, address and telephone number;
      (2)   That the center is licensed to operate legally and the number of
children and the age categories the center is licensed to serve;
      (3)   That the state department of Job and Family services issues the
center a license which is posted in a conspicuous place for review;
      (4)   That the law and rules governing child day care are available at
the center for review upon request;
      (5)   That the department of Job and Family Services’ toll-free number is
available, and any person may use it to report a suspected violation by the
center;
      (6)   That the administrator and each employee of the center are required
under Ohio law to report their suspicions of child abuse or child neglect;
      (7)   That any custodial parent, custodian, or guardian of a child
enrolled in a center shall be permitted unlimited access to the center during
its hours of operation for the purpose of contacting their children, evaluating
the care provided by the center or evaluating the premises. Upon entering the
premises, the custodial parent, custodian, or guardian shall notify the
administrator of his or her presence;
      (8)   That rosters of names and telephone numbers of parents, custodians,
or guardians of children attending the center are available on request. Parents
shall be notified that the rosters shall not include the name or telephone
number of any parent, custodian, or guardian who requests the administrator not
include his or her name or telephone number;
      (9)   That the center’s licensing record including, but not limited to,
compliance report forms from the department and evaluation forms from the
health, building, and fire departments that inspected the center, is available
on request from the department;
      (10)   That it is unlawful to discriminate in the enrollment of children
upon the basis of race, color, religion, sex, or national origin;
      (11)   That it is unlawful to smoke on the premises during the Center’s
hours of operation and all Centers shall comply with Ohio laws and regulations
regarding smoking.
   (b)   Parents and Guardians of children at day care centers shall be
provided with written information concerning the center’s program including, at
a minimum:
      (1)   Day and hours of operation;
      (2)   The maximum number of children per staff member allowed;
      (3)   A sample of the daily program schedule for the group of children in
which the child will receive care.
   (c)   Parents and Guardians of children at day care centers shall be
provided with written information concerning the center’s policies concerning:
      (1)   Discipline and safety;
      (2)   The serving of meals and snacks;
      (3)   Emergencies, accidents, management of communicable illnesses and
administration of medications;
      (4)   Fees, registration, rebates, overtime charges, and permanent
withdrawals;
      (5)   The release of the child from the center to any other person other
than the custodial parent or guardian;
      (6)   The transportation of children including, but not limited to,
transportation of a child to the source of emergency medical care or emergency
dental care and transportation for routine trips, field trips, or special
outings;
      (7)   The center’s plan for parental participation;
      (8)   The center’s plan for the supervision of children.
   (d)   A copy of the policies stated above must be kept on file at the day
care center and is subject to inspection by the City of Cleveland.
(Ord. No. 924-09. Passed 8-5-09, eff. 8-13-09)
§ 227.10 Parental or Guardian Access
   (a)   The residential parent, custodian, or guardian of a child enrolled in
a day care center shall be permitted unlimited access to the center during its
hours of operation for the purposes of contacting the child, evaluating the
care provided by the center, evaluating the premises of the center, or for
other purposes approved by the director. Upon entering the premises, the
residential parent, custodian, or guardian shall notify the administrator or
his or her designee of his or her presence.
   (b)   A parent of a child enrolled in a day care center that is not the
child’s residential parent shall be permitted unlimited access to the center
during its hours of operation for those purposes and conditions under which the
residential parent of that child is permitted access to the center. However,
the access of the parent who is not the residential parent is subject to and
limited by any agreement between parents and, to the extent described in RC
Chapter 5104, is subject to and limited by any terms or conditions limiting the
right of access of the parent who is not the residential parent, as described
in RC 3109.051, that are contained in a visitation order or decree issued under
that section, RC 3109.11 or RC 3109.12, or any other provision of the Ohio
Revised Code.
(Ord. No. 924-09. Passed 8-5-09, eff. 8-13-09)
§ 227.11 Ventilation, Light, Heat and Screening
   (a)   All rooms in a day care center shall be adequately heated and
ventilated, and no room shall be used for day care center purposes unless the
same has windows opening on a public thoroughfare, or a yard or court not less
than ten (10) feet wide, which windows shall have a total glass and sash area
equivalent to one-eighth (1/8) of the total floor area of the room.
   (b)   Each room used for day care center purposes shall be properly
ventilated and no day care center shall be operated or conducted unless it is
provided with a heating apparatus approved by the Commissioner of Health and
installed in conformity with law and ordinance, sufficient to maintain a
temperature of not less than sixty-eight degrees Fahrenheit (68°F), at all
times in all parts of the day care center to which children are admitted.
   (c)   All doors, windows and other outside openings of any day care center
shall be adequately provided with screens from May 15 to November 15 of each
year while the day care center is in operation, so as to prevent the entrance
of flies into the day care center. Each day care center shall be kept and
maintained free from flies and other insects.
(Ord. No. 924-09. Passed 8-5-09, eff. 8-13-09)
§ 227.12 Floor Space
   (a)   The day care center shall have, for each child for whom the center is
licensed, at least thirty-five (35) square feet of usable indoor floor space
wall-to-wall regularly available for the child care operation exclusive of any
parts of the structure in which the care of children is prohibited by law or by
rules adopted by the board of building standards.
   (b)   Each bed or crib shall be so placed at all times as to provide a space
of not less than one (1) foot on all sides around such bed or crib, except
where the bed or crib may be in contact with a wall. Nothing contained in this
chapter, however, shall prevent the installation of sectional metal beds of the
type and construction approved by the Commissioner of Health.
(Ord. No. 924-09. Passed 8-5-09, eff. 8-13-09)
§ 227.13 Rooms Above Ground Level
   No room shall be used for day care center purposes unless the floor is above
ground level, except if the Commissioner of Health and the Division of Fire
shall upon a full examination of such room pronounce the same safe, healthful
and sanitary.
(Ord. No. 924-09. Passed 8-5-09, eff. 8-13-09)
§ 227.14 Outdoor Play Space and Playgrounds
   (a)   Each day care center shall have on the site a safe outdoor play space
which is enclosed by a fence or otherwise protected from traffic or other
hazards. The play space shall contain not less than sixty (60) square feet per
child using such space at any one time, and shall provide an opportunity for
supervised outdoor play each day in suitable weather. The Commissioner of
Health may exempt a center from the requirement if an outdoor play space is not
available and if all of the following are met:
      (1)   The center provides an indoor recreation area that has not less
than sixty (60) square feet per child using the space at any one time, that has
a minimum of one thousand four hundred forty (1, 440) square feet of space, and
that is separate from the indoor space required under Section
227.12 of this section;
      (2)   The Commissioner of Health has determined that there is regularly
available and scheduled for use a conveniently accessible and safe park,
playground, or similar outdoor play area for play or recreation;
      (3)   The children are closely supervised during play and while traveling
to and from the area.
   (b)   Stationary outdoor equipment such as, but not limited to, climbing
gyms, swings or slides, shall be placed out of the path of the main traffic
pattern in the yard and shall be securely anchored unless portable by design.
   (c)   Outdoor play surfaces shall be maintained daily and shall be kept free
of hazards and debris.
   (d)   Wading pools shall be filtered, emptied, or drained daily. When not in
use, the pools shall be stored or otherwise made inaccessible to children.
(Ord. No. 924-09. Passed 8-5-09, eff. 8-13-09)
§ 227.15 Premises to be Kept Clean
   Each day care center, every part of a day care center, and all areas
appurtenant to a day care center, shall be kept in a clean, sanitary and
healthful condition, free from dangerous or noxious substances of any kind, or
any conditions that may, in the judgment of the Commissioner of Health, tend to
injure the physical or moral well-being of the children admitted or cared for
in the day care center. No dry dusting or sweeping shall be done in any day
care center while children are cared for in the day care center. No spraying of
pesticides shall be done in any day care center while children are cared for in
the day care center.
(Ord. No. 924-09. Passed 8-5-09, eff. 8-13-09)
§ 227.16 Bedding
   (a)   Each center shall provide a quiet space for children who want to rest,
nap, or sleep. The center or parent shall provide a clean and washable pad,
mat, or comfortable furniture for children to use to rest, nap or sleep. No
child shall be permitted to rest, nap, or sleep on the floor without a mat,
pad, cot or comfortable furniture.
   (b)   When children rest, nap, or sleep on mats or pads, floors shall be
clean, warm, dry, and draft free.
   (c)   Evacuation routes shall not be blocked by resting children. Each child
shall have a free and direct means of escape, and the child care staff members
shall have a clear path to each child.
   (d)   Children not of common parents may not occupy the same sleeping space
at the same time.
(Ord. No. 924-09. Passed 8-5-09, eff. 8-13-09)
§ 227.17 Care of Children’s Clothing and Diapering
   (a)   All children’s clothing must be kept clean and dry throughout the time
at the day care center.
   (b)   Changing of diapers for all non-toilet trained school children shall
be handled in conformity with the following methods:
      (1)   Changing of diapers for all non-toilet trained school children
shall occur in a space that contains a hand-washing facility.
      (2)   Hands of the adult caring for the child shall be washed with soap
and water after each diaper change.
      (3)   If a central diaper changing station is to be used, there shall be
a separation material placed between the child and the changing surface. The
separation material shall be replaced after each diaper change with a clean
separation material.
      (4)   The central diaper changing station shall be disinfected after each
diaper change with an appropriate germicidal agent. If the diaper changing
station is soiled after the diaper change, it shall be cleaned with soap and
water and then disinfected with an appropriate germicidal agent.
      (5)   Any product used during diaper changing which is used on more than
one (1) child shall be used in a way that the container does not touch the
child. Any product obtained from a common container and applied to a child
shall be applied in a manner that does not contaminate the product or its
container. Common containers shall be cleaned and disinfected with an
appropriate germicidal agent when soiled.
   (c)   Storing of clean diapers and clothing shall be handled under the
following methods:
      (1)   A clean supply of diapers and clothing shall be available at all
times and shall be stored in a specifically designated area.
      (2)   Diapers and clothing used during diaper changing brought from the
child’s home shall be stored in a space assigned exclusively for each school
children’s belongings.
   (d)   Storage and laundering of soiled diapers and clothing shall be handled
under the following methods:
      (1)   Diapers and clothing soiled with fecal matter and sent home with a
child need not be rinsed at the center, but may be placed directly into a
plastic container or bag, sealed tightly, and stored away from the rest of the
child’s belongings and out of reach of children.
      (2)   Soiled diapers to be disposed of or cleaned by the center shall be
placed in common plastic-lined, covered container which shall be emptied,
cleaned, and disinfected with an appropriate germicidal agent daily or more
frequently as needed. Diapers to be laundered at the center should be stored in
an appropriate germicidal solution until laundered.
      (3)   Soiled diapers to be commercially laundered shall be held for
pickup for laundering for no longer than seven (7) days.
      (4)   Diapers to be laundered at home or by the center shall be held for
no longer than one (1) day.
      (5)   Soiled disposable diapers shall be discarded daily.
      (6)   Disposable materials are recommended for diaper changing, and if
used, shall be used once and discarded. If washcloths or other washable
materials are used, they shall be used once and stored in an appropriate
germicidal solution until laundered.
(Ord. No. 924-09. Passed 8-5-09, eff. 8-13-09)
§ 227.18 Use of Common Items Prohibited
   The common use of washcloths, towels, bed linen, combs, tooth brushes, hair
brushes and drinking cups, and other personal affects is prohibited.
(Ord. No. 924-09. Passed 8-5-09, eff. 8-13-09)
§ 227.19 Toilet Facilities
   Each day care center shall be adequately supplied with hot and cold water
and toilet facilities within the building or part of the building used as the
day care center. The hot water shall not go above one hundred twenty degrees
Fahrenheit (120°F). Scald controls shall be placed on all hot water dispensers
to which children have access. There shall be separate toilets for boys and
girls of school age and sinks and toilets shall be of a suitable height for the
age and size of the children. If toilets and sinks are not of a suitable height
for children, the center shall provide a sturdy portable platform on which the
children may stand. All toilet facilities shall be equipped with adequate
toilet tissue, soap and hand-drying mechanisms, including towels or air driers.
Each day care center that uses a toilet training apparatus must clean the
apparatus after each individual use and the apparatus must be stored in an
appropriate place after use. Toilet facilities shall be cleaned on a regular
basis using germicidal substances, but cleaning must not take place while the
children are in attendance.
(Ord. No. 924-09. Passed 8-5-09, eff. 8-13-09)
§ 227.20 Isolation Room or Area
   Each day care center shall be provided with an isolation room/area of
adequate size to provide for the isolation and care of any child having or
suspected of having any contagious, infectious, parasitic or communicable
disease, pending the examination of such child, and its removal from the day
care center. Such isolation room/area shall be completely separated from all
other parts of the day care center, and shall be so situated, maintained and
equipped as to prevent the communication or spread of any disease from any
occupant of such isolation room to other children admitted to or cared for in
such day care center. The isolation room shall be equipped with a cot, at a
minimum, for children to lie down and rest while being isolated.
(Ord. No. 924-09. Passed 8-5-09, eff. 8-13-09)
§ 227.21 Communicable Disease
   (a)   Each day care center shall have a written policy concerning the
management of communicable disease for both attendees and staff. This policy
shall be available to all parents and guardians of children at the center, each
employee of the center and to the director on request. The policy shall
include, at a minimum:
      (1)   The center’s means of training all staff on signs and symptoms of
illness and in hand washing and disinfection procedures;
      (2)   The center’s policy regarding the management of communicable
disease among the center’s employees;
      (3)   The list of symptoms for which a child shall be discharged from the
center;
      (4)   Procedures for isolating and discharging an ill child and policy
for readmitting a child;
      (5)   Location of Ohio department of health “Child Day Care Communicable
Disease Chart” which shall be posted in each center;
      (6)   Procedure for immediate notification of the parent or guardian when
a child is exhibiting signs or symptoms of illness or has been exposed to a
communicable disease;
      (7)   The center’s policy for administration of medications to any child
at the center;
      (8)   The center’s policy regarding the care of a mildly ill child.
   (b)   A daily health check shall be conducted every day to recognize the
signs of communicable disease and all results shall be documented and kept on
file.
   (c)   Day care centers shall follow the Ohio Department of Health “Child Day
Care Communicable Disease Chart” for appropriate management of suspected
illnesses. This chart shall be posted in the day care center.
   (d)   Any child absent from any day care center for more than three (3) days
shall be subjected to a medical examination and proper documentation of said
exam shall be presented to the day care center to indicate permission to return
to the day care center.
(Ord. No. 924-09. Passed 8-5-09, eff. 8-13-09)
§ 227.22 Care and Selection of Food
   (a)   Each day care center that prepares and/or serves food must post food
licenses issued by the Department of Public Health or exemption thereof in a
conspicuous place, easily noticed by all who enter the day care center. Current
menus for the entire week shall be posted in a conspicuous place and shall
reflect all meals, including breakfast, lunch, dinner or supper, and snacks to
be served by the center; any substitute foods served shall be from the basic
food groups and shall be recorded on the posted menu on the day the substitute
food is served. Special efforts should be made to serve healthy food and
beverage options to the children.
   (b)   All food used by the day care center or food provided by the parents
of the children shall be stored safely and in a sanitary way. Storage of foods
shall meet the requirements of RC Chapter 3732 and any relevant regulations
adopted by the public health council. Refrigerators shall be set to hold food
at a temperature below forty-one degrees Fahrenheit (41°F). The thermostat
shall be in good working condition and accurate.
   (c)   Fluid milk shall be vitamin D fortified. Low- fat, skim, or dry
powdered skim milk shall be vitamin A and D fortified. Prepared baby formula
may also be used to feed infants. Breast milk must be labeled with name and
date of issue. Refrigerated breast milk must not be kept for more than twenty-
four (24) hours. Frozen breast milk may be stored for up to three (3) months.
All nipples, bottles and containers of food and drink used in any day care
center shall be kept thoroughly clean and capped with plastic tops and labeled
with the child’s name at all times.
   (d)   Parents may provide food for their children at the day care center if
the center secures a proper valid food license, the center has a policy which
addresses the center’s procedures for providing a meal or snack to a child who
comes to the center without food from home, and the center provides parents
with nutritional guidelines of what foods must be provided for their children.
Parents need to check with the day care center to find out if there are foods
or products that are disallowed because a particular child or children at the
center may be allergic to that food or product.
(Ord. No. 924-09. Passed 8-5-09, eff. 8-13-09)
§ 227.23 Sanitary Condition of Day Care Centers
   (a)   Each day care center and all of the rooms, walls, floors, ceilings,
closets, cupboards, stoves, refrigerators, furniture and other appurtenances,
shall be kept in a thoroughly clean and sanitary condition at all times, and
free from any dangerous, noxious or deleterious substances or conditions.
   (b)   Furniture, equipment, and materials which are not usable due to
breakage or hazards shall be removed immediately and either repaired or
discontinued from use.
   (c)   Washable equipment and furniture shall be cleaned with soap and water
at least two (2) times each year. Additionally, any item soiled during daily
use by, but not limited to, blood, vomitus, toileting accidents and spills
shall immediately be cleaned with soap and water and then disinfected with a
germicidal agent. Toys and other items placed in children’s mouths shall be
cleaned thoroughly and disinfected with an appropriate germicidal solution and
rinsed with water daily and immediately if soiled with blood, feces, urine or
vomitus.
   (d)   All electrical outlets shall be covered to prevent accidents.
   (e)   If electrical fans are used, they shall have protective coverings,
shall not be easily tipped over, and shall be placed so that they are not
hazardous to children.
   (f)   Cleaning equipment shall be stored in a space that is inaccessible to
children. Cleaning agents, aerosol cans, or other chemical substances shall be
stored in their original containers and/or clearly labeled, and stored in a
space that is designated for the storage of such items and that is inaccessible
to children.
   (g)   Blankets and/or sheets belonging to the center used by the children
shall be laundered at least every week or more often if soiled. If a blanket
and/or sheet is used by a different child, it shall be laundered between uses.
   (h)   Accumulated trash and garbage shall be stored outside of the outdoor
or indoor play area and shall not be accessible to the children.
(Ord. No. 924-09. Passed 8-5-09, eff. 8-13-09)
§ 227.24 First Aid Supplies
   First Aid supplies shall be readily available at all times the day care
center is in operation. First Aid supplies shall be organized and easily
accessible and shall include: one (1) roll of one-half (0.5) inch non-
allergenic adhesive tape, one (1) roll of two (2) inch gauze roller bandage,
ten (10) individual wrapped sterile gauze squares in various sizes, twenty-five
(25) adhesive compresses (band aids), three (3) cotton towels or sheeting, one
(1) pair of scissors, assorted sizes of safety pins, one (1) flashlight, one
(1) thermometer, one (1) measuring spoon or dosing spoon, tweezers, and one-
third (1/3) of a cup of powdered milk for dental first aid. Supplies shall be
replaced as they are used, become damaged, or are sterile no longer.
(Ord. No. 924-09. Passed 8-5-09, eff. 8-13-09)
§ 227.25 Program and Equipment
   (a)   Each center shall provide each day a balance of both quiet and active
play suitable to the age and abilities of the children in care and shall
include, but not be limited to:
      (1)   Homework or individual, small group activities;
      (2)   Developmentally appropriate enrichment activities;
      (3)   Child initiated activities and unstructured time periods;
      (4)   Large muscle and outdoor play activities. In extremely inclement
weather, the center shall provide an opportunity for indoor gross motor play
such as, but not limited to climbing, jumping, running, or riding wheel toys.
   (b)   Each center shall make available to the children play materials and
equipment for the purpose of implementing program goals and activities. Play
materials and equipment shall be suitable to the age levels and abilities of
the children attending the center.
   (c)   Play materials to be used in the center’s program shall be arranged in
an orderly manner so that children may select, remove, and replace play
materials with a minimum of assistance during appropriate times throughout the
daily program.
   (d)   Each center shall provide durable furniture, such as tables and
chairs, for purposes of implementing the program. The furniture shall be child
sized or appropriately adapted for use by children.
(Ord. No. 924-09. Passed 8-5-09, eff. 8-13-09)
§ 227.26 Medical Examination Before Admission; Contagious Disease
   No child shall be admitted to the day care center unless the child has been
given a thorough and complete medical examination by a licensed examining
physician. Such examination shall include all laboratory tests necessary to
indicate the physical condition of the child examined, including a recent blood
lead test for children under six (6) years of age, and shall provide to the
child all necessary immunizations that are required by law. The result of such
examination shall be reduced to writing and preserved in the permanent files
kept at the day care center. No child may be admitted to any day care center
unless the examination indicated by the record shows that such child is free
from any contagious, infectious, communicable or parasitic disease, and duly
protected against contagion or infection. No examining physician shall make any
untrue or incorrect statement in any report provided for in this section.
(Ord. No. 924-09. Passed 8-5-09, eff. 8-13-09)
§ 227.27 Overcrowding and Children per Staff Member Ratio
   (a)   No room in any day care center shall be overcrowded. Any room shall be
deemed overcrowded for the purposes of this chapter if there is less than three
hundred (300) cubic feet of air space per child at any time.
   (b)   Each day care-center shall have at least two (2) responsible adults,
including one (1) staff member, available on the premises at all times when
seven (7) or more children are in the center. The center shall organize the
children in the center in small groups, shall provide child-care staff to give
continuity of care and supervision of the children on a day-by-day basis, and
shall ensure that no child is left alone or unsupervised. The following ratios
of children per child-care staff member are to be followed:
Infants
Infants
                                                                                 5:1 or
                                                                                 12:
                                                                                 2 with
   Less than 12 months old                                                    2 staff
                                                                                 members
                                                                                 in the
                                                                                 room
   12 to 18 months old                                                        6:1
Toddlers
   18 to less than 30 months old                                              7:1
   At least 30 months to less than 3 years                                    8:1
Preschool
   3 years old                                                                12:1
   4 and 5 year olds                                                          14:1
School Children
   Children enrolled in, or eligible to be enrolled in kindergarten or above, 18:1
but less than 11 years old
   11 through 14 years old                                                    20:1
 
   (c)   When children are combined with other age groups, the ratio must
conform to the youngest child in the group.
   (d)   Each day care center must have an administrator on site for minimum of
at least half of the operating hours. This presence must be documented and
available for inspection.
(Ord. No. 924-09. Passed 8-5-09, eff. 8-13-09)
§ 227.28 Discipline of Children
   Each day care center shall have a written discipline policy which describes
the center’s philosophy of discipline and the specific methods of discipline
used at the center. The policy shall follow the State’s guidelines as set forth
in OAC 5101:2-17-42. The parent or guardian of a child enrolled in a center
shall receive a copy of the written discipline policy and a copy of the policy
shall be on file at the day care center and ready for inspection.
(Ord. No. 924-09. Passed 8-5-09, eff. 8-13-09)
§ 227.29 Safety Policies
   Each day care center shall have written policies for different safety issues
including, but not limited to not leaving children unattended, arrival and
departure policies, immediate telephone access, fire and weather alert plans,
incident report procedures, monthly fire drills, field trip safety plans, and
the no spraying of aerosols while children are present. These written policies
shall be on file at the day care center and ready for inspection.
(Ord. No. 924-09. Passed 8-5-09, eff. 8-13-09)
§ 227.30 Child Enrollment, Attendance and Medical Records
   (a)   The administrator of each day care center shall maintain enrollment,
health, and attendance records for all children attending the center and health
and employment records for all center employees. The records shall be
confidential except as otherwise exempt by law.
   (b)   Enrollment records shall include:
      (1)   The name, address, and birth date of each child;
      (2)   The date of admission of each child;
      (3)   The names, home addresses, home telephone numbers of each parent or
guardian;
      (4)   The names, work addresses, work telephone numbers, or name and
address of location and telephone number where each parent or guardian may be
reached during the hours the child attends the center;
      (5)   The names, addresses, telephone numbers and relationships to each
child of at least two (2) local persons who can be contacted by the center in
the event of an emergency if the parent or guardian cannot be reached.
   (c)   Attendance records shall be kept by the staff member responsible for
the child. Records shall be kept for at least three (3) months and shall
include the names of the other children in the group, the name of the staff
member in charge of that group, the designated space used by the group, and the
schedule of each child in the group, including the days and hours of
attendance.
   (d)   Health records shall be secured from the parent on or before the first
day of attendance. The health record shall be kept on file and shall include:
      (1)   A list of medications, food supplements, modified diets, or
fluoride supplements currently being administered to the child;
      (2)   Written, signed and dated instructions from a licensed physician or
licensed dentist to administer medications, food supplements, modified diets or
fluoride supplements;
      (3)   A list of all allergies and any special precautions or treatment
indicated for these allergies;
      (4)   A list of all physical problems, health problems, and any history
of hospitalization;
      (5)   A list of diseases the child has had;
      (6)   The name, address, and telephone number of the child’s physician or
clinic;
      (7)   An emergency transportation authorization as required in the Ohio
Administrative Code.
   (e)   The center shall require that parents or guardians review and update
information as needed or at least annually.
(Ord. No. 924-09. Passed 8-5-09, eff. 8-13-09)
§ 227.31 Administration of Medications and Supplements
   (a)   Each center shall have a written policy on file and given to parents
and guardians that governs whether and how a center administers medications,
food supplements, modified diets or fluoride supplements.
   (b)   Each center shall secure the written instructions of a licensed
physician or licensed dentist for the administration of the medication, food
supplement, modified diet, or fluoride supplement and secure the written,
signed and dated instructions of the parent or guardian on the form provided by
the director for the administration of the medication, food supplement,
modified diet, or fluoride supplement.
   (c)   Prescription labels on medications to be administered must be clearly
labeled, with a current date, an exact dosage and the specific number of
dosages to be given daily, and the route of administration.
   (d)   Exceptions:
      (1)   In cases of extreme emergency, center personnel may administer
syrup of Ipecac to a child without written instructions from a physician if
following verbal instructions of the poison control center or a licensed
physician.
      (2)   Nonprescription fever-reducing medications that do not contain
aspirin, or nonprescription cough or cold medications that do not contain
codeine may be administered by the center without written instructions from a
licensed physician if the child’s parent or guardian have provided an
authorization, the medication is in its original container, and medication is
properly labeled with dosages based on the child’s age or weight.
   (e)   Medications, food supplements, and fluoride supplements shall be kept
in a safe location where children cannot reach it. A medication requiring
refrigeration shall be refrigerated on arrival at the center and shall be
stored so as not to contaminate foodstuffs.
(Ord. No. 924-09. Passed 8-5-09, eff. 8-13-09)
§ 227.32 Medical and Dental Emergency Procedures
   (a)   The day care center shall have a written plan for medical and dental
emergencies. The emergency plan shall require immediate notification of the
parent or guardian in the event of any accident, injury, or illness and shall
include plans for transportation of the child to the source of medical or
dental care treatment, if necessary.
   (b)   The medical and dental emergency plan shall be posted by each
telephone used by the center and in each classroom used by the children at the
center. The emergency plan shall state, at a minimum, the following
information:
      (1)   The center’s name, address, and telephone number;
      (2)   The location of the first aid kit;
      (3)   The current emergency telephone numbers for the emergency squad,
the fire department, the hospital, the poison control center, the local public
children’s services agency, and the police department;
      (4)   The names of the staff trained to administer first aid;
      (5)   The location of children’s records;
      (6)   General instructions to staff in case of emergency, including the
supervision of children during the emergency;
      (7)   General instructions to staff in case of illness of children;
      (8)   The location of the Ohio department of health dental first aid
chart.
(Ord. No. 924-09. Passed 8-5-09, eff. 8-13-09)
§ 227.33 Reports to the Director of Public Health
   (a)   Every person, firm, association or corporation conducting, managing or
maintaining a day care center shall report to the Director of Public Health
within timelines specified in OAC 3701-3-05. Every person, firm, association or
corporation conducting, managing or maintaining a day care center shall report
to the Director of Public Health, all cases and suspected cases of contagious
diseases, such as smallpox, chickenpox, diphtheria, scarlet fever, mumps,
measles, whooping cough, impetigo contagiosa, typhoid fever, tuberculosis,
hand, foot and mouth disease, meningitis (bacterial, viral/aseptic), flu,
diarrheal diseases, and any other disease classified as communicable in
accordance with OAC 3701-3-02. The report shall give the names and addresses of
persons so afflicted and all other known facts relating to the case or incident
in accordance with OAC 3701-3-03, which may aid in eradicating such diseases.
   (b)   Every person, firm, association or corporation conducting a day care
center shall also make out a Monthly Illness Report Form in writing on or
before the fifth day of each calendar month, giving a complete record of the
operation of the center during the preceding calendar month, showing the number
of children admitted, all relevant illnesses, all accidental injuries and
deaths, the cause of the same and other information as may be necessary to an
intelligent supervision of the center. This report shall be kept in the
permanent records of the day care center.
   (c)   All reports required in this section shall be made upon blanks
approved by the Director of Public Health and shall be signed by the
superintendent or the official in charge. All records placed in permanent files
under the requirements of this chapter shall be open to inspection by the
Director of Public Health or any officer or employee of the Division of Health
designated by the Director of Public Health at any time.
(Ord. No. 1642-12. Passed 12-3-12, eff. 12-6-12; Ord. No. 20-13. Passed 1-7-13,
eff. 1-8-13)
§ 227.34 Appeal
   A day care center's license may be suspended or revoked at any time by the
Director of Public Health on his or her own initiative. Before suspending or
revoking the license the Director of Public Health shall afford the licensee
the opportunity of a hearing on the charges. The licensee may appeal from the
order in the manner provided by Section
201.03. A second suspension for the same reason or, in any case a third
suspension of a day care center's license shall operate as a revocation of such
license. No day care center's owner or administrator whose license has been
revoked shall again be licensed as a day care provider in the City unless on
presentation of reasons satisfactory to the Director of Public Health. The
Director of Public Health shall notify the Building Department, the Division of
Fire and the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses of all suspensions or
revocations of day care licenses.
(Ord. No. 1642-12. Passed 12-3-12, eff. 12-6-12; Ord. No. 20-13. Passed 1-7-13,
eff. 1-8-13)
§ 227.35 Violations
   (a)   If any person, firm, association or corporation conducting a day care
center violates any of the provisions of this chapter relating to the safety
of, or the accommodations for the children, the Director of Public Health is
authorized to issue an order to close the day care center and keep it closed
until such repairs or alterations have been made as will comply with the
provisions of this chapter.
   (b)   No person shall fail to comply with a lawful order issued by the
Director of Public Health under this section.
(Ord. No. 1642-12. Passed 12-3-12, eff. 12-6-12; Ord. No. 20-13. Passed 1-7-13,
eff. 1-8-13)
§ 227.99 Penalty
   (a)   Any person, firm, association or corporation who opens, maintains or
conducts a day care center without first having been granted a permit, or after
the due revocation of the permit, or in violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter, shall be fined not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00), nor
more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense.
   (b)   Whoever fails to comply with the lawful order issued under division
(a) of Section
227.35 is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day during which
noncompliance or a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
   (c)   In the event of any actual or threatened violation of this chapter or
an emergency situation, the Director of Law, in addition to other remedies
provided by law, may institute proper suit in equity or at law to prevent or
terminate the violation or remedy the situation.
(Ord. No. 924-09. Passed 8-5-09, eff. 8-13-09)
CHAPTER 229 – NURSING AND REST HOMES
229.01   License Required; Inspection
229.02   Prohibited Acts
229.99   Penalty
   Note: The City enforces the provisions of RC Chapter 3721 relative to
nursing and rest homes, OAC Chapter 3701-17, which are the rules and
regulations of the Public Health Council promulgated pursuant to RC 3721.04,
and OAC Chapter 4101:2-90, which are the rules and regulations for existing
nursing and rest homes promulgated by the Ohio Board of Building Standards.
License and inspection fees are charges by the Ohio Director of Health pursuant
to RC 3721.04(F) and OAC 3701-17-03.
Cross-reference:
   Conveying intoxicating liquors or drugs into hospital, sanitarium, CO
617.10
Statutory reference:
   Licensing residential care facilities for mentally retarded, RC 5123.18
   Nursing and rest homes, RC 3721
   State regulations, OAC Ch. 3701-17, Ch. 4101:2-90
§ 229.01 License Required; Inspection
   The Director of Public Health and Welfare shall take appropriate action
through the employees of his or her Department or such members of the Division
of Police as may be assigned to his or her assistance, to ascertain that all
nursing and rest homes as defined in RC 3721.01, within the City are duly
licensed and operating in compliance with applicable provisions of law and
ordinance.
(Ord. No. 725-A-44. Passed 10-8-45)
§ 229.02 Prohibited Acts
   No person, firm, association or corporation shall open, conduct, manage or
maintain a nursing and rest home as defined in RC 3721.01, less adequately
equipped or with a personnel fewer in number and training than has been
determined by the proper officials of the State at the time of the issuance of
the license for such home or renewal thereof, to be adequate and sufficient
properly to care for the inmates of such home; nor shall any person fail to
display the license certificate issued by the State prominently in the hall or
in the main entrance into such home or refuse admittance to, or obstruct the
entrance of any City officer duly authorized to make inspection of such home or
hinder such officer in the performance of his or her duty.
(Ord. No. 725-A-44. Passed 10-8-45)
§ 229.99 Penalty
   Any person, firm or corporation which violates any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and fined not more than twenty-
five dollars ($25.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed each day during or on which such violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. No. 725-A-44. Passed 10-8-45)
CHAPTER 231 – ABORTIONS
231.01   Definitions
231.02   Abortion Performed During First Trimester of Pregnancy
231.03   Abortion Performed During Second Trimester of Pregnancy
231.04   Purposeful Taking of a Fetal Life; Refusals to Perform Abortions
231.05   Experimentation upon a Fetus
231.06   License Required; Application
231.07   Inspection Required for Licensing
231.08   License Fee
231.09   Prohibition Against Issuing Abortion Service License in Local Retail
District
231.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Unlawful promotion of abortion, CO
609.02
Statutory reference:
   Abortion manslaughter, RC 2919.13
   Abortion trafficking, RC 2919.14
   Abortion without informed consent prohibited, RC 2919.12
§ 231.01 Definitions
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   “Physician” means a doctor licensed to practice medicine by the State
of Ohio, whether practicing within or outside a hospital.
   (b)   “Counselor” means an individual trained in abortion counseling, and
who is certified for that purpose by the Director of Public Health and Welfare.
   (c)   “Abortion” means the termination of human pregnancy with an intention
other than to produce a live birth or to remove a dead fetus.
   (d)   “Abortion service” means an individual physician, group practice of
physicians, clinic, hospital or other firm, agency, institution or organization
by whom or under whose auspices and control abortions are performed, whether as
a primary service or as an integral part of a broader practice or group of
medical services, and his, her or their physical facilities used in the
performance of an abortion.
(Ord. No. 1861-A-73. Passed 12-10-73, eff. 12-10-73)
§ 231.02 Abortion Performed During First Trimester of Pregnancy
   In all cases where termination of a pregnancy is performed by an abortion
service during the first trimester of the woman’s pregnancy, the following
standards, facilities and procedures must be met, provided and adhered to:
   (a)   Abortions may only be performed by a physician licensed to practice
medicine by the State of Ohio;
   (b)   Written verification by the attending physician of the diagnosis and
duration of pregnancy, indicating the methods used to determine diagnosis and
duration of pregnancy;
   (c)   Availability of pre-operative instructions and counseling by a
certified counselor or attending physician;
   (d)   Recorded pre-operative history and physical examination, particularly
directed to identification of pre-existing illnesses or drug sensitivities that
may have a bearing on the operative procedures or the anesthesia. Permanent
post-operative records shall also be maintained by the physician;
   (e)   Laboratory procedures including blood type and RH factor and those
procedures usually required as a prerequisite for the performance of surgery;
   (f)   Availability of procedures for prevention of RH sensitization if
indicated by blood test;
   (g)   A receiving facility where the patient may be prepared and receive
necessary pre-operative medication and observation prior to the procedure;
   (h)   Availability on the premises of adequate oxygen, parenteral fluids,
anesthesia and resuscitation equipment. There shall also be a written procedure
approved by the Director of Public Health and Welfare to deal with emergency
situations including transportation to a hospital;
   (i)   A recovery facility in which the patient can be observed until she has
sufficiently recovered from the procedure and anesthesia and can be safely
discharged by the physician;
   (j)   Post-operative instructions and available post-operative counseling;
   (k)   Examinations by a pathologist of all pathological specimens, and the
disposal of human remains in a legal, humanitarian and dignified manner;
   (l)   The physician performing the abortion must report to the Director or
his or her designate, on an abortion report form available from the Director.
These forms shall be used for statistical purposes by the Department of Public
Health and Welfare and shall not be matters of public record. The name of any
specific patient will not be required in the report;
   (m)   The usual informed consent including the operative permit signed by
the pregnant woman indicating her understanding of the availability of pre-
operative and post-operative counseling either through the attending physician
or, without cost, through the Department.
(Ord. No. 1861-A-73. Passed 12-10-73, eff. 12-10-73)
§ 231.03 Abortion Performed During Second Trimester of Pregnancy
   In all cases where termination of pregnancy is performed by an individual
during the second trimester of the woman’s pregnancy the following standards
and procedures must be met and adhered to:
   (a)   Abortions may only be performed by a physician licensed by the State
of Ohio and only in an in-patient medical care facility;
   (b)   Written verification by the attending physician of the diagnosis and
duration of pregnancy indicating the method or methods used to determine
diagnosis and duration of pregnancy in the physician’s best medical judgment;
   (c)   Mandatory pre-operative instructions and counseling by the attending
physician or a counselor certified by the Director of Public Health and
Welfare;
   (d)   Recorded pre-operative history and physical examination particularly
directed to identification of pre-existing or concurrent illnesses or drug
sensitivities that may have a bearing on the operative procedure or the
anesthesia. Permanent post-operative records shall also be maintained by the
physician;
   (e)   Laboratory procedures as usually required for a hospital admission,
including but not limited to blood typing, RH testing, urinalysis (specific
gravity, sugar and microscopic examination of sediment) and blood drawn for
cross matching;
   (f)   Availability of procedures for prevention of RH sensitization if
indicated by blood test;
   (g)   A receiving facility where the patient may be prepared and receive
necessary pre-operative medication and observation prior to the procedure;
   (h)   Availability on the premises of adequate parenteral fluids, oxygen,
anesthesia and resuscitation equipment. There shall also be a written procedure
approved by the Director to deal with any possible emergency situation;
   (i)   A recovery facility in which the patient can be observed until she has
sufficiently recovered from the procedure and the anesthesia, and can be safely
discharged by the physician. Adequate blood transfusion facilities must also be
available so that an emergency transfusion can be given within thirty (30)
minutes;
   (j)   Post-operative instructions and arrangements for follow-up visits by
the woman and available post- operative counseling;
   (k)   Examination by a pathologist of all pathological specimens, and the
disposal of human remains in a legal, humanitarian and dignified manner;
   (l)   The physician performing the abortion must report to the Director or
his or her designate, on an abortion report form available from the Director.
These forms shall be used for statistical purposes by the Department of Public
Health and Welfare and shall not be matters of public record. The name of any
specific person will not be required in the report;
   (m)   The usual informed consent, including the operative permit signed by
the pregnant woman.
(Ord. No. 1861-A-73. Passed 12-10-73, eff. 12-10-73)
§ 231.04 Purposeful Taking of a Fetal Life; Refusals to Perform Abortions
   (a)   There shall be no abortions performed subsequent to viability except
where it is necessary in appropriate medical judgment for the preservation of
the life or health of the woman.
   (b)   No person shall purposely take the life of the fetus born alive.
   (c)   No physician, nurse or other health care personnel shall be required,
against his or her conscience, to perform, assist or participate in medical
procedures which result in the termination of a pregnancy. The refusal of any
person to perform, assist or participate in such medical procedures shall not
be a basis for any disciplinary or other recriminatory action against him or
her, nor shall he or she be liable to any other person for damages, allegedly
arising from such refusal. No hospital, hospital director or governing board of
any hospital shall be required to permit the termination of human pregnancies
within its institution, and the refusal to permit such procedures shall not be
grounds for civil liability to any person, nor a basis for any disciplinary or
other recriminatory action against it.
(Ord. No. 1861-A-73. Passed 12-10-73, eff. 12-10-73)
§ 231.05 Experimentation upon a Fetus
   No person shall experiment upon or sell the product of human conception
which is aborted, irrespective of the duration of the pregnancy.
(Ord. No. 1861-A-73. Passed 12-10-73, eff. 12-10-73)
§ 231.06 License Required; Application
   No person, firm or corporation shall engage in, carry on or operate an
abortion service in the City unless and until he or she has first obtained a
license to engage in, carry on and operate an abortion service. Every applicant
for a license shall make an application in writing to the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses, which application shall set forth and name under
which the abortion service is to be operated and the name of every person, firm
or corporation having an interest in the license, and the location where the
abortion service is to be carried on, and if a corporation, the names and
addresses of all corporate officers, and if a partnership, the names and
addresses of all partners. Such application shall also cite that all standards,
facilities and procedures required by this chapter are in the location stated
in the application and ready for use.
(Ord. No. 1861-A-73. Passed 12-10-73, eff. 12-10-73)
§ 231.07 Inspection Required for Licensing
   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses shall refer each application
for a license hereunder to the Director of Public Health and Welfare, who shall
forthwith make or cause to be made an on-site inspection of the premises,
personnel and facilities where the proposed abortion service is to operate.
After completing such inspection the Director shall return the application to
the Commissioner with his or her approval or disapproval thereon. No license
shall be granted by the Commissioner on disapproval of the Director.
(Ord. No. 1861-A-73. Passed 12-10-73, eff. 12-10-73)
§ 231.08 License Fee
   The license fee for each abortion service location shall be two hundred
dollars ($200.00).
   All applications shall be originally accompanied by a fee of sixty dollars
($60.00), which in no event shall be refunded. After the Director of Public
Health approves the application, the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses
shall issue a license upon the payment of the balance of the two hundred dollar
($200.00) fee. All licenses shall be for a period of one (1) year and expire on
December 31 next following the date of issuance. There shall be no rebate for
any lesser time. The license required shall be conspicuously displayed on the
premises.
(Ord. No. 2393-02. Passed 2-3-03, eff. 2-3-03)
§ 231.09 Prohibition Against Issuing Abortion Service License in Local Retail
District
   Notwithstanding any other provision of the Codified Ordinances, no license,
required under the provisions of Section
231.06, shall be issued for an abortion service to be located in a Local Retail
Business District as set forth in Section
343.01 of the Codified Ordinances, and no abortion service shall operate in a
Local Retail Business District.
(Ord. No. 2048-77. Passed 7-18-77, eff. 7-18-77)
§ 231.99 Penalty
   Any individual, firm, corporation, association or partnership which violates
any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and fined not
more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and, if an individual, shall be
imprisoned not more than six (6) months for each violation. Every violation
shall be considered an individual offense subject to the full penalty of this
section. The Director of Public Health and Welfare is hereby authorized to seal
the operation, as it relates to the termination of pregnancies, of any office,
clinic, medical center or hospital found to be in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 1861-A-73. Passed 12-10-73, eff. 12-10-73)
CHAPTER 233 – DEATHS
233.01   Certification of Death
Cross-reference:
   Corpse abuse, CO
621.13
   Failure to report a crime or knowledge of death, CO
615.04
§ 233.01 Certification of Death
   The death of any person within the City shall be officially certified by the
Cuyahoga County Coroner or a physician. No person shall bury, cremate or
dispose of any human corpse which has not been officially certified dead, but
shall report such fact immediately to the Commissioner of Health, the Chief of
the Bureau of Vital Statistics or the Cuyahoga County Coroner.
(Ord. No. 511-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
CHAPTER 234 – CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS FACILITY TIPPING FEES
234.01   Definitions
234.02   Fee
234.99   Penalty
§ 234.01 Definitions
   (a)   “Construction and Demolition Debris Facility,” means a construction
and demolition debris facility licensed under RC 3714.06.
(Ord. No. 946-06. Passed 6-12-06, eff. 6-16-06)
§ 234.02 Fee
   (a)   Each Construction and Demolition Debris Facility owner or operator
shall pay a fee of thirty cents ($0.30) for each cubic yard of construction and
demolition debris disposed of within the City.
   (b)   Each Construction and Demolition Debris Facility operator shall record
each load of construction and demolition debris material disposed of at their
facility on an Ohio Environmental Protection Agency daily log form. The amount
of material shall be recorded in either yards or tons. Any material recycled
from the construction and demolition debris loads shall not be assessed the
tipping fee provided that the Construction and Demolition Debris Facility
operator maintains documentation on the amount of recycled material.
   (c)   Each Construction and Demolition Debris Facility operator shall make
monthly payment to the Director of Public Health, or his or her designee, based
on the amount of material in yards disposed of during the month multiplied by
the current tipping fee. If construction and demolition debris is recorded in
tons, a conversion factor of two (2) yards equals one ton shall be used to
determine the yardage. Payment shall be made to the Director of Public Health
within thirty (30) days of the end of each month.
   (d)   Tipping fees collected under this section shall be deposited in a fund
and sub-fund designated by the Director of Finance for the purpose of
administering the Department of Public Health’s construction and demolition
debris landfill regulatory program. The funds are appropriated for that
purpose.
(Ord. No. 946-06. Passed 6-12-06, eff. 6-16-06)
§ 234.99 Penalty
   No Construction and Demolition Debris Facility owner or operator shall fail
to comply with any of the provisions in this chapter. Any Construction and
Demolition Debris Facility owner or operator who fails to comply with any
provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree each
day of violation is a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 946-06. Passed 6-12-06, eff. 6-16-06)
CHAPTER 235 – SMOKING BAN – CITY PROPERTY
235.01   Declaration of Nonsmoking Places, Prohibition
235.02   No Smoking in Areas Within 150 Feet of Entrances and Exits of City
Places of Employment
235.03   Restrictions on Smoking in Places of Employment – Repealed
235.04   Exemptions – Repealed
235.05   Designation of Smoking Areas – Repealed
235.06   Enforcement – Repealed
235.07   Education – Repealed
235.08   Governmental Agency Cooperation – Repealed
235.09   Relation to Other Law – Repealed
235.99   Declaration of a Nuisance; Enforcement and Penalties
   Note: Pursuant to Section 2 of Ord. No. 473-11, Sections
235.01,
235.02, and
235.99 shall take effect on June 24, 2011.
§ 235.01 Declaration of Nonsmoking Places, Prohibition
   (a)   Pursuant to RC 3794.05, the City hereby declares any outdoor area
owned and/or controlled by the City and not otherwise qualifying as a
nonsmoking place under RC Chapter 3794, to be a nonsmoking place, except areas
specifically designated by the Director of Public Works as a designated smoking
area.
   (b)   No person shall refuse to immediately discontinue smoking in the
outdoor areas declared nonsmoking places by this section when requested to do
so by the Director of Public Health or his or her designee or any authorized
City officer or employee.
   (c)   The Director of Public Health or Director of Public Works shall post
"No Smoking" signs conspicuously at the ingresses and egresses of all outdoor
areas declared nonsmoking places and shall post signs to designate smoking
areas where appropriate.
   (d)   As used in this Chapter:
      (1)   A.   "Alternative nicotine product" means, subject to division (d)
(1)B., an electronic cigarette or any other product or device that consists of
or contains nicotine that can be ingested into the body by any means,
including, but not limited to, chewing, smoking, absorbing, dissolving, or
inhaling.
         B.   "Alternative nicotine product" does not include any of the
following:
            1.   Any cigarette or other tobacco product;
            2.   Any product that is a "drug" as that term is defined in 21
U.S.C. 321(g)(1);
            3.   Any product that is a "device" as that term is defined in 21
U.S.C. 321(h);
            4.   Any product that is a "combination product" as described in 21
U.S.C. 353(g).
      (2)   A.   "Electronic cigarette" means, subject to division (d)(2)B. of
this section, any electronic product or device that produces a vapor that
delivers nicotine or any other substance to the person inhaling from the device
to simulate smoking and that is likely to be offered to or purchased by
consumers as an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo,
or electronic pipe.
         B.   "Electronic cigarette" does not include any item, product, or
device described in division (d)(1)B.1. to 4. of this section.
      (3)   "Smoking" means inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any
lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, other lighted smoking device for burning
tobacco or any other plant, or alternative nicotine product, including
electronic cigarettes. "Smoking" does not include the burning of incense in a
religious ceremony.
      (4)   "Outdoor area" means city-owned public parks, City-owned outdoor
public recreation areas and City-owned swimming pools, and includes picnic
shelters within City-owned parks and recreation areas; Public Square and all
downtown malls open to the public; and other City-owned areas adjacent to City-
owned and occupied buildings that are used by the public not including the
public right-of-way. "Outdoor area" does not include the City-owned golf
courses, North Coast Harbor, Voinovich Park, and 9th Street Pier, and City-
owned fishing piers and breakwalls, City-owned cemeteries; and designated
smoking areas at City airports as designated by the Director of Port Control
and City buildings, as designated by the Director of Public Works.
(Ord. No. 695-14. Passed 7-16-14, eff. 9-19-14)
§ 235.02 No Smoking in Areas Within 150 Feet of Entrances and Exits of City
Places of Employment
   (a)   Smoking is prohibited within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any
entrance or exit of a City place of employment except as it affects real
property not owned by the City or is otherwise permitted under RC Chapter 3794.
A smoking area within the restricted zone at City airports as designated by the
Director of Port Control, and City buildings, as designated by the Director of
Public Works, are not included in this prohibition. No person shall refuse to
immediately discontinue smoking if smoking within one hundred fifty (150) feet
of any entrance or exit of a City place of employment, when requested to do so
by the Director of Public Health or his or her designee, or any authorized City
officer or employee.
   (b)   The Director of Public Health shall post the prohibition set forth in
division (a) on all “No Smoking” signs posted at any entrance and exit of City
places of employment.
   (c)   “City place of employment” means an enclosed area under the direct or
indirect control of the City that the City’s employees use for work or any
other purpose, and that may also be open to the public.
(Ord. No. 473-11. Passed 4-25-11, eff. 6-24-11)
§ 235.03 Restrictions on Smoking in Places of Employment – Repealed
(Ord. No. 473-11. Passed 4-25-11, eff. 4-25-11)
§ 235.04 Exemptions – Repealed
(Ord. No. 473-11. Passed 4-25-11, eff. 4-25-11)
§ 235.05 Designation of Smoking Areas – Repealed
(Ord. No. 473-11. Passed 4-25-11, eff. 4-25-11)
§ 235.06 Enforcement – Repealed
(Ord. No. 473-11. Passed 4-25-11, eff. 4-25-11)
§ 235.07 Education – Repealed
(Ord. No. 473-11. Passed 4-25-11, eff. 4-25-11)
§ 235.08 Governmental Agency Cooperation – Repealed
(Ord. No. 473-11. Passed 4-25-11, eff. 4-25-11)
§ 235.09 Relation to Other Law – Repealed
(Ord. No. 473-11. Passed 4-25-11, eff. 4-25-11)
§ 235.99 Declaration of a Nuisance; Enforcement and Penalties
   (a)   Any violation of this chapter is declared to be a nuisance which
affects and endangers the public health. The Director of Public Health and any
authorized City officer or employee who, upon information or by observation
ascertains a violation of this chapter, may impose the penalties set forth in
this section. Enforcement of this chapter is in addition to any other method of
enforcement provided in these Codified Ordinances and state law.
   (b)   Whoever violates division (b) of Section
235.01 or division (a) of Section
235.02 is liable to the City of Cleveland for a civil offense and shall receive
a warning on the first offense; on the second offense, shall be fined one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00); on a third offense shall be fined two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00); and beginning with the fourth offense, shall be fined
three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) and each day a violation occurs shall be
a separate offense. Any person charged with the commission of a civil offense
under this section may appeal to the Director of Public Health, or his or her
designee. The appeal shall be taken not later than twenty (20) days from the
date of the civil charge. Failure to file an appeal or pay the costs imposed
within this time period shall constitute a waiver of the right to contest the
charge and shall be considered an admission.
   (c)   The Director of Public Health may issue rules and regulations to carry
out the provisions of these sections which shall be effective thirty (30) days
after their publication in the City Record.
(Ord. No. 1233-15. Passed 11-9-15, eff. 11-11-15)
CHAPTER 235A – TOBACCO PRODUCT SALES LICENSING
235A.01   Definitions
235A.02   Tobacco Retail Sales License Required
235A.03   Tobacco Retail Sales License Fee
235A.04   Restrictions on the Sale of Tobacco Products
235A.05   Self-Service Display Restrictions
235A.06   Enforcement
235A.07   Violations and Civil Penalties
235A.08   Public Education
235A.09   Rulemaking Authority
235A.10   Tobacco Enforcement and Education Fund
235A.11   Severability
235A.99   Penalty
§ 235A.01 Definitions
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   (a)   “Authorized Agent” means an entity with which the Director has
contracted for the community outreach and education provisions contained in
this chapter.
   (b)   “City” means the City of Cleveland, Ohio.
   (c)   “Department” means the Department of Public Health of the City or its
Authorized Agent.
   (d)   “Director” means the Director of the Department of Public Health or
its Authorized Agent.
   (e)   “Distribute” means giving, providing, or delivering Tobacco Products
as defined in this section.
   (f)   “Electronic Smoking Device” has the same meaning as defined in RC
2927.02.
   (g)   “Purchaser” means any person who obtains or attempts to obtain a
Tobacco Product.
   (h)   “Sale” or “sell” means transferring, or offering or attempting to
transfer, Tobacco Product, as defined in the section, for money, trade, barter,
exchange, or other consideration.
   (i)   “Self-Service Display” means the open display or storage of Tobacco
Products in a manner that is physically accessible in any way to the general
public without the assistance of the Tobacco Retailer, as defined in this
section, or its agent, employee, or representative and a direct person-to-
person transfer between the purchaser and the Tobacco Retailer or its agent,
employee, or representative.
   (j)   “Tobacco Product(s)” has the same meaning as defined in RC 2927.02 and
includes vapor product(s) as also defined in that section.
   (k)   “Tobacco Retailer” means any individual, firm, partnership, joint
venture, association, joint stock company, corporation, unincorporated business
entity, or any other group acting as a unit that owns a business where Tobacco
Products are available for sale to the general public. Tobacco Retailer does
not mean the employees or agents of an owner of a business where Tobacco
Products are available for sale to the general public.
(Ord. No. 187-2025. Passed 4-14-25, eff. 10-13-25)
§ 235A.02 Tobacco Retail Sales License Required
   (a)   Each Tobacco Retailer engaging in the sale of Tobacco Products shall
secure a tobacco retail sales license from the Commissioner of Assessments and
Licenses for each location where it sells Tobacco Products in the City before
engaging or continuing to engage in such business. An application for a tobacco
retail sales license shall be made to the Commissioner of Assessments and
Licenses and shall contain the full name of the applicant, the applicant’s
business and personal address and telephone number, the name of the business
for which the tobacco retail sales license is sought, a copy of the applicant’s
valid vendor’s license from the Ohio Department of Taxation, if applicable, the
signed form described in division (f) below, and any additional information the
Commissioner of Environmental Health or the Director deems necessary, such as a
certificate of occupancy issued by the City.
   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses shall transmit the application
to the Director for review, investigation, and a determination of compliance
after which the Director shall return the application to the Commissioner with
a recommendation for approval or disapproval. If the application is recommended
for approval, the Commissioner shall issue a tobacco retail sales license. If
the application is recommended for disapproval, a notice of denial shall be
given to the applicant with the reasons for denial and the right to appeal
under Section
201.03 of these Codified Ordinances.
   (b)   An application for a tobacco retail sales license may also be denied
for the reasons set forth in division (c) of Section
235A.07.
   (c)   No Tobacco Retailer shall sell or distribute Tobacco Products without
a valid tobacco retail sales license.
   (d)   A tobacco retail sales license may be renewed annually upon
application made prior to the expiration of the previous license and shall
remain valid for a period beginning with the date of issuance of the tobacco
retail sales license and ending on the thirty-first (31st) day of December
following the date of the issuance of the tobacco retail sales license unless
sooner revoked under this chapter, unless the Tobacco Retailer has outstanding
fines imposed under this chapter, or unless the Tobacco Retailer to whom it was
issued discontinues business, in either of which case the holder of the tobacco
retail sales license shall immediately return it to the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses. A tobacco retail sales license shall not be
transferred from one Tobacco Retailer to another or from one location to
another.
   (e)   The Tobacco Retailer shall conspicuously display the tobacco retail
sales license at all times and shall provide it to any person upon request. In
the event of mutilation or destruction of the tobacco retail sales license, a
duplicate copy, marked as such, shall be issued by the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses upon application accompanied by a fee set by the
City’s Board of Control and updated from time-to-time as necessary.
   (f)   No tobacco retail sales license shall be issued or renewed to a
Tobacco Retailer unless the Tobacco Retailer provides a signed form stating
that the Tobacco Retailer has read this chapter and has provided training to
all employees regarding the sale of Tobacco Products and restrictions thereto.
Such training shall inform employees that the sale of Tobacco Products to
persons under twenty-one (21) years of age is illegal, identify the types of
identification legally acceptable for proof of age, and explain that sales of
Tobacco Products to persons under twenty-one (21) years of age may subject the
Tobacco Retailer to penalties as provided in this chapter.
   (g)   No tobacco retail sales license shall be issued to a person under
twenty-one (21) years of age.
(Ord. No. 187-2025. Passed 4-14-25, eff. 10-13-25)
§ 235A.03 Tobacco Retail Sales License Fee
   (a)   The fee for a tobacco retail sales license shall be used to cover and
shall not exceed the administrative cost for licensing, community outreach,
education and training, retail inspections, compliance checks and general
enforcement of the provisions authorized by this chapter.
   (b)   The fee for a tobacco retail sales license shall be set by the City’s
Board of Control and updated from time-to-time as necessary. The fee is due at
the time of application and is not refundable.
(Ord. No. 187-2025. Passed 4-14-25, eff. 10-13-25)
§ 235A.04 Restrictions on the Sale of Tobacco Products
   (a)   Age Restriction. No Tobacco Retailer or its agent, employee, or
representative shall sell or distribute any Tobacco Product to any person under
twenty-one (21) years of age, except if a person is participating in a research
protocol described in division (e) of Section
607.15 of these Codified Ordinances and meets the requirements therein.
   (b)   Age Verification. Tobacco Retailers or their agents, employees, or
representatives shall verify by means of government-issued photographic
identification that the purchaser is at least twenty-one (21) years of age.
   (c)   Signage. Signs reading, “THE SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO PERSONS UNDER
21 IS PROHIBITED BY LAW” shall be legibly printed in letters at least one (1)
inch-high and shall be posted clearly and conspicuously in every location where
Tobacco Products are sold. Selling Tobacco Products in any place that does not
have a sign consistent with this division is prohibited by law and punishable
under this chapter.
(Ord. No. 187-2025. Passed 4-14-25, eff. 10-13-25)
§ 235A.05 Self-Service Display Restrictions
   (a)   No Tobacco Retailer or its agent, employee, or representative shall
sell or distribute Tobacco Products by or from a Self-Service Display except in
places where persons under the age of twenty-one (21) are not permitted access.
   (b)   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses, upon the recommendation
and order of the Commissioner of Environmental Health, shall suspend the
applicable license of a Tobacco Retailer in violation of division (a) until the
Tobacco Products have been placed behind a counter or locked doors.
(Ord. No. 187-2025. Passed 4-14-25, eff. 10-13-25)
§ 235A.06 Enforcement
   (a)   This chapter shall be enforced by the Commissioner of Environmental
Health and any other officer or employee designated for that purpose by the
enforcement of this Health Code.
   (b)   All Tobacco Retailers must be open to inspection by the Department or
its Authorized Agent during regular business hours.
   (c)   All Tobacco Retailers may be subject to at least two (2) compliance
checks annually. The Commissioner of Environmental Health, or his or her
designee, may conduct compliance checks by engaging persons between the ages of
eighteen (18) and twenty (20) to enter the premises of Tobacco Retailers to
attempt to purchase Tobacco Products. Follow-up compliance check(s) of all non-
compliant Tobacco Retailers are required within three (3) months of any
violation of this chapter.
   (d)   The results of all compliance checks and inspections are to be kept
and available to the public upon request and may be published on the
Department’s web page at least annually.
   (e)   Any person who desires to register a complaint of an alleged violation
of this chapter or Section
607.15 of these Codified Ordinances may do so by contacting the Commissioner of
Environmental Health, and the Commissioner shall investigate the alleged
violation.
(Ord. No. 187-2025. Passed 4-14-25, eff. 10-13-25)
§ 235A.07 Violations and Civil Penalties
   (a)   The Commissioner of Environmental Health, and any authorized City
officer or employee, who upon information or observation ascertains a violation
of this chapter or Section
607.15 of these Codified Ordinances, may impose civil fines on the Tobacco
Retailer. The fines are as follows and shall be adjusted in proportion to any
increases in the previous year in the consumer price index for all Urban
Consumers (CPI-U), as published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S.
Department of Labor:
      (1)   For a first violation, a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00);
      (2)   For a second violation within a thirty-six (36) month period, a
fine of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) and a seven (7) day suspension of
the applicable tobacco retail sales license;
      (3)   For a third violation within a thirty-six (36) month period, a fine
of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and a thirty (30) day suspension of the
applicable tobacco retail sales license; and
      (4)   For a fourth violation and each subsequent violation thereafter
within a thirty-six (36) month period, a fine of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) and the applicable tobacco retail sales license of the Tobacco
Retailer shall be revoked.
   (b)   Each violation, and every day in which a violation occurs or
continues, shall constitute a separate offense. The determination that a
violation has occurred shall be in writing and mailed to the Tobacco Retailer
by the Commissioner of Environmental Health, no later than thirty (30) days
from the date of the violation. The written notice shall specify the chapter
and section that the Tobacco Retailer violated. A civil penalty imposed under
division (a) above may be appealed to the Director in writing within twenty
(20) days from the date of the civil penalty. The Director shall have
jurisdiction to affirm or reverse. A person aggrieved by a final decision of
the Director may further appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals within thirty
(30) days after the Director’s written decision.
   (c)   A tobacco retail sales license issued under this chapter may also be
denied, suspended, or revoked by the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses,
upon the recommendation and order of the Commissioner of Environmental Health
and through written notice, should the Tobacco Retailer or Tobacco Retailer’s
agent, employee, or representative directly or indirectly:
      (1)   Sell Tobacco Products without a valid tobacco retail sales license;
      (2)   Fail to pay fines issued in accordance with this chapter;
      (3)   Have a tobacco retail sales license revoked within the preceding
twelve (12) months of the date of application for a tobacco retail sales
license;
      (4)   Fail to provide required information or provide false or misleading
information on the application for a tobacco retail sales license;
      (5)   Violate any federal, state, or local tobacco laws; or
      (6)   Sell or distribute marijuana without an applicable state-issued
license, or otherwise engage as a medical or adult-use marijuana operator,
cultivator, processor, dispensary, laboratory, or entity as defined in Sections
347.19(b) and
347.191(b) of these Codified Ordinances without an applicable state-issued
license.
   (d)   All Tobacco Products shall be removed from the premises upon
suspension or revocation of a tobacco retail sales license. Failure to remove
all Tobacco Products shall constitute a separate violation punishable by a fine
of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each and every day of noncompliance.
   (e)   A violation of Section
235A.04 is hereby declared to be a nuisance which affects and endangers the
public health. The Commissioner of Environmental Health and any authorized City
officer or employee who, upon information or by observation ascertains a
violation of Section
235A.04, may impose the penalties set forth in this chapter and in Section
201.99 of these Codified Ordinances. Enforcement of this section is in addition
to any other method of enforcement provided in these Codified Ordinances and
state law.
(Ord. No. 187-2025. Passed 4-14-25, eff. 10-13-25)
§ 235A.08 Public Education
   The Director, or his or her Authorized Agent, shall engage in a continuing
public health education program to explain and clarify the purposes and
requirements of this chapter to Tobacco Retailers and the public. The program
may include publication of a brochure in writing and online for Tobacco
Retailers to explain the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 187-2025. Passed 4-14-25, eff. 10-13-25)
§ 235A.09 Rulemaking Authority
   The Director is hereby authorized to promulgate rules and regulations to
carry out the purpose and intent of this chapter in order to protect the public
health, safety and welfare which shall be effective thirty (30) days after
their publication in the City Record.
(Ord. No. 187-2025. Passed 4-14-25, eff. 10-13-25)
§ 235A.10 Tobacco Enforcement and Education Fund
   All fees and civil fines collected from licensing and infractions of this
chapter are to be deposited into the “Tobacco Enforcement and Education Fund”
administered by the Department to cover the administrative costs for licensing,
community outreach, education and training, retail inspections, and compliance
checks.
(Ord. No. 187-2025. Passed 4-14-25, eff. 10-13-25)
§ 235A.11 Severability
   The provisions of this chapter are severable, and if any provision, clause,
sentence, or paragraph of this chapter or the application thereof to any person
or circumstances are held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be
unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such a ruling shall not affect the other
parts of this chapter that can be given effect.
(Ord. No. 187-2025. Passed 4-14-25, eff. 10-13-25)
§ 235A.99 Penalty
   A Tobacco Retailer that engages in the sale of Tobacco Products without a
valid tobacco retail sales license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be
guilty of distribution of Tobacco Products without a tobacco retail sales
license, a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this section,
then the Tobacco Retailer shall be denied a tobacco retail sales license for a
period of five (5) years.
(Ord. No. 187-2025. Passed 4-14-25, eff. 10-13-25)
CHAPTER 236 – REQUIREMENTS TO IMPLEMENT DINE SAFE OHIO ORDER
236.01   Definitions
236.02   Facial Coverings, Social Distancing and Capacity Requirements
236.03   Emergency Nuisance and Abatement Order
236.04   Responsibility of the Operator
236.05   Civil Penalties and Enforcement
236.06   Appeals
236.07   Expiration
Cross-reference:
   Facial coverings and social distancing during the COVID-19 pandemic, CO
Ch. 602
   Passenger facial coverings in vehicles for hire during the COVID-19
pandemic, CO
437.30
   Sanitization after COVID-19 positive employee, CO Ch.
238
§ 236.01 Definitions
   (a)   The words in this chapter shall have the meaning given to them in
Section
602.01 of the Cleveland Codified Ordinances.
   (b)   "Operator" means a person who owns, controls, operates, or maintains a
business that is subject to the Ohio Director of Health's Dine Safe Ohio Order
dated June 5, 2020 ("Dine Safe Ohio Order") and as thereafter amended.
(Ord. No. 556-2020. Passed 7-15-20, eff. 7-15-20)
§ 236.02 Facial Coverings, Social Distancing and Capacity Requirements
   (a)   No person shall operate a business that is subject to the Dine Safe
Ohio Order or any amendments thereto unless the business complies with the
following:
      (1)   Requires all employees who interact with the public or other
employees to wear a facial covering, except for employees who are not required
by any Ohio Department of Health's order to wear a facial covering, including,
but not limited to the following:
         A.   When facial coverings in the work setting are prohibited by law
or regulation;
         B.   When facial coverings are in violation of documented industry
standards;
         C.   When facial coverings violate the business' documented safety
policies;
         D.   When the employee is working alone in an assigned work area not
open to the public; and
         E.   When a functional (practical) reason exists for an employee not
to wear a facial covering.
      (2)   Requires all individuals consuming food or beverage to be seated.
      (3)   Establishes the required maximum dining capacity by using updated
COVID-19 compliant floor plans as set forth in the Dine Safe Ohio Order or as
thereafter amended that ensures that all individuals must be seated to consume
food or beverage. As used here "dining capacity" includes those who are
consuming food, those who are consuming beverages, and those who are consuming
both.
      (4)   Posts at all public entrances the maximum dining capacity, a copy
of the COVID-19 compliant floor plan, as described in subdivision (a)(3) of
this section, and the maximum reservation or party size limitation as set forth
in Dine Safe Ohio Order or as thereafter amended.
      (5)   If the business has an open congregate area for dancing or other
activities, as described in the Dine Safe Ohio Order and any amendments
thereto, the business shall establish a capacity limit for each such area,
which capacity limit complies with the social distancing requirements in the
Dine Safe Ohio Order and any amendments thereto, and shall post a notice of
each such capacity in each area where individuals can easily see and read the
notice. The capacity for open congregate areas is not in addition to the dining
capacity.
      (6)   The social distancing requirements in the Dine Safe Ohio Order and
any amendments thereto.
      (7)   Requires all individuals entering and remaining in the business to
wear a facial covering at all times, unless an individual is exempted under
division (c) of Section
602.02 of the Cleveland Codified Ordinances.
   (b)   No employee of a place of business who is required to wear a facial
covering under the Dine Safe Ohio Order and any amendments thereto shall fail
to do so.
   (c)   No person owning or operating a place of business shall fail to
provide, within ten (10) days of receiving a written request from the City, a
written justification why an employee is exempt from wearing a facial covering.
(Ord. No. 556-2020. Passed 7-15-20, eff. 7-15-20)
§ 236.03 Emergency Nuisance and Abatement Order
   Any place of business that is operated in violation of the provisions of
this chapter is declared to be an emergency nuisance, and an abatement order
may be summarily issued to the operator to be complied with immediately or the
Director of Public Health, or any authorized City officer or employee, shall
take such action as is necessary to remedy the emergency nuisance condition.
(Ord. No. 556-2020. Passed 7-15-20, eff. 7-15-20)
§ 236.04 Responsibility of the Operator
   Every act or omission of an agent or employee that constitutes a violation
of any provision of this chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of the
operator if such act or omission occurs with the approval of the operator, or
as a result of the operator's negligent failure to supervise the agent's or
employee's conduct. The operator shall be punished for such act or omission in
the same manner as if the operator committed the act or caused the omission.
(Ord. No. 556-2020. Passed 7-15-20, eff. 7-15-20)
§ 236.05 Civil Penalties and Enforcement
   (a)   Any person who violates subdivision (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4),
(a)(5), (a)(6), or (a)(7) of Section
236.02, each constituting a separate offense, shall be issued a verbal warning
and, if the violation continues after a reasonable time to take corrective
measures, the person shall be subject to a civil penalty of one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) for the first offense and a civil penalty of three thousand
dollars ($3,000.00) for each subsequent violation.
   (b)   Any person who violates division (b) of Section 236.02 shall be
subject to a civil penalty of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each violation.
   (c)   The Director of Public Health, Director of Public Safety, or the
Commissioner of Environmental Health, and any other officer or employee
designated by them, and any Cleveland Police Officer may enforce the provisions
of this chapter.
   (d)   The civil penalties prescribed in this section are in addition to any
rights, remedies, or other penalties provided by law.
(Ord. No. 556-2020. Passed 7-15-20, eff. 7-15-20)
§ 236.06 Appeals
   A civil penalty imposed under Section
236.05 may be appealed to the Directors of Public Safety and Public Health
("Directors"), or their designees, within ten (10) days after receipt of the
civil penalty. The Directors shall grant the appeal or conduct a hearing, which
may be virtual, within thirty (30) days. The Directors shall have jurisdiction
to affirm or reverse the civil penalty. A person aggrieved by a final decision
of the Directors may further appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals within
thirty (30) days after the Directors' written decision.
(Ord. No. 556-2020. Passed 7-15-20, eff. 7-15-20)
§ 236.07 Expiration
   This Chapter
236 shall expire upon the termination of the Ohio Director of Health's Dine
Safe Ohio Order dated June 5, 2020 ("Dine Safe Ohio Order") or any amendment,
whichever is later.
(Ord. No. 556-2020. Passed 7-15-20, eff. 7-15-20)
CHAPTER 237 – ADULT VIDEO ARCADES AND ADULT LIVE ENTERTAINMENT ARCADES
237.01   Purpose and Findings
237.02   Definitions
237.03   Configuration
237.04   Minors Prohibited; When
237.05   Responsibility of the Operator
237.06   Applicability of Chapter
237.07   Nuisance
237.08   Severability
237.99   Penalties
   Note: Ordinance No. 1520-03, passed January 26, 2004, repealed Chapter
699 and enacted this chapter relating to Adult Video Arcades and Adult Live
Entertainment Arcades. Sections 2 and 3 of Ordinance No. 1520-03, passed
January 26, 2004, effective March 6, 2004 read as follows:
   Section 2. That within ten (10) days of the passage of this legislation, the
Director of Public Health shall send a notice, by certified and regular mail,
to all Adult Video Arcades and Adult Live Entertainment Arcades located in the
City of Cleveland, informing them of the passage of this legislation and
providing them with a copy of this legislation.
   Section 3. That lawfully established Adult Video Arcades and Adult Live
Entertainment Arcades in existence on the date of the passage of this
legislation will have until August 1, 2004, to come into compliance with the
law. All other businesses must be in compliance from the effective date of this
legislation.
§ 237.01 Purpose and Findings
   Purpose. It is the purpose of this ordinance to regulate sexually oriented
businesses and related activities to promote the health and general welfare of
the citizens of the City. The provisions of this ordinance have neither the
purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of
any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly,
it is neither the intent nor effect of this ordinance to restrict or deny
access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First
Amendment or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually
oriented entertainment to their intended market. It is neither the intent nor
effect of this ordinance to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene
materials.
(Ord. No. 650-05. Passed 6-6-05, eff. 6-15-05)
§ 237.02 Definitions
   (a)   The words in this chapter shall have the meaning given to them in
347.07 of the Cleveland Codified Ordinances.
   (b)   “Operator” means a person who owns, controls, operates, or maintains a
Adult Video Arcade or Adult Live Entertainment Arcade.
   (c)   “Manager’s station” means the area where the owner, operator, or
employee keeps the cash register. This must be an open, conspicuous area
accessible to the patrons.
(Ord. No. 650-05. Passed 6-6-05, eff. 6-15-05)
§ 237.03 Configuration
   No person shall operate an Adult Video Arcade or an Adult Live Entertainment
Arcade unless the Arcade complies with the following requirements:
   (a)   It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure
that at least one (1) employee is on duty and can see the monitor located at
the manager’s station at all times that any patron is present inside the
premises;
   (b)   The premises’ owner or operator installs a camera system in the video
booths that complies with the following requirements:
      (1)   The owner or operator operates the camera system when any of the
booths are available for viewing videos;
      (2)   The owner or operator numbers all the booths in the store with an
individual number so that the booth is identified on the monitor, the digital
recording, and the maintenance log;
      (3)   The camera system includes an individual camera in each video
booth;
      (4)   The individual cameras are placed in the booths in a way that shows
the people inside the booths from at least the knees to the shoulders;
      (5)   Each Video Arcade will ensure that nothing obstructs the camera
from showing the people inside the booths from at least the knees to the
shoulders;
      (6)   Each Video Arcade will immediately remove anything that obstructs
the camera from showing the people inside the booths from at least the knees to
the shoulders;
      (7)   The camera system has a monitor at the manager’s station so that
the owner, operator, or employee who is present in the store can view it;
      (8)   The monitor faces into the store’s public area so that it is
visible from the public area;
      (9)   The monitor’s screen is not obstructed from view from the public
area at any time that the store is open to the public;
      (10)   The monitoring system operates on a switcher system so that the
monitor switches sequentially and continuously from one (1) camera to another.
The continuous switching process will be timed to allow an adequate view of
each area surveyed by each camera. The view inside each booth must be at least
four (4) seconds, but not more than six (6) seconds. Once the camera system
completes a circuit showing the inside of all the booths, the system must
immediately start a new circuit showing inside all the booths;
      (11)   The monitor and the recording identify the booth number for the
booth that is being shown on the monitor;
      (12)   The camera system records the view required in division (b)(10) of
this section in digital format on a minimum five (5) consecutive days recording
loop. The owner or operator must maintain at least the most recent five (5) day
period’s recordings at all times;
      (13)   The camera system records the date and time for the recorded
images;
      (14)   The owner or operator places a sign that is at least five (5)
inches by seven (7) inches in a conspicuous place in each booth stating words
to the effect: “This arcade installed a video-camera-monitoring-and-recording
system in this booth. The arcade monitors and records activity in this booth;”
      (15)   If anyone removes or defaces the sign required by division (b)(14)
of Section
237.03, then the owner or operator will replace the sign with a new one as soon
as store personnel find that the sign has been removed or defaced. The owner or
operator must keep enough extra signs in supply at the store to be able to
replace any sign as needed;
      (16)   If a camera is not operating in any booth, the store must close
that booth until the camera is repaired. “Not operating” means that the camera
does not transmit images showing the booth’s interior so that the image is
shown on the monitor and recorded by the recording device;
      (17)   If the entire camera system is not operating, then the Video
Arcade may not operate any video booths until the system is repaired;
      (18)   Each Video Arcade will keep a log for every time the camera system
or an individual camera is not working. The log also must note any time that
the sign required by division (b)(14) of Section
237.03 is defaced or removed. The log should show the date and time the camera
or camera system stopped working, the date and time a repair company fixed it,
and the repair company’s contact information. The owner or operator must
immediately provide a copy of this log to City officials on request.
   (c)   Restrooms may not contain video- reproduction equipment and shall not
be used for viewing videos.
   (d)   No owner or operator, and no person who is the owner’s or operator’s
agent or employee, shall fail to ensure that the requirements of division (b)
of this section are met at all times.
   (e)   Except inside the video booths, the owner or operator will provide
artificial light at the premises in all areas where the public is permitted at
a level that provides an average illumination of ten (10) foot candles (one
hundred seven (107) lux) over the area at a height of thirty (30) inches above
the floor level. Inside the video booths, the owner or operator will provide
artificial light at a level that allows the activities inside the booth to be
clearly visible on the camera system’s monitor and recordings. If City
officials cannot clearly see activities inside the booths either on the camera
system’s monitor or recordings, then the Video Arcades must raise the light
level inside the booths to the point where the activities are clearly visible.
   (f)   It shall be the duty of the operator, and it shall also be the duty of
any agents and employees present in the premises, to ensure that the
illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is
present in the premises.
   (g)   No viewing room or booth may be occupied by more than one (1) person
at any time.
   (h)   No opening of any kind shall exist between viewing rooms or booths.
   (i)   It shall be the duty of the operator, and it shall also be the duty of
any agents and employees present in the premises, to ensure that no more than
one (1) person at a time occupies a viewing booth or room, and to ensure that
no person attempts to make an opening of any kind between the viewing booths or
rooms.
   (j)   The operator of the sexually oriented business, either personally or
through an agent or employee, shall regularly during each business day, inspect
the walls between the viewing booths to determine if any openings or holes
exist.
   (k)   The operator of the sexually oriented business, either personally or
through an agent or employee, shall regularly during each business day clean
the viewing booths.
   (l)   The operator of the sexually oriented business, either personally or
through an agent or employee, shall cause all floor coverings in viewing booths
to be nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting.
   (m)   The operator of the sexually oriented business, either personally or
through an agent or employee, shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling
surfaces in viewing booths to be constructed of, or permanently covered by,
nonporous, easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood, composition board or
other porous material shall be used within forty-eight (48) inches of the
floor.
(Ord. No. 2163-05. Passed 3-20-06, eff. 3-24-06)
§ 237.04 Minors Prohibited; When
   (a)   No unmarried person under eighteen (18) years of age shall enter any
part of an Arcade in that all of the booths are used to present filmed, taped,
or live entertainment which is characterized by its emphasis on specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
   (b)   If any of the booths in an Arcade are used to present filmed, taped,
or live entertainment that is characterized by its emphasis on specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas, no unmarried person under eighteen
(18) years of age shall enter any of the booths that are used in this way.
   (c)   No operator, either personally or through an agent or employee, shall
permit any unmarried person under eighteen (18) years of age to enter a picture
arcade in violation of division (a) of this section or a booth in violation of
division (b) of this section.
(Ord. No. 650-05. Passed 6-6-05, eff. 6-15-05)
§ 237.05 Responsibility of the Operator
   Every act or omission of an agent or employee that constitutes a violation
of any provision of this chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of the
operator if such act or omission occurs with the authorization, knowledge, or
approval of the operator, or as a result of the operator’s negligent failure to
supervise the agent’s or employee’s conduct. The operator shall also be
punished for such act or omission in the same manner as if the operator
committed the act or caused the omission.
(Ord. No. 1520-03. Passed 1-26-04, eff. 3-6-04)
§ 237.06 Applicability of Chapter
   The applicability of this chapter shall not be avoided by the Arcade’s use
or maintenance of a membership or club format or of any similar form of doing
business.
(Ord. No. 1520-03. Passed 1-26-04, eff. 3-6-04)
§ 237.07 Nuisance
   Any Adult Video Arcade or Adult Live Entertainment Arcade or any part of any
Adult Video Arcade or Adult Live Entertainment Arcade that is operated in
violation of the provisions of this chapter is declared to be a nuisance and
the City shall be authorized to seek an injunction to prohibit it from
maintaining the nuisance.
(Ord. No. 1520-03. Passed 1-26-04, eff. 3-6-04)
§ 237.08 Severability
   If any provision of this chapter is held unconstitutional, invalid, or
unenforceable, the unconstitutional, invalid, or unenforceable provision shall
be considered severable from the remainder of this chapter. It is declared that
each division, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of a division, sentence,
clause, or phrase would have been adopted notwithstanding the
unconstitutionality, invalidity, or unenforceability of any other portion of
this chapter.
(Ord. No. 1520-03. Passed 1-26-04, eff. 3-6-04)
§ 237.99 Penalties
   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter, other than
division (c) of Section
237.04, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Any operator
who, personally or through an agent or employee, permits a minor to enter an
Adult Video Arcade or an Adult Live Entertainment Arcade or booth in violation
of division (c) of Section
237.04 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day upon
which any violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 1520-03. Passed 1-26-04, eff. 3-6-04)
CHAPTER 238 – SANITIZATION AFTER COVID-19 POSITIVE EMPLOYEE
238.01   Definitions
238.02   Sanitization After COVID-19 Positive Employee
238.03   Civil Penalties and Enforcement
238.04   Appeals
238.05   Expiration
Cross-reference:
   Facial coverings and social distancing during the COVID-19 pandemic, CO
Ch. 602
   Passenger facial coverings in vehicles for hire during the COVID-19
pandemic, CO
437.30
   Requirements to implement Dine Safe Ohio order, CO
Ch. 236
§ 238.01 Definitions
   (a)   "Covered businesses" include any for-profit, non-profit, educational
entities, or government entities (other than federal) regardless of the nature
of service, the function it performs, or its corporate or entity structure and
does not include schools, as defined in division (e) of Section
602.01 of the Cleveland Codified Ordinances, or jails or prison facilities.
   (b)   "Sanitize" means to perform environmental cleaning consistent with the
guidance from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention for cleaning and
disinfecting for COVID-19, which cleaning includes using cleaning agents that
are known to kill the coronavirus on all surfaces, including, without
limitation, workstations, countertops, railings, door handles, equipment,
machinery, work tools, walls, and barriers.
(Ord. No. 556-2020. Passed 7-15-20, eff. 7-15-20)
§ 238.02 Sanitization After COVID-19 Positive Employee
   (a)   If any covered business learns that one of its employees tests
positive for COVID-19 and that employee was present in the business while
symptomatic, that business shall sanitize as described in division (b) of
Section
238.01 before that covered business may be open to the public.
   (b)   No covered business shall open to the public until it completes the
sanitization required in division (a) of this Section.
(Ord. No. 556-2020. Passed 7-15-20, eff. 7-15-20)
§ 238.03 Civil Penalties and Enforcement
   (a)   Any person who violates division (b) of Section
238.02 shall be subject to a civil penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
for each offense.
   (b)   The civil penalties prescribed in this section are in addition to any
rights, remedies, or other penalties provided by law.
   (c)   The Director of Public Health, Director of Public Safety, or the
Commissioner of Environmental Health, and any other officer or employee
designated by them, and any Cleveland Police Officer may enforce the provisions
of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 556-2020. Passed 7-15-20, eff. 7-15-20)
§ 238.04 Appeals
   A civil penalty imposed under Section
238.03 may be appealed to the Directors of Public Safety and Public Health
("Directors"), or their designees, within ten (10) days after receipt of the
civil penalty. The Directors shall grant the appeal or conduct a hearing, which
may be virtual, within thirty (30) days. The Directors shall have jurisdiction
to affirm or reverse the civil penalty. A person aggrieved by a final decision
of the Directors may further appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals within
thirty (30) days after the Directors' written decision.
(Ord. No. 556-2020. Passed 7-15-20, eff. 7-15-20)
§ 238.05 Expiration
   This Chapter
238 shall expire upon the termination of the Mayor's Proclamation of Civil
Emergency in the City of Cleveland dated March 11, 2020, as amended.
(Ord. No. 556-2020. Passed 7-15-20, eff. 7-15-20)
CHAPTER 239 – POSTING OF SIGNS WARNING AGAINST CONSUMING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
DURING PREGNANCY
239.01   Definitions
239.02   Sign Posting; Requirements
239.03   Sign Distribution
239.04   Rules and Regulations
239.99   Penalty
   Note: Pursuant to Section 2 of Ord. No. 3046-88, the requirements of
Sections
239.01 through
239.04 and
239.99, as enacted by Ord. No. 3046-88, are not intended to either create a
cause of action against vendors brought by their customers or relieve vendors
from any potential liability to their customers arising out of the sale of
alcoholic beverages.
§ 239.01   Definitions
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   “Alcohol” means ethyl alcohol, whether rectified or diluted with water
or not, whatever its origin may be and includes synthetic denatured alcohol.
Such terms excludes denatured alcohol, and wood alcohol.
   (b)   “Alcoholic beverage” means any liquid or compound containing alcohol
which is fit to use for beverage purposes, from whatever source and by whatever
process produced, by whatever name called and whether or not the same is
medicated, proprietary or patented. Such phrase includes liquor, beer, wine,
mixed beverages and spiritous liquor, all as defined in RC 4301.01.
   (c)   “At retail” means for use or consumption by the purchaser and not for
resale.
   (d)   “Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, organization or legal entity of any kind.
   (e)   “Vendor” means any person who owns or operates a business
establishment which sells at retail alcoholic beverages, excluding state liquor
stores.
(Ord. No. 3046-88. Passed 2-27-89, eff. 4-8-89)
§ 239.02   Sign Posting; Requirements
   All vendors shall post, in a conspicuous place within their business
establishment a sign, measuring at least eight and one-half (8.5) by eleven
(11) in size and containing the following message in legible, English lettering
with black letters on a white background: “Warning: Drinking Alcoholic
Beverages During Pregnancy Can Cause Birth Defects.”
(Ord. No. 3046-88. Passed 2-27-89, eff. 4-8-89)
§ 239.03   Sign Distribution
   The Department of Public Health and Welfare shall have signs printed meeting
the requirements contained in Section
239.02 and shall make them available to vendors upon request. The Director of
Public Health and Welfare shall request of the State of Ohio that state liquor
stores within the City voluntarily comply with the requirements of this
chapter.
(Ord. No. 3046-88. Passed 2-27-89, eff. 4-8-89)
§ 239.04   Rules and Regulations
   The Director of Public Health and Welfare shall promulgate rules and
regulations for the posting of signs by vendors as required by Section
239.02.
(Ord. No. 3046-88. Passed 2-27-89, eff. 4-8-89)
§ 239.99   Penalty
   Any vendor who fails to post signs in accordance with the requirements of
Section
239.02 is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. Each day said offense continues shall
be deemed a separate and distinct offense.
(Ord. No. 3046-88. Passed 2-27-89, eff. 4-8-89)
CHAPTER 240 – LEAD HAZARDS
240.01   Definitions
240.02   Lead Hazards Are A Nuisance
240.03   Prohibitions
240.04   Secondary Prevention
240.05   Lead Abatement and Lead Hazard Control
240.06   Disclosures in Sale or Lease of Target Housing Regarding Lead Hazards
240.07   Residential Property Renovation; Paint Outlet Information Rule
240.08   Notice Requirements
240.09   Enforcement
240.99   Penalties
§ 240.01 Definitions
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   "Clearance examination" means an examination, performed by a clearance
technician, lead inspector, or lead risk assessor, to determine whether lead
hazards in a residential unit, child day-care facility, or school have been
sufficiently controlled. A clearance examination includes a visual assessment,
collection and analysis of environmental samples.
   (b)   "Clearance technician" means a person, other than a licensed lead
inspector or lead risk assessor, who is licensed under RC Chapter 3742 to
perform a clearance examination.
   (c)   "Commissioner" means the Commissioner of the Division of the
Environment of the Department of Public Health unless otherwise specified.
   (d)   "Department" means the Department of Public Health unless otherwise
specified.
   (e)   "Interim controls" means a set of measures designed to temporarily
reduce human exposure or likely exposure to lead-based paint hazards, including
specialized cleaning, repairs, maintenance, painting, temporary containment,
ongoing lead hazard maintenance activities, and the establishment and operation
of management and resident education programs.
   (f)   "Landlord" has the same meaning as in division (b) of Section
375.01.
   (g)   "Lead Abatement" means a measure or a set of measures, designed for
the single purpose of permanently eliminating lead hazards. "Lead abatement"
includes all of the following:
      (1)   Removal of lead-based paint and lead- contaminated dust;
      (2)   Permanent enclosure or encapsulation of lead-based paint;
      (3)   Replacement of surfaces or fixtures painted with lead-based paint;
      (4)   Removal or permanent covering of lead- contaminated soil;
      (5)   Preparation, cleanup, and disposal activities associated with lead
abatement.
   "Lead abatement" does not include any of the following:
      (1)   Residential rental unit lead-safe maintenance practices performed
pursuant to RC 3742.41 and 3742.42;
      (2)   Implementation of interim controls;
      (3)   Activities performed by a property owner on a residential unit to
which both of the following apply:
         A.   It is a freestanding single-family home used as the property
owner's private residence;
         B.   No child under six (6) years of age who has lead poisoning
resides in the unit.
      (4)   Renovation, remodeling, landscaping or other activities, when the
activities are not designed to permanently eliminate lead-based paint hazards,
but, instead, are designed to repair, restore, or remodel a given structure or
dwelling, even though these activities may incidentally result in a reduction
or elimination of lead-based paint hazards. Abatement does not include
operations and maintenance activities or other measures and activities designed
to temporarily, but not permanently, reduce lead-based paint hazards. This
definition shall not be interpreted to exempt any person from any requirement
under State or federal law regarding lead abatement, including lead hazard
control orders or requirements for full abatement of lead-based paint in
certain federally-funded projects.
   (h)   "Lead-based paint" means any paint or other similar surface-coating
substance containing lead at or in excess of the level that is hazardous to
human health as set forth in Rule 3701-32-19 of the Ohio Administrative Code
(OAC) as it may be hereafter amended.
   (i)   "Lead hazard" means material that is likely to cause lead exposure and
endanger an individual's health as set forth in OAC Rule 3701-32-19. Lead
hazard includes lead-based paint, lead-contaminated dust, lead-contaminated
soil and lead-contaminated water pipes.
   (j)   "Lead hazard control" means measures taken to reduce or eliminate a
lead hazard, which includes, but is not limited to, lead abatement, interim
controls, or both, as appropriate.
   (k)   "Permanent" means an expected design life of at least twenty (20)
years.
   (l)   "Rental agreement" has the same meaning described in division (c) of
Section
375.01 of the Codified Ordinances.
   (m)   "Target housing" means any housing constructed prior to 1978, except
housing for the elderly or persons with disabilities (unless any one or more
children age six (6) years or under resides or is expected to reside in such
housing) or any zero (0) bedroom dwelling.
   (n)   "Tenant" has the meaning described in division (e) of Section
375.01 of the Codified Ordinances.
   (o)   "Zero (0) bedroom dwelling" means any residential dwelling in which
the living areas are not separated from the sleeping area. The term includes
efficiencies, studio apartments, dormitory or single room occupancy housing,
military barracks, and rentals of individual rooms in residential dwellings.
(Ord. No. 747-2019. Passed 7-24-19, eff. 7-26-19)
§ 240.02 Lead Hazards Are A Nuisance
   (a)   This Council finds that lead hazards constitute a nuisance.
   (b)   The Commissioner may determine that a nuisance is required to be
immediately controlled under this section if, in the Commissioner’s opinion,
failure to immediately control the hazard may cause a serious risk to the
health of the occupants of the property. In such a case, the Commissioner may
require the owner or manager of the property to immediately control the
nuisance or the Commissioner may, by his or her authorized representative,
immediately control such nuisance.
(Ord. No. 1027-04. Passed 8-11-04, eff. 8-17-04)
§ 240.03 Prohibitions
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Violate any provision of RC Chapter 3742, as may be applicable, or
the rules adopted pursuant to it;
      (2)   Apply or cause to be applied any lead-based paint on or inside a
residential unit, child day-care facility, or school, unless the Ohio director
of health has determined by rule under RC 3742.45 that no suitable substitute
exists;
      (3)   Interfere with an investigation conducted in accordance with this
chapter or RC 3742.35 or by the Commissioner or the Commissioner's designee,
any lead inspector or risk assessor.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly authorize or employ an individual to perform
lead abatement on a residential unit, child day-care facility, or school unless
the individual who will perform the lead abatement holds a valid license issued
under RC 3742.05.
   (c)   No person shall do any of the following when a residential unit, child
day-care facility, or school is involved:
      (1)   Perform a lead inspection without a valid lead inspector license
issued under RC 3742.05;
      (2)   Perform a lead risk assessment or provide professional advice
regarding lead abatement without a valid lead risk assessor license issued
under RC 3742.05;
      (3)   Act as a lead abatement contractor without a valid lead abatement
contractor's license issued under RC 3742.05;
      (4)   Act as a lead abatement project designer without a valid lead
abatement project designer license issued under RC 3742.05;
      (5)   Perform lead abatement without a valid lead abatement worker
license issued under RC 3742.05;
      (6)   Perform a clearance examination without a valid clearance
technician license issued under RC 3742.05, unless the person holds a valid
lead inspector license or valid lead risk assessor license issued under that
section;
      (7)   Perform lead training for the licensing purposes of RC Chapter 3742
without a valid approval from the director of health under RC 3742.08.
      (8)   Perform interim controls without complying with 24 C.F.R. Part 35.
      (9)   Perform lead-safe maintenance practices without complying with RC
3742.41 and 3742.42.
   (d)   No person shall manufacture, sell or hold for sale toys and other
articles intended for use by children as defined in 16 C.F.R. 1303.2, or
furniture as defined in 16 C.F.R. 1303.2, that bears paint containing lead in
excess of 0.009 percent by weight of the total nonvolatile content of the paint
or the weight of the dried paint film.
   (e)   No person shall sell or lease target housing in the City unless the
owner, lessor, or agent of the target housing meets all applicable requirements
of Section
240.06 regarding disclosures of lead hazards.
   (f)   No person renovating target housing in the City shall fail to comply
with Section
240.07.
   (g)   No owner or manager of a retail or wholesale outlet of paint and
paint-removal products shall violate division (b) of Section
240.07 by failing to provide an EPA-approved lead hazard information pamphlet.
   (h)   All power-assisted methods of lead-based paint removal are hereby
prohibited, unless the standards and methods set forth in OAC Chapters 3701-30
or 3701-32, as applicable, are followed. Open flame burning is prohibited under
any circumstances.
(Ord. No. 747-2019. Passed 7-24-19, eff. 7-26-19)
§ 240.04 Secondary Prevention
   (a)   When the Commissioner becomes aware that an individual under six (6)
years of age has lead poisoning, the Commissioner is authorized to conduct an
investigation or lead risk assessment in accordance with the requirements of
OAC Chapter 3701.
   (b)   In conducting the investigation, the Commissioner may request
permission to enter, or for a lead inspector or risk assessor to enter, the
residential unit, child day-care facility, or school that the Commissioner
suspects to be the sources of the lead poisoning. If the Commissioner or
delegated lead inspector or risk assessor is unable to obtain permission to
enter the property, either may apply for an order of court to enter the
property.
   (c)   As part of the investigation, the Commissioner may review the records
and reports, if any, maintained by a lead inspector, lead abatement contractor,
lead risk assessor, lead abatement project designer, lead abatement worker, or
clearance technician.
   (d)   When the Commissioner determines, as a result of an investigation and/
or risk assessment conducted under division (a) of this section, that a
residential unit, child day-care facility, or school are contributing to a
child’s lead poisoning, the Commissioner is authorized to issue an order, in
accordance with OAC Chapter 3701, to have each lead hazard controlled.
   (e)   No person shall fail to comply with an order issued by the
Commissioner under division (d).
(Ord. No. 1027-04. Passed 8-11-04, eff. 8-17-04)
§ 240.05 Lead Abatement and Lead Hazard Control
   (a)   The Commissioner is authorized to establish a program for loaning
equipment, at no cost, for the removal or control of lead hazards in the City
and is authorized to enter into contracts, as approved by the Director of Law,
for the purpose of loaning the equipment.
   (b)   The commissioners and inspectors of the Division of Environment and
Department of Building and Housing are authorized to issue a stop work or cease
and desist order to any person performing work in violation of RC Chapter 3742
or this chapter.
   (c)   No person shall fail to immediately stop lead abatement or control
activities when ordered to do so under division (b) of this section. No person
shall resume lead abatement or control activities except in conformance with
all applicable standards and methods prescribed in RC Chapter 3742.
(Ord. No. 747-2019. Passed 7-24-19, eff. 7-26-19)
§ 240.06 Disclosures in Sale or Lease of Target Housing Regarding Lead Hazards
   (a)   Disclosure in Purchase or Lease of Target Housing.
      (1)   A seller or lessor of target housing must disclose information
concerning lead upon the transfer of any target housing pursuant to the
Residential Lead-Based Paint Hazard Reduction Act of 1992, 42 U.S.C. 4852d, and
shall adhere to all rules and regulations promulgated under the Act, as may be
amended from time to time. Before a purchaser or tenant is obligated under a
contract to purchase target housing or a rental agreement to lease target
housing, the seller or lessor shall perform the activities and provide the
disclosures described in this section:
         A.   Provide the purchaser or tenant with an EPA-approved lead hazard
information pamphlet;
         B.   Disclose to the purchaser in writing in the sales contract, or to
the tenant, in writing in the rental agreement: (i) the presence of any known
lead-based paint, or any known lead-based paint hazards, in the housing; (ii)
any additional information available concerning the known lead-based paint and/
or lead-based paint hazards, such as the basis for the determination that lead-
based paint and/or lead-based paint hazards exist, the location of the lead-
based paint and/or lead-based paint hazards, and the condition of the painted
surfaces; and (iii) whether the property or unit is under a lead hazard control
order;
         C.   Disclose to the tenant a copy of the most recent clearance
examination or lead risk assessment and, if applicable, the lead-safe
certification;
         D.   Provide to the purchaser or tenant any records or reports
(including notices or letters of violation) available pertaining to lead-based
paint or lead-based paint hazards in the target housing, including regarding
common areas, and regarding other residential dwellings in multi-family target
housing, provided that the information is part of an evaluation or reduction of
lead-based paint and/or lead-based paint hazards in the target housing;
         E.   Permit the purchaser a ten (10) day period (unless the parties
mutually agree in writing to a different period of time or to waive this
requirement) to conduct a lead risk assessment or lead inspection for the
presence of lead-based paint and/or lead-based paint hazards;
         F.   Include in the sale or rental agreement the Lead Warning
Statement prescribed in 40 C.F.R. 745.113;
         G.   Include in the sale or rental agreement acknowledgments that the
pamphlet, disclosures, ten (10) day period (if required) and warning required
were provided.
      (2)   Discovery of Lead Hazards or Presumed Lead Hazards. If the owner of
a residential unit learns of the presence of lead-based paint and/or lead-based
paint hazards the owner shall notify each tenant of the presence of lead-based
paint and/or lead-based paint hazards within ten (10) days of discovering its
presence. In addition, the owner shall notify prospective tenants of presumed
lead-based paint and shall provide each tenant with a Lead Warning Statement
and the lead hazard information pamphlet, as prescribed by 42 U.S.C. 4852d.
      (3)   Compliance Assurance. Whenever a seller or lessor has entered into
a contract with an agent for the purpose of selling or leasing a unit of target
housing, the agent, on behalf of the seller or lessor, shall ensure compliance
with the requirements of this section and 40 C.F.R. 745 Subpart F. An agent
means any party who enters into a contract with a seller or lessor, including
any party who enters into a contract with a representative of the seller or
lessor, for the purpose of selling or leasing target housing. The term "agent"
does not apply to purchasers or any purchaser's representative who receives all
compensation from the purchaser.
   (b)   Penalties for Violations.
      (1)   Criminal Penalty. Any person who knowingly fails to comply with any
provision of this section shall be subject to the penalties provided in Section
240.99.
      (2)   The Director of Public Health or Commissioner is authorized to take
lawful action as may be necessary to enforce this section or to enjoin any
violation of it.
      (3)   Civil Liability. Any person who violates any provision of this
section will be jointly and severally liable to the purchaser or lessee in an
amount equal to one (1) month's rent or one (1) month's mortgage payment.
      (4)   In any action brought for damages under this section, the
appropriate court may award court costs to the party commencing the action,
together with reasonable attorney fees and any expert witness fees, if that
party prevails.
      (5)   A non-profit environmental health or housing rights organization is
authorized to bring an action under division (b)(3) of this section on behalf
of an aggrieved individual or individual(s) for violations of this section.
Such organization may recover its costs under the remedies provided in
divisions (b)(3) and (b)(4) of this section if the organization demonstrates
that it has exerted organizational resources, including staff time, to
investigate the alleged non-compliance with this section.
   (c)   Validity of Contracts and Liens. Nothing in this section may affect
the validity or enforceability of any sale or contract for the purchase and
sale or lease of any interest in residential real property or any loan, loan
agreement, mortgage, or lien made or arising in connection with a mortgage
loan, nor may anything in this section create a defect in title.
(Ord. No. 747-2019. Passed 7-24-19, eff. 7-26-19)
§ 240.07 Residential Property Renovation; Paint Outlet Information Rule
   (a)   All renovations, repair and painting performed for compensation in
target housing shall be performed in compliance with 40 C.F.R. Part 745,
Subpart E, Residential Property Renovation, as may be amended from time to
time. Any person performing renovations, repair and painting shall provide to
occupants of the residential property a renovation-specific pamphlet as
required under 40 C.F.R. 745.81.
   (b)   All retail and wholesale outlets of paint and paint removal products
shall distribute an EPA- approved lead hazard information pamphlet to each
purchaser of paint and paint removal products.
(Ord. No. 747-2019. Passed 7-24-19, eff. 7-26-19)
§ 240.08 Notice Requirements
   (a)   For any lead abatement, interim controls, lead-safe maintenance
practices or lead-safe renovation work in a residential unit, child day-care
facility or school, the owner shall provide seven (7) days advance written
notice to all occupants of residential structures, or all parents, students,
teachers, and staff of child day-care facilities or schools from which lead-
based paint is to be removed, and to all occupants of residential structures
which are within thirty (30) feet of the residential structure, child day-care
facility or school from which the lead-based paint is to be removed. The notice
shall be as prescribed by the Commissioner and shall include, at a minimum, the
address at which the lead-based paint will be removed, the date of commencement
of the lead-based paint removal, the anticipated length of time to complete the
removal, and the method by which the lead-based paint will be removed. The
notice shall include a copy of an EPA-approved lead hazard information
pamphlet.
   (b)   The notice required under this section does not relieve any person
from compliance with any other notice requirements under state or federal law,
including when notice is required by a hazard control order.
(Ord. No. 747-2019. Passed 7-24-19, eff. 7-26-19)
§ 240.09 Enforcement
   (a)   Whenever the Commissioner or Director of Building and Housing
(Director) or a designee determines upon information, or by observation or
inspection, that any provision of this chapter is being or has been violated,
the official may issue a notice of violation to the owner, manager, or person
in charge to correct the violation. If the violation constitutes a nuisance
that, in the determination of the Commissioner, Director or designee, may
endanger the health or safety of any person, the notice of violation shall
order the immediate abatement of the nuisance.
   (b)   In addition to any penalty for a violation of this chapter, the
Commissioner or Director or a designee may use any and all remedies in this
Health Code, including
Chapter 203, to prevent, terminate or abate the nuisance, or to otherwise take
action to control the nuisance, the costs and expense of which may be recovered
as provided in RC 715.261, including certifying the costs and expense to the
County Auditor, to be placed on the property as a lien to be collected as other
taxes and returned to the City.
   (c)   In addition to any penalty for a violation of this chapter, the
Commissioner or Director of Building and Housing or a designee may control such
nuisance. The costs and expense of controlling a nuisance by the Commissioner
or designee under this chapter, may be recovered as provided in RC 715.261,
including certifying the costs and expense to the County Auditor, to be placed
on the property as a lien to be collected as other taxes and returned to the
City.
   (d)   The authority described in division (c) to control such nuisance
includes the authority to order the owner or manager to relocate the occupants
of a residential unit, day-care facility, or school, until the property passes
a clearance examination, if the Commissioner determines that the health of the
occupants may be at risk during the lead hazard control work. The Commissioner
may relocate the occupants until the residential unit, child day-care facility,
or school passes a clearance examination. The costs and expense of the
relocation may be recovered by certifying those costs to the County Auditor, to
be placed on the property as a lien to be collected as other taxes and returned
to the City.
   (e)   In the event of an actual or threatened violation of this chapter, or
in an emergency situation, the Director of Law, in addition to other remedies
provided by law, may institute a proper suit in equity or at law to prevent,
terminate or otherwise remedy the violation.
   (f)   In addition to all other penalties and remedies provided by law, any
person damaged by a nuisance caused by a violation of this chapter may
institute a proper action in equity or at law to prevent, terminate or
otherwise remedy the violation.
   (g)   The City has enacted and enforces the provisions of this chapter only
to promote the public health, safety and general welfare, and for obligations
imposed on it by the State of Ohio under delegation by the Ohio Department of
Health. The City does not assume, nor does it impose on its officers and
employees, an obligation the breach of which causes it to be liable in money
damages to any person who claims that such breach proximately caused injury. In
addition, nothing in this chapter may be interpreted to limit the City's
statutory immunity under RC Chapter 2744.
(Ord. No. 747-2019. Passed 7-24-19, eff. 7-26-19)
§ 240.99 Penalties
   (a)   Whoever violates division (f) of Section
240.03 is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
   (b)   Whoever violates any provision of Chapter
240 for which no other penalty is provided or rule or regulation or order under
this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. Except for a
violation of division (f) of Section
240.03, each day during which noncompliance or a violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
   (c)   As provided by RC 2901.23 and 2929.31, organizations convicted of an
offense are guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(Ord. No. 736-06. Passed 8-9-06, eff. 8-16-06)
TITLE III: FOOD AND FOOD PRODUCTS
   Chapter
241   Food Shops
   Chapter
243   Ohio Uniform Food Safety Code
   Chapter
245   Frozen Desserts
CHAPTER 241 – FOOD SHOPS
241.01   Rules and Regulations
241.02   Enforcement and Inspection
241.03   Definitions
241.04   Quality and Labeling Standards
241.041   Safe Food Sanitation Standards
241.05   Food Shop Licenses and Fees
241.051   Food Vehicle Permit; Fee – Expired
241.06   License or Permit Disapproval; Revocation; Suspension; Appeals
241.061   Public Health Information Sign Requirements
241.07   Display of License, Permit, and Public Health Information Sign
241.08   Food Shop Sanitation
241.09   Food Handling Premises to be Free of Insects and Rodents
241.10   Animals Prohibited
241.11   Walls, Ceilings, Floors; Light and Ventilation
241.12   Water Supply
241.13   Sanitary Facilities
241.14   Equipment and Utensils
241.15   Wastes
241.16   Living and Sleeping Quarters
241.17   Offensive Substances and Odors
241.18   Reserved
241.19   Transportation
241.20   Display
241.21   Licensing Outdoor Restaurants: Procedure and Fee
241.22   Adulterated or Misbranded Food
241.23   Cleanliness of Food Handlers
241.231   Sale of Irradiated Foods – Repealed
241.232   Perishable food labeling – Repealed
241.24   Adulterated or Misbranded Drugs or Cosmetics
241.25   Vending Machines
241.26   Sources of Poultry and Game
241.27   Sale of Poultry by Weight
241.28   Inspections Required
241.29   Standards for Hamburg or Hamburger
241.30   Standards for Ground Beef, Ground Steak, Ground Chuck, Chopped Beef,
Chopped Steak, etc.
241.31   Standards for Pork Sausage and Breakfast Sausage
241.32   Enforcement Requiring Extra Services; Costs
241.33   Perishable Food Labeling
241.34   Safe Food Sanitation Standards
241.35   Categories and Fees
241.36   Mobile Food Shops – Location Permits; Fee
241.37   Mobile Food Shops – Location Restrictions
241.38   Mobile Food Shops – Regulations
241.39   Standards for Pork Sausage and Breakfast Sausage – Repealed
241.40   Enforcement Requiring Extra Services; Costs – Repealed
241.42   Foods Containing Industrially-Produced Trans Fat Restricted
241.43   Beverages Offered with Children's Meals
241.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Adulterated food, candy, CO
629.03
   Coloring, sale or display of rabbits, poultry, CO
603.10
   Defrauding restaurants, CO
625.25
   Meat packing standards, CO
651.01
   Vermin and rodent infestation, CO
Ch. 211
Statutory reference:
   Adulterated, misbranded and unsafe food, RC 3715.59 et seq.
   Food processing places to be kept sanitary, RC 913.41 et seq.
   Marketing standards, RC Ch. 925
   Pure Food and Drug Law, RC Ch. 3715
§ 241.01 Rules and Regulations
   The Directors of Public Health and Capital Projects are authorized to adopt
rules and regulations as may be necessary for the proper interpretation and
enforcement of this chapter. Such rules and regulations shall be published in
the City Record for two (2) consecutive weeks and shall be effective after
fifteen (15) days from the second publication thereof. Such rules and
regulations shall have the force and effect of this chapter and continue in
effect until revoked by the respective Director or by resolution of Council.
(Ord. No. 1657-11. Passed 11-28-11, eff. 11-28-11)
§ 241.02 Enforcement and Inspection
   The Director of Public Health, and authorized employees who are registered
environmental health specialist or environmental health specialist-in-training,
are charged with the enforcement of this chapter. Any such person shall have
the right to enter and inspect any place where the business of food is engaged
in. No person shall refuse or hinder inspection, or fail to answer all
reasonable questions relative to handling food or fail to furnish, upon
request, any records deemed necessary for the enforcement of this chapter. If
the Director of Public Health and/or authorized employees find, or have cause
to believe, that within a retail food establishment or food service operation
in their jurisdiction food is adulterated, or so misbranded as to be dangerous
or fraudulent, said food may be embargoed in accordance with OAC 901: 3-4-15,
3701-21-27 and may be taken for examination, free of charge. Whenever the
Director of Public Health and/or authorized employees find in any food shop,
any meat, seafood, poultry, vegetable, fruit, or other perishable foods that
are unsound, or contain any filthy, decomposed, or putrid substance, or that
may be poisonous or deleterious to health or otherwise unsafe, the foods are
declared to be a nuisance, and shall forthwith be condemned or destroyed, or in
any other manner rendering the items unsalable as human food. The Director of
Capital Projects shall have concurrent authority to enforce the provisions of
this chapter not specifically delegated to the Director of Public Health.
   The Director of Public Health and/or authorized employees acting as the
licensor are authorized to tag any article, such as a utensil, material, or
piece of equipment if the article presents a public health hazard. In
accordance with OAC 901: 3-4-12, the procedures for cease use must be followed
when tagging equipment in a Retail Food Establishment and Food Service
Operation. For the purposes of this rule, a public health hazard is presented
by any article whose use can reasonably be expected to result in the
contamination or adulteration of a food product based upon its state of repair,
cleanliness, location, or construction. The licensor may tag any such article
and prohibit the article’s use by the license holder. A tag removing an article
from use shall state the reason for the article’s removal from use, and either
state the provisions for returning the article to use or the disposition of the
article if the article cannot be satisfactorily reconditioned. No license
holder shall remove or permit to be removed, a tag without the permission of
the licensor.
(Ord. No. 707-2025. Passed 7-9-25, eff. 7-14-25)
§ 241.03 Definitions
   (a)   As used in this chapter:
      (1)   "Food shop" applies to "retail food establishment" and "food
service operation", as those terms are defined in RC Chapter 3717.
      (2)   "Mobile food shop" means a "mobile retail food establishment" or
"mobile food service operation", as those terms are defined in RC Chapter 3717.
      (3)   "Vendor" means a mobile food shop or a person operating a mobile
food shop.
      (4)   "Food item" means a raw, cooked, or processed edible substance,
ice, beverage, or ingredient used or intended for use or for sale in whole or
in part for human consumption. Food includes ice, water or any other beverage,
food ingredients, and chewing gum.
      (5)   "Street" means street, alley, highway, roadway, or avenue.
      (6)   "Vending device" means a container for the sale, display or
transport of food items by a vendor.
      (7)   "Mobile food shop manager" means the individual or individuals with
primary responsibility and authority for operating a mobile food shop.
      (8)   "Trailer" means an unpowered flatbed vehicle towed by another.
      (9)   "Central Business District" means the area defined inSection
325.12.
      (10)   "Community event" or "special event" means a community based
organization event specifically granted use of streets and sidewalks within a
specifically defined area for a period of time not exceeding ten (10) days.
      (11)   "Sidewalk" means that portion of the street between the curb lines
or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property line.
      (12)   "Street" means street, alley, highway, roadway, or avenue.
      (13)   "Unobstructed walk" means a clear, continuous paved surface free
of tree grates, elevator grates and all vertical obstructions.
      (14)   "Operator" means a vendor.
      (15)   "Commercial Activity" is defined as any activity which is
conducted as part of the commercial establishment.
      (16)   "Public Health Information Sign" means the placard (white, yellow,
or red) that is issued by Cleveland Department of Public Health to the license
holder following a standard health or safety inspection which shall designate
whether the license facility is inspected and in compliance, or in the
enforcement process.
   (b)   The definitions contained in RC Chapters 3715 and 3717 pertaining to
the administration and enforcement of food safety programs are adopted and
incorporated by the City of Cleveland as if set forth herein.
(Ord. No. 1233-15. Passed 11-9-15, eff. 11-11-15)
§ 241.04 Quality and Labeling Standards
   (a)   The definitions and standards of identity, the standard of quality,
the standard of fill of container and the labeling requirements for any food
sold or manufactured in the City shall be those established for interstate
commerce by the United States Food and Drug Administration and Ohio Department
of Agriculture.
   (b)   Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, the definitions and
standards of identity and the labeling requirements for meat, meat by-products
and meat food products sold or manufactured in the City shall be those of the
Ohio Department of Agriculture.
(Ord. No. 2163-01. Passed 5-20-02, eff. 5-23-02)
§ 241.041 Safe Food Sanitation Standards
   The definitions and standards for safe sanitation in retail food
establishments and food service operations shall be any established as the Ohio
Uniform Food Safety Code, promulgated by The Ohio Director of Agriculture and
Ohio Public Health Council pursuant to RC 3717.05.
(Ord. No. 2025-2000. Passed 12-18-00, eff. 12-27-00)
§ 241.05 Food Shop Licenses and Fees
   (a)   No food shop shall be operated without the person, firm, association,
or corporation conducting the business first applying for and obtaining an
annual license. All fees and charges assessed under this section shall be paid
to the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses.
   (b)   The provisions of RC Chapters 3715 and 3717 pertaining to the
licensing, administration and enforcement of food safety programs by the local
licensing authority are adopted and incorporated herein by the City of
Cleveland.
   (c)   The holder of a food service operation license as defined by state law
shall not be required to obtain a retail food establishment license except when
the activities of a retail food establishment and a food service operation are
carried on within the same facility by the same person or entity, then the
determination of what license applies shall be made according to the primary
business of the person or entity as determined by the licensor, the City of
Cleveland Director of Public Health, as described in RC 3717.44.
   (d)   Each application to the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses for a
mobile food service operation license required under RC 3717.43 shall be
accompanied by a combined license and inspection fee as follows:
 
2025
Risk Level             Fee
FSO Mobile             $376.00
RFE Mobile (High Risk) $376.00
RFE Mobile (Low Risk)  $188.00
 
 
2026
Risk Level             Fee
FSO Mobile             $400.00
RFE Mobile (High Risk) $400.00
RFE Mobile (Low Risk)  $200.00
 
   (e)   Each application to the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses for a
vending food service operation license required under RC 3717.43 shall be
accompanied by a combined license and inspection fee as follows:
 
2025
Risk Level Fee
Vending    $17.80
 
 
2026
Risk Level Fee
Vending    $18.30
 
   (f)   Each application to the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses for a
temporary commercial food service operation and temporary non-commercial food
service operation license required under RC 3717.43 shall be accompanied by a
combined license and inspection fee as follows:
 
2025
Risk Level       Fee
5-day temporary  $120.00
5-day temporary  $60.00
(non-commercial)
 
 
2026
Risk Level       Fee
5-day temporary  $130.00
5-day temporary  $65.00
(non-commercial)
 
   (g)   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses may also collect fees for
collection and bacteriological examination of samples taken from a food shop in
an amount equal to the cost of such collection and examination as determined by
the Director of Public Health.
   (h)   Except for plans pertaining to mobile or temporary food service
operations or vending devices, the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses
shall collect fees in the amounts stated below, for plan reviews of food shops
prior to submission of plans to the Department of Public Health:
 
2025 Plan Review Fee Commercial Non-Commercial
New Operations       $500.00    $250.00
Extensive Alteration $250.00    $125.00
 
 
2026 Plan Review Fee Commercial Non-Commercial
New Operations       $500.00    $250.00
Extensive Alteration $250.00    $125.00
 
   (i)   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses shall submit all
applications for a food shop license to the Director of Public Health for
approval or disapproval of the application.
   (j)   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses is authorized to collect
license fees for retail food establishments and food service operations and
deposit the fees into a fund created under RC 3717.25 and 3717.45.
   (k)   For purposes of this section, non-commercial organizations are defined
as organizations such as churches, or non-profit organizations operated
exclusively for charitable purposes as defined in RC 5739.02(B)(12), provided
that displayed foods are not displayed for more than seven (7) consecutive days
or more than fifty-two (52) separate days per year.
   (l)   For a food service operation, a penalty of twenty five percent (25%)
of any license fee required by this section must be paid before the issuance of
the license if the required license fee is not paid on or before the date it is
due.
(Ord. No. 665-2025. Passed 7-9-25, eff. 7-14-25)
§ 241.051 Food Vehicle Permit; Fee – Expired
(Ord. No. 210-11. Passed 4-25-11, eff. 4-25-11)
§ 241.06 License or Permit Disapproval; Revocation; Suspension; Appeals
   (a)   The Director of Public Health may suspend or revoke a food license
upon determining that the license holder is in violation of any requirement of
RC Chapter 3717 or the rules adopted thereunder, which are applicable to retail
food establishments and food service operations, including a violation
evidenced by the documented failure to maintain sanitary conditions within the
operation.
   (b)   Except in the case of a violation that presents an immediate danger to
the public health, prior to initiating an action to suspend or revoke a food
license, the Director of Public Health shall give the license holder written
notice specifying each violation and a reasonable time within which each
violation must be corrected to avoid suspension or revocation of the license.
The Director of Public Health, and/or authorized employee, may extend the time
specified in the notice for correcting a violation if the license holder, in
the sole discretion and determination of the Director of Public Health, is
making a good faith effort to correct the alleged violation. If the license
holder fails to correct the violation in the time granted by the Director of
Public Health, and/or authorized employee, the Director of Public Health, and/
or authorized employee, may initiate an action to suspend or revoke the food
license by giving the license holder written notice of the proposed suspension
or revocation.
   (c)   In the case of a violation that presents an immediate danger to the
public health, the Director of Public Health may issue an immediate order of
suspension or revocation of a food license without giving written notice or
affording the license holder the opportunity to correct the violation.
   (d)   The license holder may appeal the proposed suspension or revocation of
a food license or the immediate order of suspension or revocation of a food
license as provided in RC 3717.29 and 3717.49 and in conformance with the rules
of procedure adopted thereunder. In such cases, the Director of Public Health
is charged with presiding over the hearing and is authorized to render a
decision denying, suspending or revoking a license, or rendering a decision to
dissolve or continue an issued suspension. A food license can be suspended for
a period up to thirty (30) days.
   (e)   A mobile food shop permit issued under Section 241.36 may be suspended
or revoked by the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses for violations of
Sections
241.37 and/or
241.38. The permittee or applicant may appeal a suspension, revocation, or
disapproval of a permit to the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses within
twenty (20) days of the date of notice of suspension, revocation, or
disapproval. The permittee or applicant may appeal the Commissioner's decision
to the Board of Zoning Appeals established pursuant to Charter Section
76-6. Notice of such appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the
Board within ten (10) days from the date of the written decision of the
Commissioner.
   (f)   If a food license has been revoked due to a violation of any of the
laws set forth in this chapter, then such food shop may not reapply for a
license or permit to operate such a business at the same location for a period
of six (6) months after the date of revocation.
(Ord. No. 507-15. Passed 7-22-15, eff. 7-27-15)
§ 241.061 Public Health Information Sign Requirements
   (a)   At the completion of each standard inspection or reinspection of a
licensed facility, the Cleveland Department of Public Health shall issue and
deliver a public health information sign to the proprietor in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter. The proprietor shall continually maintain and
display the most recent public health information sign issued by the Cleveland
Department of Public Health until a more recent public health information sign
is issued by Cleveland Department of Public Health.
   (b)   The public health information sign shall designate whether the
licensed facility is inspected and in compliance, inspected and in need of a
follow-up inspection or in the enforcement process.
   (c)   The public health information sign which designates that a licensed
facility is in compliance shall be the color green and shall have no critical
violations and shall have the word "INSPECTED".
   (d)   The public health information sign which designates that a licensed
facility is in the enforcement process shall be the color white if the facility
has one (1) to four (4) uncorrected critical violations, yellow if the facility
has five (5) or six (6) uncorrected critical violations, and red if the
facility has seven (7) or more uncorrected critical violations or any critical
issue(s) that pose(s) an imminent risk to public health, and shall have the
words "INSPECTED" and "enforcement process".
   (e)   If the Cleveland Department of Public Health issues a red sign, the
Department must notify the Council within one (1) week of issuing the red sign.
(Ord. No. 1298-16. Passed 11-21-16, eff. 11-23-16)
§ 241.07 Display of License, Permit, and Public Health Information Sign
   (a)   No person shall fail to display the license or permit issued under
this chapter in a conspicuous place upon the wall and close to the entrance of
the premises where such business is conducted.
   (b)   No person shall fail to display the public health information sign
issued by the Cleveland Department of Public Health in the most recent manner
that is clearly visible to the general public and to patrons entering the
licensed facility.
   (c)   Upon receipt of a public health information sign, the proprietor
shall:
      (1)   Post the public health information sign in the front window of the
establishment so as to be visible from outside and located within five (5) feet
of the front door and not less than four (4) feet or more than six (6) feet
from the floor; or posted in a display case which is mounted on the outside
front wall of the establishment and located within five (5) feet of the front
door and not less than four (4) feet or more than six (6) feet from the floor;
or posted in a location as directed and determined at the discretion of the
Cleveland Public Health Department to ensure proper notice to the general
public and to patrons.
      (2)   In the event that the licensed facility is operated in the same
building or space as another business, or in the event that a licensed facility
shares a common patron entrance with another business, or in the event of both,
the public health information sign shall, unless otherwise directed by the
Cleveland Public Health Department, be posted in the initial patron contact
area or in a location as directed and determined at the discretion of the
Cleveland Public Health Department to ensure proper notice to the general
public and to patrons.
      (3)   No proprietor shall cause or allow the public health information
sign to be altered, defaced, marred, camouflaged, removed, duplicated, replaced
or hidden from view.
      (4)   Continually maintain and display only the most recent public health
information sign.
   (d)   Food vehicles shall display a public health information sign in
accordance with division (b) of this section and display the name and address
of the business on the side of such vehicle in letters at least two (2) inches
high and shall have displayed the vehicle permit plate issued by the
Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses.
(Ord. No. 507-15. Passed 7-22-15, eff. 1-1-16)
§ 241.08 Food Shop Sanitation
   Every food shop and all parts thereof and appurtenant thereto, shall be kept
clean and sanitary at all times and free from any accumulation of filth and
waste material.
(Ord. No. 2163-01. Passed 5-20-02, eff. 5-23-02)
§ 241.09 Food Handling Premises to be Free of Insects and Rodents
   All buildings and portions of buildings in which food is prepared, stored or
served shall be of rat-proof construction and insect and rodent free. When
flies are prevalent, all openings to the outer air shall be effectively
screened and doors shall be self-closing unless other effective means are
provided to prevent their entrance.
(Ord. No. 2163-01. Passed 5-20-02, eff. 5-23-02)
§ 241.10 Animals Prohibited
   No live animals shall be brought into, or kept in any room in which food is
prepared, processed, stored or served except that guide dogs accompanying their
blind masters may not be prohibited.
(Ord. No. 2163-01. Passed 5-20-02, eff. 5-23-02)
§ 241.11 Walls, Ceilings, Floors; Light and Ventilation
   The walls and ceilings of food shops shall be of smooth construction and
easily cleanable material and shall be kept clean, in good repair and well-
painted. Floors shall be of impervious material and smooth construction and
shall be kept clean. Rooms where food is handled shall be well-ventilated and
food preparation and utensil washing areas shall be adequately lighted and
sufficient in size for their purpose.
(Ord. No. 2163-01. Passed 5-20-02, eff. 5-23-02)
§ 241.12 Water Supply
   Every food shop shall have running hot and cold water, abundant in supply
and under adequate pressure supplied to conveniently located sinks, and if
necessary, other devices for the processing of food and washing of equipment.
The water shall be of safe, sanitary quality.
(Ord. No. 2163-01. Passed 5-20-02, eff. 5-23-02)
§ 241.13 Sanitary Facilities
   (a)   Every food shop shall be provided with adequate toilet facilities.
Such facilities shall be clean, in good repair and properly ventilated. All
toilet room doors shall be tight fitting and self-closing and no toilet room
shall open directly into any room where food is prepared or served.
Conveniently located hand-washing facilities shall be provided for all toilet
rooms, including wash bowl supplied with running hot and cold water, soap and
sanitary towers or other approved drying facilities. Such hand-washing
facilities shall not be used for the washing of food or food equipment. No
employee shall resume work after using the toilet room without washing his or
her hands. When deemed necessary, auxiliary hand-washing facilities shall be
provided in the food preparation area.
   (b)   No clothing shall be kept in an objectionable manner in any food shop
and when deemed necessary, suitable dressing rooms shall be provided for
employees.
(Ord. No. 2163-01. Passed 5-20-02, eff. 5-23-02)
§ 241.14 Equipment and Utensils
   All equipment in food shops shall be designed, constructed and so placed as
to be easily cleanable, and shall be in good repair and kept clean. No utensils
shall be made wholly or in part of lead, cadmium or other substances which food
may affect to form dangerous or unwholesome substances. Utensils shall be
stored and handled in a manner to prevent contamination. Drying cloths, table
cloths and napkins shall be clean and used only for their intended purposes.
(Ord. No. 2163-01. Passed 5-20-02, eff. 5-23-02)
§ 241.15 Wastes
   All food shop wastes, whether liquid or solid, combustible or
noncombustible, whether inside or outside the shop, shall be kept in such a
manner as not to become a nuisance. All stored garbage and rubbish shall be
kept in suitable, tightly covered containers.
(Ord. No. 2163-01. Passed 5-20-02, eff. 5-23-02)
§ 241.16 Living and Sleeping Quarters
   No building or portion of a building where food is prepared for sale shall
be used for living purposes unless the portion of the building so used is
separated from the food shop. There shall be no direct opening between rooms
where food is stored, prepared or served to the public, and rooms used for
living purposes.
(Ord. No. 2163-01. Passed 5-20-02, eff. 5-23-02)
§ 241.17 Offensive Substances and Odors
   In any room where food is processed, no barbering, shoe repairing,
laundering or other operation where offensive substances or odors may be set
free, shall be allowed.
(Ord. No. 2163-01. Passed 5-20-02, eff. 5-23-02)
§ 241.18 Reserved
§ 241.19 Transportation
   No food shall be transported unless it is so covered that it is protected
from dust, dirt, insects and other contaminating substances. Every vehicle
transporting food shall be kept in a clean, sanitary condition.
(Ord. No. 2163-01. Passed 5-20-02, eff. 5-23-02)
§ 241.20 Display
   No food shall be displayed in, upon or over any street, alley, sidewalk, or
other public place in the City, except in districts designated by the City as
market districts. Produce or other foodstuffs displayed outside on the food
shop’s property shall be displayed so as to be protected from contamination.
(Ord. No. 2163-01. Passed 5-20-02, eff. 5-23-02)
§ 241.21 Licensing Outdoor Restaurants: Procedure and Fee
   (a)   To provide for issuance of annual licenses by the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses and to direct the Director of Public Health to develop
rules for the operations not inconsistent with state statutes and regulations,
application shall be accepted by the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses
from restaurants, the approval of which will allow them to conduct commercial
activity outdoors.
   (b)   Each license application shall have included with it a sketch of the
premises showing what outdoor areas are proposed to be used for commercial
activity.
   (c)   Before any food shop may expand its operation to an outdoor area, in
addition to obtaining a food service operation or retail food establishment
license, it must submit a new application for an outdoor restaurant license and
new sketch of the premises to the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses and
obtain approval as required by this section.
   (d)   Each application shall be accompanied by an outdoor license fee of
fifty dollars ($50.00).
   (e)   This section shall in no way supersede any applicable portions of City
or state health regulations.
   (f)   On the approval of the application by the Director of Public Health,
the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses shall issue the outdoor restaurant
license. Denial of an outdoor restaurant license may be appealed to the Board
of Zoning Appeals.
   (g)   After issuance of the outdoor restaurant license, each applicant must
submit an application for a sidewalk permit under
Chapter 513 of these Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 507-15. Passed 7-22-15, eff. 7-27-15)
§ 241.22 Adulterated or Misbranded Food
   No person, firm or corporation shall sell, keep for sale, store or serve any
food or drink that is unclean, unwholesome, spoiled, unfit for human
consumption, adulterated, misbranded, not labeled if required to be labeled or
which does not conform to standard. All milk, milk products, frozen desserts,
meat, meat by-products and meat food products, shellfish and ice shall be from
approved, inspected sources.
(Ord. No. 2163-01. Passed 5-20-02, eff. 5-23-02)
§ 241.23 Cleanliness of Food Handlers
   All food handlers shall be clean in their habits and shall wear clean
garments. When deemed necessary, food handlers shall wear caps, nets or other
hair coverings when preparing or serving food. Food handlers shall not
expectorate or use tobacco in any form in rooms where food is prepared or
served.
(Ord. No. 2163-01. Passed 5-20-02, eff. 5-23-02)
§ 241.231 Sale of Irradiated Foods – Repealed
(Ord. No. 2025-2000. Passed 12-18-00, eff. 12-27-00)
§ 241.232 Perishable food labeling – Repealed
(Ord. No. 2163-01. Passed 5-20-02, eff. 5-23-02)
§ 241.24 Adulterated or Misbranded Drugs or Cosmetics
   No person, firm or corporation shall sell or offer for sale in the City any
drug, cosmetic or device that is adulterated, misbranded or fraudulent.
(Ord. No. 2163-01. Passed 5-20-02, eff. 5-23-02)
§ 241.25 Vending Machines
   (a)   No person shall employ a coin-operated or other mechanical dispensing
device for vending of food or drink unless the machine is constructed of
suitable material and designed for easy, thorough cleaning and sanitizing and
is maintained in clean, sanitary surroundings. Each machine shall be filled
with wholesome ingredients, handled under sanitary conditions and transported
in a clean, sanitary manner.
   (b)   Food in vending machines shall not be admixed with any trinket, prize
or other similar novelty made of plastic, metal or other non-nutritive
substances.
   (c)   Whenever requested by the official charged with the enforcement of
this chapter, the owner or operator of such mechanical devices for dispensing
food and drink, or his or her representatives, shall assist in making
inspection of the interior of such machines at all reasonable hours.
(Ord. No. 2163-01. Passed 5-20-02, eff. 5-23-02)
§ 241.26 Sources of Poultry and Game
   No poultry or game shall be brought into the City for sale except in
conformity with all applicable Federal and State and City laws and regulations
including RC Chapters 3715 and 3717.
(Ord. No. 2163-01. Passed 5-20-02, eff. 5-23-02)
§ 241.27 Sale of Poultry by Weight
   Poultry shall be sold by weight only.
(Ord. No. 2163-01. Passed 5-20-02, eff. 5-23-02)
§ 241.28 Inspections Required
   (a)   No person, firm or corporation shall sell, keep for sale, store or
deliver within the City any meat, meat by-product or meat food product that is
adulterated, mislabeled or not labeled if required to be labeled.
   (b)   No uninspected meat, meat by-product or meat food product shall be
sold, kept for sale, stored or delivered within the City, and no meat, meat by-
product or meat food product shall be brought into the City from any plant or
place not having Federal inspection, State inspection or inspection by any
other acceptable official agency.
(Ord. No. 2163-01. Passed 5-20-02, eff. 5-23-02)
§ 241.29 Standards for Hamburg or Hamburger
   (a)   As used in this chapter, “hamburg” or “hamburger” means comminuted
fresh or fresh frozen skeletal beef, with or without the addition of beef fat
as such, containing not more than a total of thirty percent (30%) beef fat or
suet, as determined by chemical analysis.
   (b)   No person, firm, partnership, corporation or association shall
display, sell or offer for sale any hamburg or hamburger containing excessive
fat, added chemicals, preservatives, coloring matter or any other matter than
beef, beef fat or suet, except that salt, pepper and other seasoning may be
added in condimental proportions.
(Ord. No. 2163-01. Passed 5-20-02, eff. 5-23-02)
§ 241.30 Standards for Ground Beef, Ground Steak, Ground Chuck, Chopped Beef,
Chopped Steak, etc.
   (a)   As used in this chapter, “ground beef,” “ground meat,” “ground steak,”
“ground chuck,” “chopped beef,” “chopped steak,” and similar comminuted beef
products means comminuted fresh or fresh frozen skeletal beef, without the
addition of beef fat as such, containing not more than a total of thirty
percent (30%) beef fat, or suet as determined by chemical analysis.
   (b)   No person, firm, partnership, corporation or association shall
display, sell or offer for sale any ground beef, ground meat, ground steak,
ground chuck, chopped beef, chopped steak and similar comminuted beef products
containing excessive fat, added chemicals, preservatives, coloring matter or
any other matter, except that salt, pepper and other seasoning may be added in
condimental proportions.
(Ord. No. 2163-01. Passed 5-20-02, eff. 5-23-02)
§ 241.31 Standards for Pork Sausage and Breakfast Sausage
   (a)   As used in this chapter, “pork sausage” means comminuted fresh or
smoked pork with fat content not more than fifty percent (50%) either in casing
or bulk, with or without the addition of seasoning. “Breakfast sausage” shall
be composed of fresh or cured meat and fresh fat, with a fat content not more
than fifty percent (50%). It may be derived from trimmings of beef, pork, veal,
lamb or mutton. It may be seasoned and smoked.
   (b)   No person, firm, partnership, corporation or association shall
display, sell or offer for sale any pork sausage or breakfast sausage which
contains excessive fat or which contains preservative.
   (c)   When comminuted meat contains any pork, it shall be labeled as
containing pork.
(Ord. No. 2163-01. Passed 5-20-02, eff. 5-23-02)
§ 241.32 Enforcement Requiring Extra Services; Costs
   Whenever the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter requires
extraordinary services, the person, firm or corporation requesting such
extraordinary services shall pay the cost of such services as determined by the
Department of Public Health.
(Ord. No. 210-11. Passed 4-25-11, eff. 4-25-11)
§ 241.33 Perishable Food Labeling
   (a)   “Person” means any individual, partnership, partner, firm, company,
corporation, association or any other legal entity, or their legal
representatives, assigns, employees or successors.
   (b)   “Perishable food” means any food which has not been frozen, canned or
dried, and which has not been prepared by the seller of the food for human
consumption without further preparation or cooking.
   (c)   No person shall sell or offer for sale to another person in the City
of Cleveland, for human consumption, perishable food:
      (1)   If the perishable food is marked by a sell-by-date, later than six
(6) months after said sell-by- date; or
      (2)   If the perishable food is marked by a sale expiration date, later
than said sale expiration date.
   (d)   No person shall sell or offer for sale to another person in the City
of Cleveland, for human consumption, perishable foods which at one time were
marked with a sell-by-date or sale expiration date, if such sell- by-date or
sale expiration date has been falsified, removed, concealed, altered, defaced
or erased.
   (e)   No person shall sell or offer for sale to another person in the City
of Cleveland, for human consumption, perishable food which had at one time been
frozen unless a sign has been conspicuously posted which states that the food
had been previously frozen and unless the words “PREVIOUSLY FROZEN” appear on
all labels and signs on which the price for the food is listed in lettering no
less than one- half (1/2) the size of the price. As used in this division,
“conspicuously posted sign” means a sign no less than two (2) feet by two (2)
feet in size and visible to customers.
   (f)   Nothing in this section shall limit or alter the prohibitions and
requirements regarding adulterated or misbranded food.
(Ord. No. 2163-01. Passed 5-20-02, eff. 5-23-02)
§ 241.34 Safe Food Sanitation Standards
   The definitions and standards for safe sanitation in retail food
establishments and food service operations shall be any established as the Ohio
Uniform Food Safety Code, promulgated by The Ohio Director of Agriculture and
Ohio Public Health Council pursuant to RC 3717.05.
(Ord. No. 2163-01. Passed 5-20-02, eff. 5-23-02)
§ 241.35 Categories and Fees
   (a)   Each application to the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses for a
food service operation license required under RC 3717.43, or for a retail food
establishment license required under RC 3717.23 shall be accompanied by a
combined license and inspection fee as follows:
      (1)   Commercial food service operations and retail food establishments
less than twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet of floor space:
 
2025
Risk Level Fee
Level I    $216.00
Level II   $240.00
Level III  $434.00
Level IV   $544.00
 
 
2026
Risk Level Fee
Level I    $224.00
Level II   $246.00
Level III  $440.00
Level IV   $548.00
 
      (2)   Commercial food service operations and retail food establishments
greater than twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet of floor space:
 
2025
Risk Level Fee
Level I    $300.00
Level II   $314.00
Level III  $1,048.00
Level IV   $1,110.00
 
 
2026
Risk Level Fee
Level I    $306.00
Level II   $322.00
Level III  $1,048.00
Level IV   $1,110.00
 
      (3)   Non-commercial food service operations and non-commercial retail
food establishments less than twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet of
floor space:
 
2025
Risk Level Fee
Level I    $108.00
Level II   $120.00
Level III  $217.00
Level IV   $272.00
 
 
2026
Risk Level Fee
Level I    $112.00
Level II   $123.00
Level III  $220.00
Level IV   $274.00
 
      (4)   Non-commercial food service operations and non-commercial retail
food establishments greater than twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet of
floor space:
 
2025
Risk Level Fee
Level I    $150.00
Level II   $157.00
Level III  $524.00
Level IV   $555.00
 
 
2026
Risk Level Fee
Level I    $153.00
Level II   $161.00
Level III  $524.00
Level IV   $555.00
 
   (b)   The risk level categories described herein shall have the meaning
established in any rules promulgated under RC Chapters 3715 and 3717.
(Ord. No. 665-2025. Passed 7-9-25, eff. 7-14-25)
§ 241.36 Mobile Food Shops – Location Permits; Fee
   (a)   Permit Required. No vendor shall sell, offer for sale, or display food
items from a vending device without first obtaining a permit from the
Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses for the location upon which the vendor
conducts a mobile food shop.
   (b)   Application. An application for a permit under this section shall be
made upon a form prescribed by the Commissioner, and contain the following:
      (1)   The vendor’s name, address, and food shop license number;
      (2)   Tax identification number;
      (3)   A description of the food cart, food truck or other vending device
from which the applicant intends to vend, including the dimensions of the cart,
truck or device;
      (4)   A description of the items to be offered for sale;
      (5)   A copy of the vendor’s food shop license;
      (6)   A certificate of insurance, or an acknowledgment thereof, by an
insurance carrier licensed to do business in this state, evidencing
comprehensive general liability coverage in the amount of one hundred thousand
dollars ($100,000.00), to protect against damage to property and/or persons
resulting from the operation of the mobile food shop;
      (7)   The location(s) for which a permit is sought, including for
locations on:
         A.   Public sidewalks outside of the Central Business District within
the City, the ward(s) in which the mobile food shop intends to operate;
         B.   Public sidewalks inside the Central Business District within the
City, an approved sidewalk occupancy permit issued by the Office of Capital
Projects under Chapter
508;
         C.   Private property within the City not owned by the applicant, a
notarized document evidencing the vendor’s right to operate on the property;
         D.   Public streets within the City, the ward(s) in which the mobile
food shop intends to operate;
      (8)   An application fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00); and
      (9)   Any other information as the Commissioner may require.
   (c)   Issuance. Upon receipt of an application in compliance with division
(b) of this section, the Commissioner shall notify the City Councilmember(s) in
whose ward(s) the mobile food shop intends to operate. The Commissioner shall
issue a permit authorizing the use of locations for those ward(s) of the City
Councilmember(s) so notified, unless within fifteen (15) days of receipt of
notification an objection or comment is received by the Commissioner. If the
notification to the Commissioner is in the nature of a comment rather than an
objection, then the Councilmember(s) shall have an additional fifteen (15) days
in which to submit an objection. An applicant may appeal any denial to the
Board of Zoning Appeals established pursuant to Charter Section
76-6. Notice of such appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the
Board within ten (10) days from the date of the written decision of the
Commissioner.
   (d)   Permitted Use. Upon receipt of a permit under this section, the
permitee may operate in those locations and wards designated on the permit in
compliance with the regulations contained in Sections
241.37 and
241.38.
   (e)   Expiration. The permit issued under this section shall expire on the
15th day of April each year, unless renewed.
   (f)   Revocation. The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses may suspend
or revoke any permit granted under this section on basis of a violation of this
chapter.
(Ord. No. 199-15. Passed 3-2-15, eff. 3-3-15)
§ 241.37 Mobile Food Shops – Location Restrictions
   (a)   Mobile Food Shops on Public Sidewalks Outside of the Central Business
District. No vendor shall operate a mobile food shop on a public sidewalk
outside of the Central Business District in the following locations:
      (1)   Within fifty (50) feet of a property occupied by a residence,
excluding residences with ground-floor retail space and excluding residences
located on the opposite side of a public street;
      (2)   Within ten (10) feet of a fire hydrant, bus stop, mail box,
telephone booth, building entrance, sidewalk elevator, fire exit or escape, or
a police or fire call box;
      (3)   In a location that restricts the free passage of pedestrians in the
lawful use of the public sidewalks by leaving an unobstructed sidewalk area of
less than six (6) feet or as otherwise determined by the City;
      (4)   Within fifty (50) feet of another mobile food shop on the public
sidewalk, except if the other mobile food shop is located on the other side of
a public street;
      (5)   Within one hundred (100) feet of a food service business operating
from a fixed and permanent location existing at the time of license issuance or
renewal, during the operating hours of such business;
      (6)   Within fifty (50) feet of the property of a gas station; or
      (7)   Within seven hundred fifty (750) feet of a special event or
community event established pursuant to
Chapter 131, except for a mobile food shop that has been authorized to
participate such event.
   (b)   Mobile Food Shops on Public Sidewalks Inside of the Central Business
District. No vendor shall operate a mobile food shop on a public sidewalk
inside the Central Business District without a permit issued under
Chapter 508. The location of mobile food shops on public sidewalks in the
Central Business District shall be as regulated in
Chapter 508.
   (c)   Mobile Food Shops on Public Streets. No vendor shall operate a mobile
food shop located on a public street in the following locations:
      (1)   Within fifty (50) feet of a property occupied by a residence,
excluding residences with ground-floor retail space and excluding residences
located on the opposite side of a public street;
      (2)   In a location where on-street parking is prohibited;
      (3)   Within ten (10) feet of a driveway apron or crosswalk;
      (4)   Adjacent to a sidewalk area that is less than ten (10) feet wide
from the curb to the closest property line;
      (5)   Within five (5) feet of another mobile food shop operating on a
public street;
      (6)   Within one hundred (100) feet of a food service business operating
from a fixed and permanent location existing at the time of license issuance or
renewal, during the operating hours of such business;
      (7)   Within fifty (50) feet of the property of a gasoline station;
      (8)   Within seven hundred fifty (750) feet of a special event or
community event established pursuant to
Chapter 131, except for a mobile food shop that has been authorized to
participate in the event; or
      (9)   Within fifty (50) feet of another mobile food shop operating on a
sidewalk within the Central Business District in accordance with a permit under
Chapter 508.
   (d)   Mobile Food Shops on Private Property. No vendor shall operate a
mobile food shop located on a private property in the following locations:
      (1)   On a property located in a residential zoning district, except in
the case of a property occupied by a school or church or other institutional
use permitted in the residential district or a property occupied by a legal
nonconforming commercial use;
      (2)   Within ten (10) feet of a property occupied by a residence;
      (3)   Within ten (10) feet of a driveway or driveway apron;
      (4)   Within ten (10) feet of a building entrance, fire exit or escape;
      (5)   Within five (5) feet of another mobile food shop;
      (6)   Closer than ten (10) feet from any public sidewalk, as measured
from the sidewalk to the closest point on the mobile food shop, except that the
mobile food shop may be located closer than ten (10) feet to a public sidewalk
if the vending device is set back at least twenty (20) feet from the inside
edge of the tree lawn or, if no tree lawn exists, at least twenty (20) feet
from the outside edge of the curb;
      (7)   Within fifty (50) feet of the property of a gasoline station;
      (8)   Within seven hundred fifty (750) feet of a special event or
community event established pursuant to
Chapter 131, except for a mobile food shop that has been authorized to
participate in the event;
      (9)   Encroaching into any public sidewalk or public street;
      (10)   In any location that will interfere with the safe movement of
vehicles or pedestrians on the subject property; or
      (11)   On property not owned by the applicant without first obtaining
written permission from the property owner and, in the case of property owned
by the City of Cleveland, permission from the applicable City department.
   (e)   Mobile Food Shops in Organized Vending Zones. Notwithstanding the
restrictions contained in divisions (a) through (d) of this section, the
Director of Capital Projects, in consultation with the Director of City
Planning and the City Councilmember(s) representing the ward(s) in which the
organized vending zone(s) will be located, are authorized to establish
organized vending zones, wherein the holders of a permit issued pursuant to
Section
241.36 may operate on such days, at such times of day, and under the conditions
that the Director determines.
      (1)   The zones shall be created by rule, taking into account the
following factors:
         A.   Pedestrian and vehicular traffic patterns, including possible
congestion during special events and sporting events;
         B.   Proximity to special events and sporting events;
         C.   Proximity to permanent food establishments; and
         D.   Other factors deemed relevant by the Director of Capital
Projects.
      (2)   The rules establishing an organized mobile food shop vending zone
shall first be published in the City Record with the effective date of the
zone.
      (3)   In establishing organized vending zones, the Director of Capital
Projects may provide rules and regulations that suspend the time and place
regulations established in Sections
241.37 and
241.38.
      (4)   Any organized vending zone may be dissolved in the same manner as
it is created or by resolution of Council.
      (5)   The Director of Capital Projects may promulgate rules and
regulations for the administration of this division. Such rules and regulations
shall be published in the City Record and become effective seven (7) days after
publication thereof.
   (f)   Mobile Food Shops Participating in Special Events. Notwithstanding the
restrictions contained in divisions (a) through (e) of this section, no vendor
shall operate a mobile food shop at the site of a special event or community
event except in accordance with the regulations of
Chapter 131.
(Ord. No. 435-13. Passed 5-20-13, eff. 5-23-13)
§ 241.38 Mobile Food Shops – Regulations
   Mobile food shops shall be operated in accordance with the regulations of
this section and as otherwise provided by this code.
   (a)   Prohibitions. No mobile food shop vendor shall:
      (1)   Sell food items, display food items, or conduct vending operations
to the occupants of vehicles stopped in traffic;
      (2)   Display food items or place lines or other devices for the display
of food items on any building or on any utility pole, planter, tree, trash
container, or other sidewalk fixture;
      (3)   Place any food items in or upon any street or sidewalk;
      (4)   Use liquefied petroleum gas, or other flammable substances, without
a required permit pursuant to Section
385.18 or operate any vending device that does not comply with the Liquefied
Petroleum Gas Code, NFPA 58, as promulgated by the National Fire Protection
Association;
      (5)   Leave a vending device unattended at any time;
      (6)   Make any loud or unreasonable noise for the purpose of advertising
or drawing attention to its food shop operations or for any other purpose;
      (7)   Conduct business without making available a container suitable for
the placement of litter;
      (8)   Throw or deposit any merchandise, packaging, containers, fat,
grease, paper or other litter on any streets or sidewalk or in any sewer;
      (9)   Place or affix any advertising material and signage to any location
other than flat upon the vending device being used in its operations;
      (10)   Operate on a public sidewalk between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 6:
00 a.m.; or
      (11)   Place a vending unit on a public sidewalk if such vending unit is
self-propelled or exceeds six (6) feet in length or four (4) feet in width.
   (b)   Requirements. All mobile food shop vendors shall:
      (1)   Obey any lawful order of a police officer to remove himself or
herself and his or her vending device entirely from the sidewalk to avoid
congestion or obstruction during an emergency;
      (2)   Comply with all requirements of applicable state and local law,
including, without limitation, the City’s Fire Prevention Code, the State of
Ohio Fire Code, and the City’s Traffic and Zoning Codes;
      (3)   If selling or offering frozen desserts, first be licensed as
otherwise required by this Code in addition to the license and permits required
by this chapter;
      (4)   If selling merchandise or non-food items, first obtain a license
and permit pursuant to Chapter
675 in addition to the license and permits required by this chapter;
      (5)   Exercise reasonable care to ensure that their operations do not
create a health or safety hazard to customers, other users of the sidewalks and
streets, or persons on abutting property;
      (6)   If operating on private property, maintain documentation of the
operator’s ownership, or if the operator is not the owner of the private
property, notarized documentation, signed by the property owner, of the
operator’s right to operate on the property;
      (7)   Maintain general liability insurance coverage in the amount of one
hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), to protect against damage to property
and/or persons resulting from the operation of the mobile food shop; and
      (8)   Operate with at least one (1) mobile food shop manager on duty.
Every mobile food shop manager on duty must have on his or her person a photo
identification badge issued by the Division of Assessments and Licenses.
         A.   Any person applying for an identification badge under this
division shall furnish to the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses a
government issued identification as well as furnish two (2) photographs of the
applicant taken within the thirty (30) day period before the date of
application and of a size designated by the Commissioner.
         B.   The Division of Assessments and Licenses is authorized to charge
a fee of sixty dollars ($60.00) for the issuance of such identification badge
required by this division. In the event that person loses the laminated
identification card issued pursuant to this division, the Commissioner shall
issue a replacement identification card upon payment of a replacement fee of
ten dollars ($10.00).
   (c)   Supplemental Rules. The Director of Capital Projects is authorized to
promulgate additional rules and regulations necessary for the administration of
this section. Such rules and regulations shall be published in the City Record
and become effective seven (7) days after publication thereof.
(Ord. No. 1657-11. Passed 11-28-11, eff. 11-28-11)
§ 241.39 Standards for Pork Sausage and Breakfast Sausage – Repealed
(Ord. No. 2163-01. Passed 5-20-02, eff. 5-23-02)
§ 241.40 Enforcement Requiring Extra Services; Costs – Repealed
(Ord. No. 2163-01. Passed 5-20-02, eff. 5-23-02)
§ 241.42 Foods Containing Industrially-Produced Trans Fat Restricted
   (a)   No foods containing industrially-produced trans fat, as defined in
this section, shall be stored, distributed, held for service, used in
preparation of any menu item or served in any food shop, as defined in division
(a) of Section
241.03 of this code or successor provision, except food that is being served
directly to patrons in a manufacturer’s original sealed package.
   (b)   For purposes of this section, a food shall be deemed to contain
industrially-produced trans fat if the food is labeled as containing, lists as
an ingredient, or has vegetable shortening, margarine or any kind of partially
hydrogenated vegetable oil. However, a food whose nutrition facts label or
other documentation from the manufacturer notes the trans fat content of the
food is zero (0) grams as labeled then it shall not be deemed to contain
industrially-produced trans fat.
   (c)   Food shops shall maintain on site the original labels identifying the
trans fat content or an affidavit provided the food supplier identifying the
trans fat content of the food products supplied, or other approved alternative
documentation for all food products:
      (l)   That are, or that contain, fats, oils or shortenings;
      (2)   That are, when purchased by such food shops, required by applicable
federal and state law to have labels; and
      (3)   That are currently being stored, distributed, held for service,
used in preparation of any menu items, or served by the food service
establishment.
   Documentation Instead of Labels. Documentation acceptable to the Director
and based upon information. Documentation acceptable to the Director, from the
manufacturers of such food products, indicating whether the food products
contain vegetable shortening, margarine or any kind of partially hydrogenated
vegetable oil, or indicating trans fat content, may be maintained instead of
original labels.
   Documentation required when food products are not labeled. If baked goods,
or other food products restricted pursuant to division (a) of this section,
that are or that contain fats, oils or shortenings, are not required to be
labeled when purchased, food shops shall obtain and maintain documentation
acceptable to the Director and based upon information, from the manufacturers
of the food products, indicating whether the food products contain vegetable
shortening, margarine or any kind of partially hydrogenated vegetable oil, or
indicating trans fat content.
   (d)   The Director of Public Health may make rules and regulations to secure
proper enforcement of this section.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is liable to the City of Cleveland for a
civil offense and shall receive a warning on the first offense; on the second
offense, shall be fined one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00); on a third offense
shall be fined two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00); and beginning with the
fourth offense, shall be fined three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) and each
day a violation occurs shall be a separate offense. Any person charged with the
commission of a civil offense under this section may appeal to the Director of
Public Health, or his or her designee. The appeal shall be taken not later than
twenty (20) days from the date of the civil charge. Failure to file an appeal
or pay the costs imposed within this time period shall constitute a waiver of
the right to contest the charge and shall be considered an admission.
   (f)   This section shall take effect on January 1, 2013 with respect to
oils, shortenings and margarines containing industrially-produced trans fat
that are used for frying or in spreads; except that the effective date of this
section with regard to oils or shortenings used for deep frying of yeast dough
or cake batter, and all other foods containing industrially-produced trans fat,
shall be July 1, 2013.
(Ord. No. 1233-15. Passed 11-9-15, eff. 11-11-15)
§ 241.43 Beverages Offered with Children's Meals
   (a)   Definitions.
      (1)   "Food service operation" has the same meaning as in RC 3717.01.
      (2)   "Children's meal" means a combination of food items and a beverage
that is prepared by and offered for purchase at a food service operation as a
unit at a single price and is primarily intended for consumption by children.
   (b)   Beverage Limitation. No food service operation shall offer a
children's meal that includes a beverage unless the beverage is:
      (1)   water, sparkling water, or flavored water, with no added natural or
artificial sweeteners; or
      (2)   nonfat or one (1) percent milk or a non-dairy milk alternative
containing no more than one hundred fifty (150) calories per container or
serving as offered for sale; or
      (3)   One hundred percent (100%) fruit juice or fruit juice combined with
water or carbonated water, with no added sweeteners, in a serving size of no
more than eight (8) ounces.
   (c)   Exception. Upon customer's request, a food service operation may sell,
and a customer may purchase, a substitute or alternative beverage instead of
the beverages offered pursuant to division (b) of this section.
   (d)   Educational Material. The Director of Public Health or a designee
shall make available educational material regarding the nutritional and health
reasons to limit a child's consumption of sugared beverages.
   (e)   Civil Penalty.
      (1)   Any food service operation offering a children's meal that includes
a beverage but that fails to limit the beverages offered in violation of
division (b) of this section shall be given a warning on its first offense, and
shall be charged a civil penalty of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for the second
offense and fifty dollars ($50.00) for a third and any subsequent offense. The
Director of Public Health or a designee is authorized to charge and collect the
civil penalties under this section.
      (2)   Any food service operation charged with a violation of division (b)
of this section may appeal in writing to the Director of Public Health or
designee within ten (10) days from the date of the civil charge. The Director
shall have jurisdiction to affirm, reverse, or modify the decision and shall do
so within thirty (30) days of the date of the appeal. A person aggrieved by a
final decision of the Director may further appeal to the Board of Zoning
Appeals within thirty (30) days after the Director's decision. Failure to file
an appeal or pay the fines imposed within this time period shall constitute a
waiver of the right to contest the charge and shall be considered an admission.
      (3)   The offering, by a food service operation on its written or posted
menu, of a children's meal with the beverage limitation set forth in division
(b) is prima facie evidence of compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. No. 524-2020. Passed 7-29-20, eff. 1-29-21)
§ 241.99 Penalty
   (a)   Whoever violates Section
241.05 is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day the violation
continues is a separate offense.
   (b)   Whoever violates Sections
241.36,
241.37, or
241.38 is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. Effective January 1, 2016, whoever
violates Section
241.07 is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. Each day the violation continues is a
separate offense.
      (1)   In addition to any other method of enforcement provided for in this
chapter, the above listed minor misdemeanors may be enforced by the issuance of
a citation in compliance with Rule 4.1 of the Ohio Rules of Criminal Procedure.
      (2)   If the offender persists in improper operations after reasonable
warning or request to desist, improper operations is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
   (c)   Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, whoever violates any of
the provisions of this chapter, or of any ordinance amending or supplementing
such provisions, shall be guilty of a first degree misdemeanor and fined no
more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisoned for not more than six
(6) months, or both. Each day the violation continues is a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 507-15. Passed 7-22-15, eff. 7-27-15)
CHAPTER 243 – OHIO UNIFORM FOOD SAFETY CODE
243.01   Oho Uniform Food Safety Code
243.02   Standards – Repealed
243.03   Permit and License Required; Fees – Repealed
243.04   Vehicles; License – Repealed
243.05   Special Services for Enforcement; Costs – Repealed
243.06   Misbranded or Adulterated Milk or Milk Products – Repealed
243.07   Labeling and Identification – Repealed
243.08   Inspection of Farms and Plants – Repealed
243.09   Violations and Notice; Records – Repealed
243.10   Standards and Tests; Permit Suspension – Repealed
243.11   Grade A Raw Milk – Repealed
243.12   Grade A Pasteurized Milk – Repealed
243.13   Personnel Health and Cleanliness – Repealed
243.14   Pasteurized Products – Repealed
243.15   Regulations for Transferring, Delivering, Serving – Repealed
243.16   Returning Containers – Repealed
243.17   Enforcement for Grade A Requirements – Repealed
Cross-reference:
   Food quality and labeling standards, CO
241.04
Statutory reference:
   Food processing places to be kept sanitary, RC 913.41 et seq.
   Sale of adulterated milk, RC 3717.01, 3717.09, 3717.31
§ 243.01 Oho Uniform Food Safety Code
   The Ohio Uniform Food Safety Code as promulgated by the Ohio Director of
Agriculture and Ohio Public Health Council pursuant to RC 3717.05, is hereby
adopted and incorporated by the City of Cleveland as fully as if set forth
herein.
(Ord. No. 2025-2000. Passed 12-18-00, eff. 12-27-00)
§ 243.02 Standards – Repealed
(Ord. No. 2025-2000. Passed 12-18-00, eff. 12-27-00)
§ 243.03 Permit and License Required; Fees – Repealed
(Ord. No. 2025-2000. Passed 12-18-00, eff. 12-27-00)
§ 243.04 Vehicles; License – Repealed
(Ord. No. 2025-2000. Passed 12-18-00, eff. 12-27-00)
§ 243.05 Special Services for Enforcement; Costs – Repealed
(Ord. No. 2025-2000. Passed 12-18-00, eff. 12-27-00)
§ 243.06 Misbranded or Adulterated Milk or Milk Products – Repealed
(Ord. No. 2025-2000. Passed 12-18-00, eff. 12-27-00)
§ 243.07 Labeling and Identification – Repealed
(Ord. No. 2025-2000. Passed 12-18-00, eff. 12-27-00)
§ 243.08 Inspection of Farms and Plants – Repealed
(Ord. No. 2025-2000. Passed 12-18-00, eff. 12-27-00)
§ 243.09 Violations and Notice; Records – Repealed
(Ord. No. 2025-2000. Passed 12-18-00, eff. 12-27-00)
§ 243.10 Standards and Tests; Permit Suspension – Repealed
(Ord. No. 2025-2000. Passed 12-18-00, eff. 12-27-00)
§ 243.11 Grade A Raw Milk – Repealed
(Ord. No. 2025-2000. Passed 12-18-00, eff. 12-27-00)
§ 243.12 Grade A Pasteurized Milk – Repealed
(Ord. No. 2025-2000. Passed 12-18-00, eff. 12-27-00)
§ 243.13 Personnel Health and Cleanliness – Repealed
(Ord. No. 2025-2000. Passed 12-18-00, eff. 12-27-00)
§ 243.14 Pasteurized Products – Repealed
(Ord. No. 2025-2000. Passed 12-18-00, eff. 12-27-00)
§ 243.15 Regulations for Transferring, Delivering, Serving – Repealed
(Ord. No. 2025-2000. Passed 12-18-00, eff. 12-27-00)
§ 243.16 Returning Containers – Repealed
(Ord. No. 2025-2000. Passed 12-18-00, eff. 12-27-00)
§ 243.17 Enforcement for Grade A Requirements – Repealed
(Ord. No. 2025-2000. Passed 12-18-00, eff. 12-27-00)
CHAPTER 245 – FROZEN DESSERTS
245.01 to
245.19   Repealed
Cross-reference:
   Unnecessary noises, CO
605.10
Statutory reference:
   Food processing places to be kept sanitary, RC 913.41 et seq.
   Power to inspect peddlers’ food products, RC 715.46
   State license required for sale or manufacture; fees, RC 3717.52
§§ 245.01 to 245.19 Repealed
(Ord. No. 2025-2000. Passed 12-18-00, eff. 12-20-00)
TITLE V: AIR POLLUTION CONTROL
   Chapter
251   Definitions
   Chapter
253   Ambient Air Quality Standards
   Chapter
255   Administrative
   Chapter
257   Installation and Modification Permits
   Chapter
259   Operation Permits and Variances
   Chapter
261   Exemptions
   Chapter
263   Fees
   Chapter
265   Visible Air Contaminant Limitations
   Chapter
267   Odors
   Chapter
269   Particulate Limitations
   Chapter
271   Sulfur Compounds Limitations
   Chapter
273   Hydrocarbon Limitations
   Chapter
275   Carbon Monoxide Limitations
   Chapter
277   Miscellaneous Limitations
   Chapter
279   Procedures and Other Requirements
   Chapter
281   Hazardous Air Pollutants
   Chapter
283   Emergency Episodes
   Chapter
285   Testing and Monitoring Equipment
   Chapter
287   Penalties
   Chapter
289   Constitutionality
   Chapter
291   Advisory Committee
   Appendices A, B, C, D
CHAPTER 251 – DEFINITIONS
251.01   Title and Distribution
251.02   Air Cleaning Equipment
251.03   Air Contaminant
251.04   Air Pollution
251.05   Ambient Air
251.06   Ambient Air Quality Standards
251.07   AGA
251.08   ASME
251.09   ASTM
251.10   Appeals Board
251.11   Architectural Coating
251.12   Asbestos
251.13   Atmosphere
251.14   Best Available Control Technology
251.15   Blast Furnace
251.16   Boiler
251.17   BTU or British Thermal Unit
251.18   Clean Air Act
251.19   Commenced
251.20   Commissioner
251.21   Compliance Schedule
251.22   Control Equipment
251.23   Criteria Pollutant
251.24   Effluent Water Separator
251.25   Emission
251.26   Existing Source
251.27   Fuel
251.28   Fuel-Burning Equipment
251.29   Fuel-Burning Equipment Input Capacity
251.30   Fugitive Emissions
251.31   Incinerator
251.32   Install or Installation
251.33   Liquid Organic Material
251.34   Major Source
251.35   Minor Source
251.36   Mobile Source
251.37   Modify or Modification
251.38   New Source
251.39   Odor
251.40   OEPA
251.41   Opacity
251.42   Open Burning
251.43   Organic Material
251.44   Organic Solvent
251.45   Owner or Operator
251.46   Particulate Matter
251.47   Person
251.48   Petroleum Cracking
251.49   Photochemically Reactive Material
251.50   Process Equipment
251.51   Process Weight
251.52   Process Weight Per Hour
251.53   Refuse
251.54   Ringelmann Chart
251.55   Seal
251.56   Significant Source
251.57   Smoke
251.58   Source
251.59   Source Operation
251.60   Stack
251.61   Standard Conditions
251.62   Stationary Source
251.63   Submerged Fill Pipe
251.64   Uncontrolled Mass Rate of Emission
251.65   Unit Operation
251.66   Unit Process
251.67   Vapor Blowdown System
251.68   Visible Emission
251.69   Volatile Photochemically Reactive Material
251.70   Waste Gas Flare
251.71   Transfer Operations
Cross-reference:
   By-product coke plant defined, CO
277.03
   Hazardous air pollutants defined, CO
Ch. 281
   Rendering plant defined, CO
267.02
   Timely defined, CO
255.03
Statutory reference:
   State definitions, RC 3704.01
§ 251.01 Title and Distribution
   This part of the Codified Ordinances shall be known as the “Air Pollution
Code” and may be separately printed and distributed. The term “this Code”
wherever used in this Title Five means the Air Pollution Code of the City of
Cleveland.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.02 Air Cleaning Equipment
   “Air cleaning equipment” means any control equipment which removes, reduces
or renders less noxious air contaminants discharged into the atmosphere.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.03 Air Contaminant
   “Air contaminant” means any smoke, vapors (except water vapor), charred
paper, dust, soot, grim, carbon fumes, gases, mist (except uncombined water),
odors, particulate matter, radioactive materials, noxious chemicals or any
other material which is discharged directly or indirectly into the atmosphere.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.04 Air Pollution
   “Air pollution” means the presence in the atmosphere of one (1) or more air
contaminants, such as dust, fumes, gas, mist, odor, smoke or vapor in
quantities, of characteristics and of duration such as to be injurious to
human, plant or animal life or to property, or which unreasonably interferes
with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property or the conduct of business.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.05 Ambient Air
   “Ambient air” means that portion of the atmosphere outside of buildings and
other enclosures, stacks or ducts which surrounds human, plant or animal life
or property.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.06 Ambient Air Quality Standards
   “Ambient air quality standards” mean ambient air quality goals expressed
numerically and intended to be attained and maintained in a stated time through
the application of appropriate preventive or control measures.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.07 AGA
   “AGA” means the American Gas Association.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77 eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.08 ASME
   “ASME” means the American Society of Mechanical Engineers.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.09 ASTM
   “ASTM” means the American Society for Testing Materials.
(Ord. No. 857-A-77. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.10 Appeals Board
   “Appeals board” means the Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals
or such other successor appeals board as shall be established by law and vested
with jurisdiction in matters relating to the air pollution board.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.11 Architectural Coating
   “Architectural coating” means any coating used for residential or commercial
buildings and other appurtenances, or industrial buildings.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.12 Asbestos
   “Asbestos” means any of six (6) naturally occurring, hydrated mineral
silicates: actinolite, amosite, anthophyllite, chrysolite, crocidolite,
tremolite; or any mixture containing any of these silicates.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.13 Atmosphere
   “Atmosphere” means the air that envelops or surrounds the earth.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.14 Best Available Control Technology
   “Best available control technology” shall be determined on a case-by-case
basis considering the following:
   (a)   The process, fuels and raw material available and to be employed in
the facility involved;
   (b)   The engineering aspects of the application of various types of control
techniques which have been adequately demonstrated;
   (c)   Process and fuel changes;
   (d)   The respective costs of the application of all such control
techniques, process changes, alternative fuels, etc.;
   (e)   Any applicable State and Federal emission limitations; and
   (f)   Location and siting considerations.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.15 Blast Furnace
   “Blast furnace” means the furnace and equipment used in the smelting process
in which primarily oxygen is removed from the ore and molten metal produced
with gas as a byproduct. The furnace and equipment consist of, but are not
limited to, the furnace proper, charging equipment, stoves, bleeders, gas dust
catcher, gas-cleaning devices and other auxiliaries pertinent to the process.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.16 Boiler
   “Boiler” means combustion equipment fired with fossil fuels used to transfer
heat from combustion gases to water or other fluids, consisting essentially of
burner, firebox, heat exchanger and a means of creating and directing a flow of
gases through the unit.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.17 BTU or British Thermal Unit
   “BTU or British Thermal Unit” means the amount of heat required to raise one
(1) pound of water from fifty-nine degrees Fahrenheit (59°F) to sixty degrees
Fahrenheit (60°F).
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.18 Clean Air Act
   “Clean Air Act” means 42 U.S.C. 1857 et seq. as amended by the Air Quality
Act of 1967. P.L. 90-148 and by the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1970, P.L. 91-
604 or by any subsequent amendments and the rules and regulations promulgated
hereunder.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.19 Commenced
   “Commenced” means an owner or operator has undertaken a continuous program
of construction, installation or modification or has entered into a binding
contractual obligation to undertake and complete, within a reasonable time, a
continuous program of construction, installation or modification.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.20 Commissioner
   “Commissioner” means the Commissioner of Air Pollution Control of the City
of Cleveland.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.21 Compliance Schedule
   “Compliance schedule” means a plan of corrective action to achieve full
compliance with the provisions of this Code, submitted as part of a variance
application. This schedule may include the following milestones, each to be
achieved at the earliest possible date:
   (a)   Submission of final control plans for source;
   (b)   Awarding of contracts for emission control systems or issuing of
purchase orders for component parts to accomplish emission control or process
modification;
   (c)   Initiation of on-site construction or installation of emission control
equipment or process modification;
   (d)   Completion of on-site construction or installation of emission control
equipment or process modification;
   (e)   Achievement of final compliance with all provisions of the Air
Pollution Code of the City of Cleveland.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.22 Control Equipment
   “Control equipment” means any device or contrivance which prevents, removes,
reduces or renders less noxious air contaminants discharged into the
atmosphere.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.23 Criteria Pollutant
   “Criteria pollutant” means an air pollutant for which air quality criteria
have been issued, such criteria being information used as guidelines for
decisions when establishing air quality goals and standards.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.24 Effluent Water Separator
   “Effluent water separator” means any tank, box, sump or other container in
which any volatile photochemically reactive material floating on or entrained
or contained in water entering such tank, box, sump or other container is
physically separated and removed from such water prior to outfall, drainage or
recovery of such water.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.25 Emission
   “Emission” means the act of releasing or discharging any air contaminant
directly or indirectly into the atmosphere from any source.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.26 Existing Source
   “Existing source” means any source which has been constructed or installed
or of which construction, installation or modification was commenced prior to
the effective date of this Code.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.27 Fuel
   “Fuel” means any form of combustible matter whether solid, liquid or gas but
does not include refuse.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.28 Fuel-Burning Equipment
   “Fuel-burning equipment” means any furnace, boiler, apparatus, stack and all
appurtenances thereto used in the process of burning fuel for the primary
purpose of producing heat or power by indirect heat transfer.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.29 Fuel-Burning Equipment Input Capacity
   “Fuel-burning equipment input capacity” means the maximum heat input rate of
any fuel-burning equipment. This maximum heat input rate shall be the
manufacturer’s or designer’s guaranteed maximum heat input rate or such other
rate as may be determined by the Commissioner in accordance with good
engineering practices. In case of conflict the determination made by the
Commissioner shall govern.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.30 Fugitive Emissions
   “Fugitive emissions” means air contaminants emitted from any source,
uncaptured at the point of origin.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.31 Incinerator
   “Incinerator” means any equipment, machine, device, article, contrivance,
structure or part thereof used to burn refuse or to process salvageable
material by burning other than by open burning as defined herein.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.32 Install or Installation
   “Install or installation” means to construct, erect, locate or affix any
source of air pollutants, including related air-cleaning equipment.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.33 Liquid Organic Material
   “Liquid organic material” means any organic material which is a liquid at
standard conditions.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.34 Major Source
   “Major source” means any stationary source which has potential emissions of
more than twenty-five (25) tons per year (25T/YR) of a criteria pollutant which
is located at a facility (plant) which has a total actual emissions of more
than one hundred (100) tons per year (100T/YR) of a criteria pollutant.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.35 Minor Source
   “Minor source” means any stationary source which is not a major or
significant source as defined herein.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.36 Mobile Source
   “Mobile source” means any vehicular air contaminant source, including, but
not limited to, automobiles, trucks, tractors, buses and other motor vehicles,
railroad locomotive, ships, boats and other waterborne craft, but not including
any source mounted on a vehicle whether such mount is temporary or permanent,
which source is not used to power the vehicle.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.37 Modify or Modification
   “Modify or modification” means any physical change in, or change in the
method of operation of, a source of air pollutants that:
   (a)   Increases or decreases the amount of air pollutants emitted; or
   (b)   Results in the emission of any type of air pollutant not previously
emitted; or
   (c)   Results in relocation of the source to new premises.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.38 New Source
   “New source” means any source the construction, installation or modification
of which is commenced on or after the effective date of this Code, except a
modification that causes a decrease in the amount of air pollutants emitted.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.39 Odor
   “Odor” means that property of an air contaminant which affects the sense of
smell.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.40 OEPA
   “OEPA” means the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.41 Opacity
   “Opacity” means a state which renders material partially or wholly
impervious to rays of light and causes obstruction of an observer’s view.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.42 Open Burning
   “Open burning” means the burning of any materials wherein air contaminants
resulting from combustion are emitted directly into the ambient air, without
passing through a stack or chimney from an enclosed chamber. For purposes of
this definition, a chamber shall be regarded as enclosed, when during the time
combustion takes place, only such apertures, ducts, stacks, flues or chimneys
are open as are necessary to provide combustion air and to permit the escape of
exhaust gas.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.43 Organic Material
   “Organic material” means any chemical compound containing carbon, excluding
carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, carbonic acid, metallic carbides, metallic
carbonates and ammonium carbonate.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.44 Organic Solvent
   “Organic solvent” means any organic material, liquid at standard conditions,
which is used as a dilutent, thinner, dissolver, viscosity reducer or cleaning
agent.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.45 Owner or Operator
   “Owner or operator” means any person who owns, leases, controls or
supervises an air contaminant emission source.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.46 Particulate Matter
   “Particulate matter” means any material, except water in uncombined form,
that is or has been airborne and exists as a liquid or a solid at standard
conditions.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.47 Person
   “Person” means any individual, partnership, partner, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or
assigns.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.48 Petroleum Cracking
   “Petroleum cracking” means a unit composed of a reactor, regenerator and
fractioning tower which is used to convert certain petroleum fractions into
more valuable products by passing the material at elevated temperature through
a bed of catalyst in the reactor. Coke deposits produced on the catalyst during
cracking are removed by burning off in the regenerator.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.49 Photochemically Reactive Material
   “Photochemically reactive material” means any liquid organic material with
an aggregate of more than twenty percent (20%) of its total volume composed of
the chemical compounds classified below or which exceeds any of the following
individual percentage composition limitations, referred to the total volume of
liquid:
   (a)   A combination of hydrocarbons, alcohols, aldehydes, ester, ethers or
ketones having a olefinic or cyclo-olefinic type of unsaturation: five percent
(5%);
   (b)   A combination of aromatic hydrocarbons with eight (8) or more carbon
atoms to the molecule except ethylbenzene eight percent; (8%);
   (c)   A combination of ethylbenzene, ketones having branched hydrocarbon
structures, trichloroethylene or toluene: twenty percent (20%).
   Wherever any organic material or any constituent of an organic material may
be classified from its chemical structure into more than one (1) of the above
groups of organic compounds, it shall be considered as a member of the most
reactive chemical group, that is, that group having the least allowable percent
of total volume of liquid.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.50 Process Equipment
   “Process equipment” means any equipment, device or contrivance for changing
any materials whatever or for storing or handling of any materials, and all
appurtenances thereto, including ducts and stack, the use of which may cause
discharge of an air contaminant into the atmosphere, but not including that
equipment specifically defined in this Code as fuel- burning equipment or
incinerator.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.51 Process Weight
   “Process weight” means the total weight of all material introduced into a
unit operation or unit process, including solid fuels, but excluding liquid
fuels and gaseous fuels when these are used solely as fuels and excluding air
introduced for purposes of combustion.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.52 Process Weight Per Hour
   “Process weight per hour” means a rate established as follows:
   (a)   For continuous or long-run steady-state unit operation or unit
process, the total process weight for the entire period of continuous operation
or for a typical portion thereof, divided by the number of hours of such period
or portion thereof.
   (b)   For cyclical or batch unit operation or batch process, the total
process weight for a period that covers a complete operation or an integral
number of cycles, divided by the hours of actual process operation during such
period.
   Where the nature of any process or operation or the design of any equipment
is such as to permit more than one (1) interpretation of this definition, the
interpretation that results in the minimum value for allowable emission shall
apply.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.53 Refuse
   “Refuse” means any discarded matter or any matter which is to be reduced in
volume or otherwise changed in chemical or physical properties in order to
facilitate its discard, removal or disposal including garbage, rubbish, trade
wastes, leaves, salvageable material, agricultural wastes, human or animal
remains and other wastes.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.54 Ringelmann Chart
   “Ringelmann Chart” means the chart published and described in the U.S.
Bureau of Mine Information Circular 8333, and on which are illustrated
graduated shades of grey to black for use in estimating the light obscuring
capacity of smoke.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.55 Seal
   “Seal” means any device, tag or marking installed or affixed by the
Commissioner of Air Pollution Control or by his or her agents or
representatives so as to prohibit use of any process, fuel-burning or control
equipment or any incinerator, premise or source causing a violation or from
which violations of this Code originate. Sealing may also be accomplished by
means of a written order by the Commissioner directed to the owner or operator
of such equipment, premise or source instructing such owner or operator that
the process, fuel-burning or control equipment or incinerator, premise or
source causing a violation shall not be operated until the Commissioner
authorizes such use in writing.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.56 Significant Source
   “Significant source” means any stationary source which has potential
emissions of more than twenty-five (25) tons per year (25T/YR) of a criteria
pollutant which is not located at a facility (plant) which has potential
emissions of more than one hundred (100) tons per year (100T/YR) of a criteria
pollutant.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.57 Smoke
   “Smoke” means small gas-borne particles resulting from incomplete
combustion, consisting predominantly but not exclusively of carbon, ash and
other combustible material.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.58 Source
   “Source” means any building, structure, facility, operation, installation,
other physical facility or real or personal property which emits or may emit
any air pollutant.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.59 Source Operation
   “Source operation” means the last operation preceding emission, with
operations: (a) Results in the separation of the air contaminant from the
process materials or in the conversion of the process materials into air
contaminants, as in the case of combustion- fuel; and (b) Is not an air
pollution abatement operation.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.60 Stack
   “Stack” means a duct, chimney, flue or conduit designed or arranged to
conduct air contaminant emissions into the atmosphere.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.61 Standard Conditions
   “Standard conditions” means a dry gas temperature of seventy degrees
Fahrenheit (70°F) (twenty-one and one-tenth degrees Celsius) (21.1°C) and a gas
pressure of fourteen and seven-tenths (14.7) pounds per square inch (seven
hundred sixty (760) millimeters of mercury) absolute dry air.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.62 Stationary Source
   “Stationary source” means a source which does not move from place to place
in its day to day operation.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.63 Submerged Fill Pipe
   “Submerged fill pipe” means any fill pipe the discharge opening of which is
entirely submerged when the liquid level is six (6) inches above the bottom of
the tank; or when applied to a tank which is loaded from the side, shall mean
any fill pipe the discharge opening of which is entirely submerged when the
liquid level is eighteen (18) inches above the bottom of the tank.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.64 Uncontrolled Mass Rate of Emission
   “Uncontrolled mass rate of emission” means the total weight rate at which
particulate matter is, or in the absence of an air-cleaning device would be,
emitted from an air contaminant source when such source is operated at its
maximum rated capacity.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.65 Unit Operation
   “Unit operation” means methods where raw materials undergo physical change
or methods by which raw materials may be altered into different states, such as
vapor, liquid or solid without changing into a new substance with different
properties or composition.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.66 Unit Process
   “Unit process” means reactions where raw materials undergo chemical change
or where one (1) or more raw materials are combined and changed into a new
substance with different properties or composition.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.67 Vapor Blowdown System
   “Vapor blowdown system” means a system for disposal of emergency and waste
refinery gases consisting of a manifolded pressure relieving system to insure
personnel safety and protect equipment.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.68 Visible Emission
   “Visible emission” means emissions of air contaminants of such quantity or
quality as to be seen in contrast with background.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.69 Volatile Photochemically Reactive Material
   “Volatile photochemically reactive material” means any photochemically
reactive material which has a vapor pressure of one and one -half (1.5) pounds
per square inch absolute or greater under actual storage conditions.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.70 Waste Gas Flare
   “Waste gas flare” means the combustion of waste gas for disposal.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 251.71 Transfer Operations
   “Transfer operations” means the loading of any liquid material into any
tank, truck, trailer or railroad tank car from any loading facility.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
CHAPTER 253 – AMBIENT AIR QUALITY STANDARDS
253.01   Maximum Concentrations, Non- Degradation
Cross-reference:
   Ambient air defined, CO
251.05
   Ambient air quality standards defined, CO
251.06
§ 253.01 Maximum Concentrations, Non- Degradation
   (a)   Concentrations of contaminants in the ambient air in excess of the
concentrations and time durations specified in the following sections shall
constitute a condition of undesirable air quality, and shall be applicable in
all areas of the City. Such standards are to be attained at the earliest
possible date, but in no event later than that date established by regulation
of the Director of the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency. All measurements
of ambient air quality are corrected to standard conditions.
   (b)   Suspended Particulate Matter.
      (1)   The maximum annual geometric mean concentration shall not exceed
sixty (60) micrograms per cubic meter.
      (2)   The maximum twenty-four (24) hour concentration, not to be exceeded
more than once per year, shall be one hundred fifty (150) micrograms per cubic
meter.
   (c)   Sulfur Dioxide.
      (1)   The maximum annual arithmetic mean concentration shall not exceed
sixty (60) micrograms per cubic meter (twenty-three thousandths (0.023) parts
per million (1,000,000) by volume).
      (2)   The maximum twenty-four (24) hour concentration, not to be exceeded
more than once per year, shall be two hundred sixty (260) micrograms per cubic
meter (one-tenth (0.10) parts per million (1,000,000) by volume).
      (3)   The maximum three (3) hour concentration, not to be exceeded more
than once per year, shall be one thousand three hundred (1,300) micrograms per
cubic meter (five-tenths (0.50) parts per million (1,000,000) by volume).
   (d)   Carbon Monoxide.
      (1)   The maximum eight (8) hour arithmetic mean concentration, not to be
exceeded more than one (1) eight (8) hour period per year, shall be ten (10)
milligrams per cubic meter (nine (9) parts per million (1,000,000) by volume).
   (e)   Photochemical Oxidants.
      (1)   The maximum one (1) hour arithmetic mean concentration shall not
exceed one hundred nineteen (119) micrograms per cubic meter (six- hundredths
(0.06) parts per million (1,000,000) by volume).
      (2)   The maximum four (4) hour arithmetic mean concentration, not to be
exceeded more than one (1) consecutive four (4) hour period per year, shall be
seventy-nine (79) micrograms per cubic meter (four- hundredths (0.04) parts per
million (1,000,000) by volume).
      (3)   The maximum twenty-four (24) hour arithmetic mean concentration,
not to be exceeded more than one (1) day per year, shall be forty (40)
micrograms per cubic meter (two-hundredths (0.02) parts per million (1,000,000)
by volume).
   (f)   Hydrocarbons.
      (1)   The maximum three (3) hour arithmetic mean concentration of non-
methane hydrocarbons shall not exceed one hundred twenty-six (126) micrograms
per cubic meter (nineteen hundredths (0.19) parts per million (1,000,000) by
volume measured as carbon) between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 am.
      (2)   The maximum twenty-four (24) hour arithmetic mean concentration of
non-methane hydrocarbons, not to be exceeded more than one (1) day per year,
shall be three hundred thirty-one (331) micrograms per cubic meter (five-tenths
(0.50) parts per million (1,000,000) by volume measure as carbon).
   (g)   Nitrogen Dioxide.
      (1)   The maximum annual arithmetic mean concentration shall not exceed
one hundred (100) micrograms per cubic meter (five-hundredths (0.05) parts per
million (1,000,000) by volume).
   (h)   Non-Degradation Policy.
      (1)   The significant and avoidable deterioration of air quality in any
part of the City where presently existing air quality is equal to or better
than that required by the adopted standards shall be prohibited.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
CHAPTER 255 – ADMINISTRATIVE
255.01   Air Pollution Personnel
255.02   Duties of Commissioner
255.03   Appeals
255.04   Abatement Orders
255.05   Records to be Available for Public Inspection; Exception
255.06   Authority to Enter into Consent Agreement
255.07   Rules and Regulations
Cross-reference:
   Advisory Committee, CO
Ch. 291
   Date registration, CO
279.04
   Emergency orders, CO
283.04
   Right of entry, CO
279.05
Statutory reference:
   Records available for public inspection, RC 3704.08
§ 255.01 Air Pollution Personnel
   The Division of Air Pollution Control shall employ and qualify such
personnel as are needed to insure the successful administration of this Code.
Such personnel of the Division shall carry out the directions of the
Commissioner in all matters, consistent with duties of their respective job
descriptions, qualifications and assignments, relating to enforcement of this
Code, including the signing of complaints and summons sought for violations,
and shall aid and assist the Commissioner in the efficient discharge of his or
her duties. No person employed in the Division shall be directly or indirectly
interested in sales of service or goods or in any matter in conflict with his
or her employment.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 255.02 Duties of Commissioner
   The Commissioner under the supervision and director of the Director of
Public Health and Welfare shall:
   (a)   Supervise the execution of all laws, rules and regulations pertaining
to air pollution as provided in this Code;
   (b)   Institute complaints against all violators of any provisions of this
Code and institute necessary legal proceedings, either personally or through
his or her representatives;
   (c)   Issue, and have served upon violators, orders requiring the repair of
equipment or abatement of conditions not in compliance with this Code;
   (d)   Compel the prevention and abatement of air pollution or nuisances
arising therefrom;
   (e)   Examine and approve or disapprove the plans for the installation or
modification of any air contaminant source or control equipment;
   (f)   Make inspections and tests of existing and newly installed air
contaminant sources or control equipment subject to this Code to determine
whether such source or equipment complies with this Code;
   (g)   Investigate complaints of violations of the provisions of this Code
and make inspections and observations of air pollution conditions. Records
shall be maintained of all such investigations, complaints, inspections and
observations;
   (h)   Administer the issuance of permits to operate, notices, waiver
citations, permits to install, variances and other documents required under the
provisions of this Code;
   (i)   Prepare and place before the Director of Public Health and Welfare for
his or her consideration proposals for additions or revisions to this Code or
other rules and regulations pertaining to air pollution;
   (j)   Encourage voluntary cooperation by persons or affected groups in the
preservation and restoration of the purity of the outdoor atmosphere;
   (k)   Collect and remit to appropriate City officials fees collected and
permits to operate variances and examination of plans and permits to install;
   (l)   Work with other City agencies and other organizations for the purpose
of coordinating activities for the common municipal good;
   (m)   Conduct tests and make studies of air contaminants whether or not
controlled by specific limitations of this Code;
   (n)   Do any and all acts which may be necessary for the successful
prosecution of the purposes of this Code and such other acts as may be
specifically enumerated herein;
   (o)   Work with other agencies of the Federal and State governments for the
purpose of the preservation and restoration of the purity of the outdoor
atmosphere;
   (p)   Notify the Mayor or the Governor of the State of Ohio whenever air
pollution in the City or in any part of the City exceeds that safe levels or
otherwise presents an imminent and substantial danger to the health or safety
of persons in the area;
   (q)   Examine and approve or disapprove the plans of any person seeking to
operate fuel-burning, incinerator, process and control equipment in variance
from the provisions of this Code;
   (r)   Establish, maintain and operate air quality monitoring stations and
other devices and methodologies designed to measure air pollution.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 255.03 Appeals
   (a)   Appeals of a person adversely affected by any order, requirement,
decision or determination by the Commissioner shall be heard and decided by the
Air Pollution Appeals Board. An appeal shall stay execution of the action
appealed. The Appeals Board shall commence to hear the merits of an appeal
within thirty (30) days after the filing of such appeal in the office of the
Board. Thereafter, the Board shall hear the final arguments and shall reach a
decision on such appeal without unreasonable or unnecessary delay.
   (b)   A motion to dissolve a stay, resulting from an appeal, may be filed by
the Commissioner with the Board. The Board shall commence to hear the merits of
such motion within seven (7) days after the filing of such motion in the office
of the Board. Thereafter, the Board shall hear the final arguments and shall
reach a decision on such motion without unreasonable or unnecessary delay.
   (c)   Appeals of any person, property owner, or member of the general public
claiming an interest or whose ability to protect an interest may be impaired or
impeded by any consent agreement or variance issued by the Commissioner, or by
any new visible emission limitations established by the Commissioner, in
accordance with the applicable provisions of this Code, shall be heard and
decided by the Board. The Board shall commence to hear the merits of an appeal
within thirty (30) days after the filing of such appeal in the office of Board.
Thereafter, the Board shall hear the final arguments and shall reach a decision
on such appeal without unreasonable or unnecessary delay.
   (d)   Absent any prior hearing or order of the Board, any person, property
owner or member of the general public shall be permitted by the Board to
intervene in a matter before the Board when such intervention is timely and the
person, property owner or member of the general public claims an interest
relating to the matter and/or the person is so situated that the disposition of
the matter by the Board may impair or impede his or her ability to protect an
interest. For the purpose of this subsection, “timely” shall mean prior to the
commencement of a hearing by the Board on the merits of a matter before the
Board.
   (e)   Any appeal from an order, requirement, decision or determination of
the Commissioner shall be filed with the Board within thirty (30) days after
receipt of notice of the action of the Commissioner.
   (f)   Any appeal from a consent agreement or variance issued by the
Commissioner or from new visible emission limitations established by the
Commissioner shall be filed with the Board within thirty (30) days after date
of publication of such consent agreement or variance by the Commissioner in the
City Record.
   (g)   The Commissioner shall be a party to all appeals brought under this
Code and shall be required to file the record of the matter at issue with the
Board within fourteen (14) days of the receipt of the notice of appeal. The
record shall include facts and findings pertinent to the Commissioner’s
decision. The Board may also require any other party or intervenor to file a
summary of their position prior to the hearing. The Board shall give public
notice of any hearing on an appeal in the City Record.
   (h)   Any person affected by a decision of the Board may obtain judicial
relief as provided by law.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 255.04 Abatement Orders
   (a)   Whenever the Commissioner finds upon inspection that a violation of
this Code or of rules and regulations promulgated thereunder has occurred, or
will occur, he or she may issue a written order to the person owning, operating
or in control of such source, requiring the abatement of all violations of this
Code and the correction of any condition which may result in a violation of
this Code. Should the person to whom such order is issued fail to act upon such
order within the time limit set forth therein or within the time extension
granted by the Commissioner, the Commissioner may revoke any existing permit to
operate and/or seal such source for failure to comply with such order.
   (b)   No person shall fail to comply with any order issued by the
Commissioner in accordance with subsection (a) hereof, without prior written
approval of the Commissioner.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 255.05 Records to be Available for Public Inspection; Exception
   (a)   Any records, reports or information obtained under the applicable
sections of this Code shall be available for public inspection, during regular
business hours, except that upon showing to the satisfaction of the
Commissioner by any person that such records, reports or information or any
particular part thereof other than emission data, to which the Commissioner has
access, if made public, would divulge methods or processes entitled to
protection as trade secrets of such person, the Commissioner shall consider
such record, report or information or particular portion thereof confidential,
except that such record, report or information may be disclosed when necessary
to sustain an action brought pursuant to the applicable sections of this code
on emission limitations or during a denial or revocation of a permit to
install, modify or operate or conditional permit to operate or variance.
   (b)   Nothing in subsection (a) hereof shall be construed to prevent the
Commissioner from compiling or publishing analyses or summaries relating to the
general condition of the atmosphere, provided that such reports do not reveal
any information otherwise confidential under this section.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 255.06 Authority to Enter into Consent Agreement
   (a)   Whenever any source or source operation is found to be in violation of
the provisions of this Code and the Commissioner determines that compliance
with the emission limitations, as established in the applicable sections of
this Code, necessitates the installation of control equipment of complex
design, or operational change of a complex nature, involving technological
ingenuity or advances of considerable magnitude, the Commissioner may upon the
approval of the Director of the Department of Public Health and Welfare, modify
any of the emission limitations, as established in this Code, and enter into a
consent agreement with the person owning, operating or in charge of such source
or source operation to bring about compliance with the emission limitations or
such modifications thereto, at the earliest possible date, based upon technical
feasibility and economical reasonableness and their relation to the benefits to
the people of the State to be derived from such compliance. The Commissioner
may also enter into a consent agreement with the person owning, operating or in
charge of any source or source operation to bring about compliance with the
emission limitations, as established in the applicable sections of this Code,
in lieu of issuing an abatement order.
   (b)   No person entering into such a consent agreement with the Commissioner
shall fail to comply with the terms and conditions of the consent agreement
without prior written approval of the Commissioner.
   (c)   The Commissioner shall give public notice of any consent agreement
entered into with any person owning, operating or in charge of any source
operation. Public notice shall consist of publication in the City Record and a
daily newspaper of general circulation in the metropolitan area.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 255.07 Rules and Regulations
   (a)   The Commissioner under the supervision and direction of the Director
of Public Health and Welfare, may adopt, amend or alter written rules and
regulations of this Code. Such rules and regulations shall neither conflict
with nor waive any provision of this Code nor any other section of the Codified
Ordinances.
   (b)   General notice of proposed rules and regulations shall be published in
the City Record, unless persons subject thereto are named and either personally
served or otherwise have actual notice thereof in accordance with law. The
notice shall include:
      (1)   A statement of the time, place and nature of public proceedings;
      (2)   Reference to the legal authority under which rule is proposed; and
      (3)   Either the terms or substance of the proposed rule or a description
of the subjects and issues involved.
   (c)   After notice required by this section, the Commissioner shall give
interested persons, within a reasonable time period to be determined by the
Commissioner, an opportunity to participate through submission of written data,
views, or arguments with or without opportunity for oral presentation. After
consideration of the relevant matter presented, the Commissioner shall
incorporate in the rules adopted a concise general statement of their basis and
purpose.
   (d)   Upon adoption, pursuant to the procedure set forth in subsections (b)
and (c) hereof, rules or regulations and amendments thereto and alterations
thereof shall become effective after two (2) successive publications in the
City Record.
   (e)   Any interested person may petition the Commissioner for the issuance,
amendment or repeal of a rule or regulation.
   (f)   Violation of rules or regulations of the Commissioner shall not
constitute the basis for criminal prosecutions; provided, however, that an
administrative order of the Commissioner based on such rules and regulations
shall be enforceable in accordance with the provisions of this Code, whether
administrative or criminal in nature.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
CHAPTER 257 – INSTALLATION AND MODIFICATION PERMITS
257.01   Application and Approval Required
257.02   Criteria for Granting Permits
257.03   Action on Application for Permit
257.04   Alternative Action on Application for Permit
257.05   Applicability of Permit
257.06   Violation of Permit
257.07   Time Limit on Permits
257.08   Registration of Contractors
257.09   Coordination of Departments
257.10   Issuance of Permits by Other Departments
257.11   Failure to Make Application or Obtain Permit or Approval Prior to Work
Cross-reference:
   Commissioner to administer permit issuance, CO
255.02(h)
   Install or installation defined, CO
251.32
   Modify or modification defined, CO
251.37
   Operation permits, CO
Ch. 259
   Permit fees, CO
Ch. 263
§ 257.01 Application and Approval Required
   (a)   No person shall install any new air contaminant source or control
equipment or modify any existing air contaminant source or control equipment
for use within the city until an application, including not less than two (2)
sets of properly prepared plans and specifications of the air contaminant
source or control equipment and structures or buildings used in connection
therewith, has been filed by the person or his or her agent in the office of,
and has been approved by, the Commissioner, and until an installation permit
has been issued by the Commissioner for such installation or modification.
   (b)   Application for permits to install or modify shall be made on forms
prepared by the Commissioner and shall contain such information as he or she
deems necessary to determine whether the permit should be issued. The
information required in such applications including plans and specifications
shall include the form and dimensions of the air contaminant source or control
equipment, together with the description and dimensions of the building or part
thereof in which such equipment is to be located, including the means provided
for admitting the air for combustion process; the character and composition of
the fuel to be used; the maximum quantity of such fuel to be burned per hour;
the kind and amount of raw materials processed; the nature, source and quantity
of uncontrolled and controlled emissions; the type, size and efficiency of
control facilities; the operating requirements; the use to be made of such air
contaminant source or control equipment; contaminant concentration, gas volume
and gas temperature at the emission point; the location and elevation of the
emission point relative to nearby structures and window openings; a flow
diagram showing the equipment under consideration and its relationship to other
processes, if any, and a general description of these processes, and any other
reasonable and pertinent information that may be required by the Commissioner.
   (c)   Applications for permits to install or modify shall be signed by the
responsible person performing the installation or modification and by the
corporate president or vice president reporting directly to the president or
highest ranking corporate officer with offices located in Cuyahoga County; or
by an equivalently responsible officer in the case of organizations other than
corporations; or, in other cases, by the source owner or operator. Such
signature shall constitute personal affirmation that the statements made in the
application are true and complete, complying fully with applicable City
requirements and shall subject the responsible official to liability under
applicable City laws forbidding false and misleading statements.
   (d)   The applicant’s signature shall constitute an agreement that the
applicant shall assume responsibility for the installation, modification or
location of such source or facility in accordance with this Code and with all
other applicable rules and regulations, and terms and conditions.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 257.02 Criteria for Granting Permits
   No permit to install or modify an air contaminant source or control
equipment shall be wanted until the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction
of the Commissioner that:
   (a)   Such installation or modification will not result in the discharge of
air contaminants in excess of the limitations established by this Code or the
Federal Standards of Performance for New Sources promulgated by the
Administrator of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to
Section III of the Clean Air Act, whichever are more stringent;
   (b)   Such installation incorporates the best available control technology;
   (c)   The information required by the Commissioner in the application has
been supplied or is adequate for the evaluation of the application for permit
to install or modify;
   (d)   Such installation or modification is provided, at the expense of the
applicant, with any sampling and testing facilities the Commissioner may
require, including, but not limited to:
      (1)   Sampling ports of a size, number and location as the Commissioner
may require;
      (2)   Safe access to each port; and
      (3)   Instrumentation to monitor and record emission data.
   (e)   Such installation or modification will not create a nuisance or
otherwise violate any other provision of this Code or the rules and regulations
promulgated pursuant thereto;
   (f)   Such installation or modification will operate without preventing or
interfering with the attainment or maintenance of any applicable ambient air
quality standard or cause any significant degradation in ambient air quality.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 257.03 Action on Application for Permit
   (a)   An application for permit to install any new air contaminant source or
control equipment shall be approved or denied by the Commissioner within sixty
(60) calendar days after it is filed in the office of the Division of Air
Pollution Control.
   (b)   An application for permit to modify any existing air contaminant
source or control equipment shall be approved or denied by the Commissioner
within sixty (60) calendar days after it is filed in the office of the Division
of Air Pollution. If such application for permit to modify is not acted upon by
the Commissioner within said sixty (60) day time period, the application for
permit to modify shall serve as authorization for the applicant to commence
with work on such modification. Such authorization shall not be construed to
prevent the Commissioner from approving or denying the application for permit
to modify at a later date. Nor shall such authorization be construed as
relieving the applicant of the responsibility of meeting the requirements of
other applicable provisions of this Code nor shall it serve as a guarantee of
immunity from prosecution or legal action for violations of other applicable
provisions of this Code.
   (c)   Approval of the application for a permit to install or modify may, at
the discretion of the Commissioner, include a condition requiring emission
tests to be conducted upon completion of installation for which the permit to
install or modify has been issued, and other special terms and conditions, to
establish compliance with the emission limitations of this Code. The
Commissioner shall notify the person applying for the permit to install or
modify of his or her approval, or reasons for denial, of the application in
writing. Upon the approval of the application and upon payment of the
prescribed fees, the Commissioner shall issue a permit for the installation or
modification of such air contaminant source or control equipment.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 257.04 Alternative Action on Application for Permit
   In the event the plans, specifications and information submitted to the
Commissioner pursuant to Section
257.01 reveal a proposal to install or modify any new or existing air
contaminant source of complex design or operational change of a complex nature
involving technological ingenuity or advances of considerable magnitude, the
Commissioner may, at his or her option, and in lieu of issuing a permit to
install or modify, require the applicant to file with the Commissioner a
statement setting forth the reasons he or she believes that the proposed
equipment installation or modification will comply with all of the applicable
provisions and limitations set forth in this Code. Upon filing of such a
statement, and with the written approval of the Commissioner, the applicant may
proceed with the proposed installation or modification, subject, however, to
all of the provisions of this Code.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 257.05 Applicability of Permit
   No installation or modification shall be made which is not in accordance
with the information contained in the application including the plans,
specifications and other pertinent information and conditions upon which the
installation or modification permit was issued without the prior written
approval of the Commissioner.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 257.06 Violation of Permit
   A violation of the permit to install or modify shall be sufficient cause for
the Commissioner to stop all work in connection with said permit, and he or she
is hereby authorized to seal the installation or modification without notice.
No further work shall be done until the Commissioner is assured that the
condition in question will be corrected and that the work will proceed in
accordance with the permit to install or modify.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 257.07 Time Limit on Permits
   Unless otherwise stated in the application for permit to install or modify,
if installation or modification is not begun within six (6) months nor
completed within one (1) year from the date of the issuance of the permit, such
permit shall automatically become void and all fees paid shall be forfeited
unless an extension of time is granted by the Commissioner.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 257.08 Registration of Contractors
   No permit required by the provisions of this Code shall be issued for work
to be undertaken by contract except to a registered contractor, as authorized
by Section 3107.37 of the Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 257.09 Coordination of Departments
   It shall be the duty of the various departments, bureaus, divisions,
officers and employees of the City, having charge of the inspection of the
premises upon which such equipment is located to cooperate with the
Commissioner to determine that the execution of work so authorized by such
permit shall be done in conformity with plans and specifications approved by
the Commissioner.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 257.10 Issuance of Permits by Other Departments
   No permit for the erection, construction, reconstruction or modification of
any building, plant or structure, related in any manner to fuel-burning
equipment, process equipment, incinerator or control equipment, or any
equipment which may be a source of air contaminants, shall be issued by the
Commissioner of Building or by any other department, bureau, division, officer
or employee of the City until the Commissioner has approved such plans and
specifications which relate in any manner to a new or an existing air
contaminant source or control equipment covered by provisions of this Code.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 257.11 Failure to Make Application or Obtain Permit or Approval Prior to Work
   (a)   No person shall cause, permit or allow the construction, installation
or modification of any air contaminant source or control equipment to commence
or proceed who has failed:
      (1)   To make an application for a permit to install or modify as
required by Section
257.01; and
      (2)   To secure from the Commissioner a permit to install as required by
Section
257.01; or
      (3)   To file a compliance statement and secure written approval of the
Commissioner to proceed with the proposed installation or modification, as
authorized in Section
257.04, in lieu of the issuance of a permit to install or modify.
   If work on the construction, installation or modification of such source or
control equipment has commenced or is proceeding, the Commissioner is
authorized to stop all work being done and to seal that part or parts of such
source or control equipment that has been constructed, installed or modified
until a permit to install or modify or approval of a compliance statement is
secured from the Commissioner.
   (b)   No permit to install or modify or permit to operate shall be issued by
the Commissioner to any person or contractor unless such person or contractor
complies with all the requirements of this Code.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
CHAPTER 259 – OPERATION PERMITS AND VARIANCES
259.01   Permit to Operate or Variance Prerequisite for Operation
259.02   Permits to Operate Subsequent to Installation or Modification Permits
259.03   Application for Permit to Operate for Existing Sources
259.04   Criteria for Granting of Permits to Operate
259.05   Action on Application for Permit to Operate
259.06   Renewal of Permits to Operate
259.07   Denial or Revocation of Permits to Operate or Conditional Permits to
Operate
259.08   Applicability of Permit to Operate
259.09   Prima Facie Evidence of Unlawful Emission
259.10   Variances
Cross-reference:
   Commissioner to administer permit issuance, CO
255.02(h)
   Installation and modification permits, CO
Ch. 257
   Permit fees, CO
Ch. 263
§ 259.01 Permit to Operate or Variance Prerequisite for Operation
   Except as otherwise provided in this Code no person shall cause, permit or
allow the operation or other use of any air contaminant source or control
equipment unless a permit to operate or variance has been granted by the
Commissioner, and no such air contaminant source or control equipment shall be
operated when such permit to operate or variance has been denied or revoked or
becomes void.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 259.02 Permits to Operate Subsequent to Installation or Modification Permits
   (a)   No person shall operate or cause to be operated any air contaminant
source or control equipment or any equipment pertaining thereto for which a
permit to install or modify was required or was issued under this Code until an
inspection has been made by the Commissioner or his or her representative. Such
inspection shall be performed within five (5) working days of notification of
completion of the installation or modification of such source or control
equipment. If an inspection is not performed within five (5) working days, the
application for the permit to install or modify will serve as a conditional
permit to operate for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days. The person
responsible for the installation or modification of any air contaminant source
or control equipment or any equipment pertaining thereto for which a permit to
install or modify is required shall notify the Commissioner when the work is
completed and ready for final inspection. No air contaminant source or control
equipment shall be operated for any other purpose or in any other manner than
that for which the permit to install or modify was approved and for which a
permit to operate has been issued unless otherwise authorized in writing by the
Commissioner. After the permit to install or modify has been issued and it is
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Commissioner that the air contaminant
source or control equipment can be operated in compliance with this Code, an
initial permit to operate shall be issued by the Commissioner. Emission tests
may be required by the Commissioner before issuing of an initial permit to
operate. Such permit to operate shall be kept posted on or near the
installation for which it was issued.
   (b)   If a new air contaminant source or control equipment that has been
installed or if an existing air contaminant source or control equipment that
has been modified in accordance with the provisions of a permit to install or
modify, and otherwise in accordance with applicable law, is unable to comply
with the applicable provisions of this Code on emission limitations as of the
date of start-up of operations, the Commissioner may grant, at his or her
discretion, a conditional permit to operate such air contaminant source or
control equipment for a period not to exceed six (6) months from start-up of
operation, provided the period is used to remedy any defect which prevents such
compliance and the applicant affirms that such air contaminant source or
control equipment will be operated in accordance with all other applicable
provisions of this Code for the duration of the conditional permit. Conditional
permits to operate may not be renewed and shall contain such terms and
conditions as the Commissioner determines necessary and appropriate.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 259.03 Application for Permit to Operate for Existing Sources
   (a)   No person shall cause, permit or allow the operation or other use of
any air contaminant source or control equipment existing prior to the adoption
of this Code for which no previous permit to install or certificate of
operation was issued by the Commissioner subsequent to October 27, 1969, under
City of Cleveland Ordinance No. 1659-A-69, or for which no permit to operate or
variance was issued, upon recommendation for issuance of such permit by the
Commissioner, by the Director of the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency
subsequent to October 23, 1972 without applying for and obtaining a permit to
operate from the Commissioner as follows:
      (1)   Applications for permits to operate shall be filed in the office of
the Division of Air Pollution Control within six (6) months of the effective
date of this Code;
      (2)   Applications for permits to operate shall be on forms prepared by
the Commissioner and shall include two (2) sets of properly prepared plans and
specifications of the air contaminant source or control equipment and
structures or buildings used in connection therewith. Such plans and
specifications shall show the form and dimensions of the air contaminant source
or control equipment, together with the description and dimensions of the
building or part thereof in which such equipment is to be located, including
the means provided for admitting the air for combustion processes; the
character and composition of the fuel to be used; the maximum quantity of such
fuel to be burned per hour; the kind and amount of raw materials processed; the
expected air contaminant emission rate; the operating requirements; the use to
be made of such air contaminant source or control equipment; contaminant
concentration, gas volume and gas temperature at the emission point; physical
characteristics of particulates emitted; the location and elevation of the
emission point relative to nearby structures and window openings; a flow
diagram showing the equipment under consideration and its relationship to other
processes; and any other reasonable and pertinent information that may be
required by the Commissioner. Failure to comply with any request for
information made by the Commissioner shall be cause for rejection of an
application.
   (b)   Applications for permits to operate shall be signed by the corporate
president or vice president reporting directly to the president, or highest
ranking corporate officer with offices located in Cuyahoga County; or by an
equally responsible officer in the case of organizations other than
corporations; or, in other cases, by the source owner or operator. Such
signature shall constitute personal affirmation that the statements made in the
application are true and complete, complying fully with applicable City
requirements, and shall subject the responsible official to liability under
applicable City laws forbidding false and misleading statements.
   (c)   The applicant’s signature shall constitute an agreement that the
applicant shall assume responsibility for the operation and location of such
source or facility in accordance with this Code and with all other applicable
rules and regulations, and terms and conditions.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 259.04 Criteria for Granting of Permits to Operate
   No permit to operate an existing air contaminant source or control equipment
shall be granted until the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the
Commissioner that:
   (a)   The operation of such air contaminant source or control equipment will
not result in the discharge of air contaminants in excess of the limitations
established by this Code;
   (b)   The operation of such air contaminant source or control equipment will
not create a nuisance or otherwise violate any other provision of this Code or
the rules and regulations promulgated therein;
   (c)   The information required by the Commissioner in the application has
been supplied and is adequate for the evaluation of the application for permit
to operate.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 259.05 Action on Application for Permit to Operate
   An application for permit to operate an existing air contaminant source or
control equipment shall be acted upon within sixty (60) calendar days after it
is filed in the office of the Division of Air Pollution Control. Approval of
the application for a permit to operate may, at the discretion of the
Commissioner, include a condition requiring emission tests to be conducted
within a reasonable period of time, as determined by the Commissioner, and
other special terms and conditions, to establish compliance with the emission
limitations of this ordinance. The Commissioner shall notify the person
applying for the permit to operate of his or her approval or reasons for
rejection of the application in writing. Upon the approval of the application
and upon the payment of the prescribed fees, the Commissioner shall issue a
permit to operate such air contaminant source or control equipment.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 259.06 Renewal of Permits to Operate
   Permits to operate air contaminant sources or control equipment shall be
renewed according to the schedule of periodic inspections of designated classes
of equipment as determined by rule or regulation of the Commissioner. No period
of time between inspections shall exceed three (3) years.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 259.07 Denial or Revocation of Permits to Operate or Conditional Permits to
Operate
   (a)   A permit to operate or a conditional permit to operate may be denied
or once granted, may be revoked:
      (1)   Incident to any discontinue and seal order;
      (2)   In an emergency where operation of the subject air contaminant
source or control equipment may be dangerous to persons or property;
      (3)   Where no air pollution control equipment or modification, if
required, has been installed to permit operation in conformity with the
provisions of this Code;
      (4)   Where the air contaminant source or control equipment is of such
condition or so installed that it cannot be or is not being operated in
conformity with the provisions of this Code;
      (5)   Upon failure or refusal of the person responsible to submit
information required by the Code;
      (6)   Upon failure or refusal of the person responsible to comply with an
abatement order issued under the provisions of Section
255.04;
      (7)   Upon failure or refusal of the person responsible to comply with
the terms and conditions of any permit granted by the Commissioner under
provisions of this Code;
      (8)   Upon failure or refusal of a person responsible to comply with the
terms and conditions of any conditional permit granted by the Commissioner
under the provisions of this Code;
      (9)   Upon failure or refusal of the person responsible to comply with
the provisions of Chapter
283.
   (b)   Notice in writing shall be sent by the Commissioner to persons in
violation of subsections (a)(1), (a)(4), (a)(5), (a)(7) and (a)(9) hereof,
except pursuant to Section
255.04, demanding compliance within a time limit set forth therein, or within a
time limit extension granted by the Commissioner prior to the revocation of an
existing permit to operate.
   (c)   Denial or revocation of a permit to operate or conditional permit to
operate shall not be a bar to prosecution for violation of any of the
provisions of this Code.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 259.08 Applicability of Permit to Operate
   The issuance of a permit to operate shall not operate as a guarantee of
immunity from prosecution or other legal action for violations occurring during
the period covered by the permit. Failure to operate under test within the
limitations and requirements of this Code shall constitute sufficient grounds
for ordering changes in the air contaminant source or control equipment or
appurtenances thereto before a permit to operate can be granted or renewed.
When the Commissioner refuses to issue a permit to operate, the Commissioner is
authorized to seal the air contaminant source or control equipment until the
person required to procure the permit to operate has complied with the
provisions of this Code.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 259.09 Prima Facie Evidence of Unlawful Emission
   In any hearing of the Municipal Court or any court of competent
jurisdiction, the fact of operation without a valid permit to operate or
variance, together with testimony as to ownership or responsibility from the
records of the Division of Air Pollution Control, shall be prima facie evidence
of unlawful emissions and that the air contaminant source or control equipment
for which the permit to operate or variance is not in effect is being operated
in violation of the provisions of this Code.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 259.10 Variances
   (a)   Any person who owns or is in control of any plant, building structure,
process, equipment or source may apply to the Commissioner for a variance from
the provisions of this Code.
   (b)   The Commissioner must give public notice of any request for a variance
from the provisions of this Code. Public notice shall consist of publication in
the City Record and daily newspaper of general circulation in the metropolitan
area and shall contain the name of the company, the source, the location, the
pollutants, the control strategy, if possible, and the duration of the variance
being requested.
   (c)   No variance shall be granted pursuant to this section except after due
consideration by the Commissioner of the relative interests of the applicant,
other owners of property likely to be affected by the discharge of emissions
and the general public. Interested persons may submit written comments on the
variance request to the Commissioner. All relevant comments, received within
thirty (30) days after the latest date of publication of the public notice of
the variance request in the City Record or daily newspaper or general
circulation in the metropolitan area, will be considered.
   (d)   No variance shall be granted until the applicant shows to the
satisfaction of the Commissioner that:
      (1)   Such source is not a new source or modification; and
      (2)   The commissioner has approved a compliance schedule for such
source.
   (e)   A compliance schedule shall be approvable where it shows to the
satisfaction of the Commissioner that:
      (1)   The plan and schedule provide for the earliest possible compliance
by the source;
      (2)   Any available alternative operating procedure and interim control
measures have reduced or will reduce the impact of such source on the public
health;
      (3)   Good faith efforts have been and will be made to reduce emissions
or otherwise comply with this Code or the rules and regulations promulgated
therein;
      (4)   The proposed control strategy will bring the source into compliance
with this Code or the rules and regulations promulgated therein;
      (5)   The compliance schedule contains a date on or before which the
source shall be operated in compliance with this Code or the rules and
regulations promulgated therein;
   (f)   A variance request shall be acted upon by the Commissioner within
ninety (90) days after receipt in the office of the Commissioner. The
Commissioner shall notify the person applying for the variance of the approval
or reasons for rejection of the variance request in writing.
   (g)   The Commissioner shall give public notice of his or her decision on
all requests for variances. Public notice shall consist of publication in the
City Record and a daily newspaper of general circulation in the metropolitan
area.
   (h)   If granted, a variance shall be effective for whatever period of time
the Commissioner deems appropriate. A variance shall not be a right of the
applicant or holder thereof but shall be in the discretion of the Commissioner,
as provided in subsections (c) and (d) hereof.
   (i)   The Commissioner may require the variance holder, as part of the terms
of the variance, to maintain such monitoring equipment and to make a file of
such information, records and reports as he or she deems necessary to insure
compliance with the terms of the variance and to evaluate the effect of the
emission upon the ambient atmosphere.
   (j)   No person shall fail to comply with any condition of a variance
granted by the Commissioner without prior written approval of the Commissioner.
This section shall have no effect upon the date of final compliance as set
forth in the variance as granted.
   (k)   Once granted, a variance may be revoked by the Commissioner:
      (1)   Upon failure or refusal of the variance holder to maintain
monitoring equipment and to make and file information, records, and reports as
required by the Commissioner;
      (2)   Upon failure of the variance holder to meet, or to show good faith
effort in meeting, any of the conditions of the variance;
      (3)   If during the period of the variance the source operation becomes
unsafe and endangers the public health.
   (l)   Nothing in this section and no variance granted pursuant hereto shall
be construed to prevent or limit the application of the emergency provisions
and procedures of this Code to any person or his or her property.
   (m)   No variance may be granted which is in any way in conflict with the
air pollution regulations of the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency or the
United States Environmental Protection Agency.
   (n)   Denial or revocation of a variance by the Commissioner shall not be a
bar to prosecution for violation of any other applicable provision of this
Code.
   (o)   Any request for renewal of a variance shall be acted upon and treated
as an original variance application.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
CHAPTER 261 – EXEMPTIONS
261.01   Exemptions, Specified; Compliance
261.02   Limited Exemptions
Cross-reference:
   Variances, CO
259.10
   Visible air contaminant exceptions, CO
265.04
§ 261.01 Exemptions, Specified; Compliance
   (a)   The provisions of this code shall not apply to the following classes
of sources:
      (1)   Systems used exclusively for comfort ventilation;
      (2)   American Gas Association (A.G.A.) approved smokeless, odorless
incinerators installed in one (1) or two (2) family dwellings;
      (3)   Fuel-burning equipment using natural gas, or No. 1 or No. 2 fuel
oil at rates of less than one million (1,000,000) BTU per hour when operated at
the maximum rated capacities and, from which, products of combustion are the
sole emissions;
      (4)   Boilers installed in any one (1) or two (2) family dwellings;
      (5)   Warm air furnaces, any unit heater, direct-fired unit heater or
ceiling-type unit heater fired with natural gas, or No. 1 or No. 2 fuel oil,
where equipment is used exclusively for space or comfort heating, or installed
in any one (1) or two (2) family dwellings.
   (b)   Exception under this section shall not relieve any owner or operator
of an air contaminant source or control equipment of the responsibility to
comply with the provisions of Section
265.01,
267.01 and
277.08 and Chapter
283. If the operation of any such air contaminant source or control equipment
violates any of the provisions of Sections
265.01,
267.01 and
277.08 and Chapter
283, the Commissioner shall take appropriate action, under the applicable
provisions of this Code, to abate the violation.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 261.02 Limited Exemptions
   (a)   The provisions of Chapters
257 and
259 shall not apply to the following classes of sources:
      (1)   Mobile sources;
      (2)   Demolition of buildings, authorized open burning, sandblasting and/
or building cleaning, spray applications of fiberated cementitious products and
spraying of asbestos containing products. Permits may be required for such
operations under the provisions of Chapters
277 and
281;
      (3)   Such other sources of small emission significance as the
Commissioner may exempt by rules and regulation.
   (b)   Exemption under this section shall not relieve any owner or operator
of an air contaminant source or control equipment of the responsibility to
comply with the provisions of other applicable sections of this Code,
including, but not limited to, emission standards and limitations, submission
of data, reporting requirements and emergency orders.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
CHAPTER 263 – FEES
263.01   Fees
263.02   Fee Reduction
263.03   Application to Governmental Units
263.04   Schools and Churches Exempted
263.05   County Land Reutilization Corporation Exempted
Cross-reference:
   Commissioner to collect and remit fees, CO
255.02
   Installation and modification permits, CO
Ch. 257
   Operation permits and variances, CO
Ch. 259
§ 263.01 Fees
   (a)   Fees for the examination of plans and applications for the issuance of
permits, variances, and for the original inspection and permit to operate for
the installation and modification of any air contaminant source or control
equipment, within the jurisdiction of this code, and renewal of permits to
operate shall be as follows:
 Permit to Install or Modify and Initial Permit to Renewal Permit to Operate
 Operate and Variance
                                                                                    Permit to
                                                                                    Install
                                                                                    or Modify
                                                                                    and       Renewal
                                                                                    Initial   Permit to
                                                                                    Permit to Operate
                                                                                    Operate
                                                                                    and
                                                                                    Variance
(1)   Fuel-burning Equipment for Each Unit. The fee should be based upon the
maximum designed heat input capacity,
   A.   Of a heat input capacity of less than 2,500,000 BTU/HR                $100.00   $50.00
   B.   Of a heat input capacity of 2,500,000 BTU/HR and less than 10,000,000 $200.00   $100.00
HR
   C.   Of a heat input capacity of 10,000,000 BTU/HR and less than 25,000,000$500.00   $250.00
HR
   D.   Of a heat input capacity of 25,000,000 BTU/HR and less than 50,000,000$1,500.00 $750.00
HR
   E.   Of a heat input capacity of 100,000,000 or more                       $2,000.00 $1,000.00
   Total fees for all fuel-burning equipment, except major sources, in the above
schedule in each boiler house (room) shall not exceed $1,000.00 for renewal of
permits to operate.
(2)   Incinerators for Each Unit.
   A.   Having a primary furnace volume of 15 cubic feet or less              $60.00    $30.00
   B.   Having a primary furnace volume of 15 cubic feet but less than 25 cubi$100.00   $50.00
feet
   C.   Having a primary furnace volume of 25 cubic feet but less than 35 cubi$140.00   $75.00
feet
   D.   Having a primary furnace volume of 35 cubic feet but less than 50 cubi$200.00   $100.00
feet
   E.   Having a primary furnace volume of 50 cubic feet but less than 100 cub$300.00   $150.00
feet
   F.   Having a primary furnace volume of 100 cubic feet but less than 200 cu$1,200.00 $600.00
feet
   G.   Having a primary furnace volume of 200 cubic feet or more             $2,000.00 $1,000.00
(3)   Process Equipment. Fee shall be based upon the value of X as determined from
the following equation: X = Process Weight in pounds per hour + Exhaust Air
Ventilation in actual cubic feet per minute.
   A.   For values of X of 1,000 or less                                      $80.00    $40.00
   B.   For values of X over 1,000 but less than 10,000                       $200.00   $100.00
   C   For values of X over 10,000 but less than 50,000                       $400.00   $200.00
   D.   For values of X over 50,000 but less than 100,000                     $800.00   $400.00
   E.   For values of X over 100,000 but less than 500,000                    $1,200.00 $600.00
   F.   For values of X over 500,000 but less than 1,000,000                  $1,600.00 $800.00
   G   For values of X of $1,000,000 or more                                  $2,000.00 $1,000.00
   Total fees for all process equipment, except major sources, in above schedule in
each work room, shall not exceed $500.00 for renewal of permits to operate.
(4)   Process and Fuel-burning Equipment. Fee shall be based upon the value of Y as
determined from the following equation: Y = Heat input in million of BTU per hour +
Exhaust Air Ventilation in actual cubic feet per minute x 1/1000
   A.   For values of Y of 1, or less                                         $80.00    $40.00
   B.   For values of Y over 1, but less than 10                              $200.00   $100.00
   C.   For values of Y over 10, but less than 20                             $300.00   $150.00
   D.   For values of Y over 20, but less than 40                             $600.00   $300.00
   E.   For values of Y over 40, but less than 60                             $1,000.00 $500.00
   F.   For values of Y over 60, but less than 80                             $1,400.00 $700.00
   G.   For values of Y over 80, but less than 100                            $1,800.00 $900.00
   H.   For values of Y over 100 or more                                      $2,000.00 $1,000.00
   Total fees for all process and fuel-burning equipment, except major sources, in
the above schedule in each work room, shall not exceed $500.00 for renewal of
permits to operate.
(5)   Control Equipment and/or Appurtenances. A separate permit shall be required
and shall carry the same fees as the air contaminant source for which it is
installed or modified. A separate permit and permit fee shall not be required when
the control equipment or appurtenances are installed as an integral part of the
source or concurrently with the installation or modification of the source.
(6)   Any Other Air Contaminant Source. Any other air contaminant source and not $100.00   $50.00
included in the above schedule
 
   (b)   Fees for the examination of applications and for the issuance of other
permits, required by this code, shall be as follows: For each permit for a
given location:
      (1)   For open burning, fifty dollars ($50.00);
      (2)   For sandblasting of buildings and other structures, fifty dollars
($50.00);
      (3)   For spraying of asbestos containing products, fifty dollars
($50.00).
   (c)   Where the nature of any process or operation or the design of any
equipment is such as to permit more than one (1) interpretation of the values
of X and/or Y in subsection (a) of this section, the interpretation that
results in the highest fee shall apply.
(Ord. No. 2393-02. Passed 2-3-03, eff. 2-3-03)
§ 263.02 Fee Reduction
   Where a fee is demanded by the OEPA air pollution regulations for a permit
to install or modify or permit to operate the same air contaminant source the
fees demanded in Section
263.01 shall be reduced by seventy-five percent (75%).
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 263.03 Application to Governmental Units
   The provisions of Section
263.01 shall apply within the City to all governmental units unless the
imposition and collection of fees are prohibited by law.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 263.04 Schools and Churches Exempted
   No fee shall be demanded or collected under the provision of Section
263.01 for the required permits, variances of inspection of fuel-burning or
control equipment or incinerators installed or to be installed in any public or
parochial school or any churches in the City.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 263.05 County Land Reutilization Corporation Exempted
   No fee shall be demanded under the provisions of Section
263.01 for any air contaminant source in the City that is owned or operated by
a County Land Reutilization Corporation organized pursuant to RC Chapter 1724.
(Ord. No. 670-2023. Passed 7-12-23, eff. 7-17-23)
CHAPTER 265 – VISIBLE AIR CONTAMINANT LIMITATIONS
265.01   Visible Emission Limitations from Any Single Source of Emission
265.02   Visible Emission Limitations from Mobile Equipment
265.03   Authority to Establish New Visible Emission Limitations
265.04   Exceptions
Cross-reference:
   Air contaminant defined, CO
251.03
   Exemptions, CO
Ch. 261
   Visible emission defined, CO
251.68
§ 265.01 Visible Emission Limitations from Any Single Source of Emission
   (a)   No person shall discharge into the atmosphere from any single source
of emission whatsoever any air contaminant of a shade or density equal to or
darker than that designated as No. 1 on the Ringelmann Chart or twenty percent
(20%) opacity, except as set forth in the applicable provisions of this chapter
and Chapter
277.
   (b)   A person may discharge into the atmosphere from any single source of
emission for a period or periods aggregating not more than three (3) minutes in
any sixty (60) minutes air contaminants of a shade or density equal to or
darker than that designated as No. 1 on the Ringelmann Chart or twenty percent
(20%) opacity but not darker than No. 3 on the Ringelmann Chart or sixty
percent (60%) opacity.
(Ord. No. 141-79. Passed 12-17-79, eff. 12-19-79)
§ 265.02 Visible Emission Limitations from Mobile Equipment
   (a)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged from any gasoline-
powered vehicle any visible air contaminants for a consecutive period greater
than five (5) seconds.
   (b)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged from any diesel-
powered vehicle, including diesel-drive motorboat and diesel locomotives, any
visible air contaminants darker in shade or density than that designated as No.
1 on the Ringelmann Chart, or twenty percent (20%) opacity, for a consecutive
period greater than five (5) seconds.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 265.03 Authority to Establish New Visible Emission Limitations
   (a)   The Commissioner is hereby authorized to establish new visible
emission limitations for any air contaminant source equipped with control
equipment if upon emission tests he or she finds that such source is in
compliance with all other applicable emission limitations, as established in
this Code, but during the time such emission tests are being conducted the
source fails to meet the requirements of Section
265.01
   (b)   No new visible emission limitations shall be established by the
Commissioner, pursuant to subsection (a) hereof, unless the owner or operator
of the affected air contaminant source and associated control equipment
petitions the Commissioner and proves to the satisfaction of the Commissioner
that:
      (1)   The affected air contaminant source and associated control
equipment were operated and maintained in a manner to minimize the opacity or
degree of emissions during the emission tests;
      (2)   The emission tests were performed under the conditions established
and monitored by the Commissioner or his or her representative;
      (3)   The affected air contaminant source and associated control
equipment were incapable of being adjusted or operated to meet the applicable
visible emission standard.
   (c)   Upon establishment by the Commissioner, pursuant to subsections (a)
and (b) hereof, of new visible emission limitations for any air contaminant
source equipped with control equipment, such new visible emission limitations
shall become effective after two (2) successive publications in the City
Record.
   (d)   No person, owner or operator shall discharge into the atmosphere from
any single source of emission whatsoever for which new visible emission
limitations were established by the Commissioner air contaminants of a shade or
density in excess of the new visible emission limitations as established by the
Commissioner, pursuant to the requirements of this section.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 265.04 Exceptions
   (a)   Where the presence of uncombined water is the only reason for failure
of an emission to meet the limitations established under this chapter, the
limitations set forth in such sections shall not apply.
   (b)   The limitations on visible air contaminants established by Section
265.01 shall not apply to open burning when a permit to open burn has been
granted by the Commissioner under authority of Section
277.09.
   (c)   The Commissioner is hereby authorized to exempt any source from
compliance with the limitations of Sections
265.01 and
265.03 for periods of startup and shutdown. Such exemption may be granted by
the Commissioner upon request of the owner or operator of any source and proof
to the satisfaction of the Commissioner that such exemption is necessary. Such
exemption shall be incorporated into the terms and conditions of permits to
operate, variances, consent agreements or by written permission of the
Commissioner.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
CHAPTER 267 – ODORS
267.01   Emission into the Atmosphere
267.02   Rendering Plants
267.03   Industrial Sources
Cross-reference:
   Exemptions, CO
Ch. 261
   Odor defined, CO
251.39
§ 267.01 Emission into the Atmosphere
   (a)   No person shall cause or allow the emission into the atmosphere from
any air contaminant source or control equipment that will cause the outdoor air
to become odorous, beyond the property line of the air contaminant source or
control equipment, as measured by the use of a scentometer, odor panel,
equivalent instrumentation or methodology used separately or in union
therewith, which is:
      (1)   On or adjacent to residential, recreational, institutional, retail
sales, hotel or educational premises when the odorous air has an odor strength
equal to or weaker than a No. 8 scale and is detectable for more than two (2)
measurements, at intervals of not less than ten (10) minutes, in any one (1)
hour period or when the odorous air has an odor strength stronger than a No. 8
scale and is detectable for more than two (2) measurements, at intervals of not
less than fifteen (15) minutes, in any eight (8) hour period.
      (2)   On or adjacent to industrial premises when the odorous air has an
odor strength equal to or stronger than a No. 21 scale and is detectable for
more than two (2) measurements, at intervals of not less than fifteen (15)
minutes, in any eight (8) hour period.
      (3)   On or adjacent to premises other than those specified in
subsections (1) and (2) hereof when the odorous air has an odor strength equal
to or stronger than a No. 8 scale and is detectable for more than two (2)
measurements, at intervals of not less than fifteen (15) minutes, in any eight
(8) hour period.
   (b)   No. 8 Scale shall mean the dilution of one (1) volume of odorous air
with seven (7) volumes of odor free air resulting in a mixture which is below
the threshold of odor sensory perception. No. 21 Scale shall mean the dilution
of one (1) volume of odorous air with twenty (20) volumes of odor free air
resulting in a mixture which is below the odor sensory perception.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 267.02 Rendering Plants
   (a)   As used in this section, the term “rendering plant” includes the land,
buildings, machinery, apparatus and fixtures employed in a process by which
animal, poultry or fish, which is unsalable, spoiled, contaminated or otherwise
unfit for human consumption, is treated, through the use of heat or other
methods, so as to convert it into fats and oils, food for poultry, livestock or
pets, fertilizer or other products.
   (b)   No person shall operate or cause to be operated a rendering plant
unless:
      (1)   All vents to the atmosphere from such rendering plant are
substantially free of any odor causing air pollution;
      (2)   Appropriate and suitable air cleaning equipment is so placed and
operated and air pollution control measures are so instituted that air
contaminants are removed or recycled to the process in such manner that the
effluent air will not create air pollution;
      (3)   Odor-producing materials are confined, processed, stored, handled
and disposed of in such a manner that odors produced within or outside the
rendering plant from this source can be controlled;
      (4)   Excessive accumulations of odor- producing materials resulting from
spillage or escape do not occur;
      (5)   Air contaminant emissions arising from unit operations or unit
processes, as well as from the handling of general materials, are confined at
the point of origin;
      (6)   All finished products, by-products and waste materials are either
odor free or so treated as to eliminate or prevent air pollution.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 267.03 Industrial Sources
   Emissions from any of the sources or processes listed in Table 1 of Appendix
A of this Title shall be equipped with air cleaning equipment for the control
of odorous matter to maintain compliance with Section
267.01. The provisions of this section are inclusive of all processes listed in
Table 1, but are not limited to those specified therein.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
CHAPTER 269 – PARTICULATE LIMITATIONS
269.01   Emission from Fuel-Burning Equipment
269.02   Emission from Incinerators
269.03   Emission from Process Equipment
Cross-reference:
   Exemptions, CO
Ch. 261
   Particulate matter defined, CO
251.46
§ 269.01 Emission from Fuel-Burning Equipment
   (a)   No person shall cause or allow to be emitted into the atmosphere from
any fuel-burning equipment or premises or to pass a convenient measuring point
near the stack outlet, particulate matter in the gases to exceed four-
hundredths (0.04) lb. per one hundred thousand (100,000) BTU heat input for
installations using less than ten million (10,000,000) BTU per hour total
input. Figure I and Table II of Appendix B of this Title shall be used to
determine the allowable particulate emission limitation for sources with a
rated heat input equal to or greater than ten million (10,000,000) BTU per
hour.
   (b)   The “heat input” shall be the aggregate heat content of all fuels
whose products of combustion emanate from a single fuel-burning unit. The heat
input-value used shall be the equipment manufacturer’s or designer’s guaranteed
maximum input, whichever is greater. The total heat input of all fuel-burning
units on a plant or premises which are united either physically or
operationally, shall be used for determining the maximum allowable amount of
particulate matter which may be emitted from any single fuel-burning unit. The
total of the capacities of all operable fuel- burning units within one (1)
system shall be considered as the capacity of the system.
   (c)   No person shall cause or allow the burning of refuse, garbage or other
debris in any boiler or any other device which has not been specifically
designed to burn such refuse, garbage or other debris and for which an
effective permit to operate has not been issued by the Commissioner.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 269.02 Emission from Incinerators
   (a)   This section shall apply to any incinerator used to dispose of refuse
or other wastes by burning and to the processing of salvageable material by
burning.
   (b)   The burning capacity of an incinerator shall be manufacturer’s or
designer’s guaranteed maximum rate or such other rate as may be determined by
the Commissioner in accordance with good engineering practices. In case of
conflict, the determination made by the Commissioner shall govern.
   (c)   For the purposes of this section, the total of the capacities of all
operable furnaces within one (1) system shall be considered as the incinerator
capacity.
   (d)   No person shall cause or allow to be emitted into the atmosphere from
any incinerator or premises or to pass a convenient measuring point near the
stack outlet, particulate matter in the exhaust gases to exceed one-tenth
(0.10) pounds of particulate matter per one hundred (100) pounds of combustible
refuse (including its ash and water content) charged for incinerators having
capacities equal to or greater than one hundred (100) pounds per hour, or two-
tenths (0.20) pounds of particulate matter per one hundred (100) pounds of
combustible refuse (including its ash and water content) charged for
incinerators having capacities less than one hundred (100) pounds per hour.
   (e)   The installation or construction of a flue fed, single flue, single
chamber incinerator is hereafter prohibited, unless such incinerator is
equipped with air cleaning equipment to maintain compliance with the emission
limitations as established in this Code.
   (f)   No person shall cause, permit or allow the operation of a flue fed,
single flue, single chamber incinerator after July 1, 1978 unless such
incinerator is equipped with air cleaning equipment to maintain compliance with
the emission limitations as established in this Code.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 269.03 Emission from Process Equipment
   (a)   No person shall cause or allow the emission of any particulate matter
from any process equipment in excess of the permitted emission as provided for
in Table III (or Figure II) or Figure III of Appendix C of this Title,
whichever is applicable under subsection (b) hereof.
   (b)   Figure III relates uncontrolled mass rate of emission (abscissa) to
maximum allowable mass rate of emission (ordinate). Table III relates process
weight rate to maximum allowable mass rate of emission. Table III is shown in
graphical form in Figure II. Figure III shall apply where the uncontrolled mass
rate of emission can be determined by an acceptable method, such as stack
tests, material balance, application of an emission factor characterization
from a reference such as U.S.E.P.A. Publication AP-42, Compilation of Air
Pollutant Emission Factor, 2nd Edition, April, 1973, or other methods approved
by the Commissioner as conforming to good engineering practices. When both the
process weight rate and the uncontrolled mass rate of emission can be
determined for a source, the more stringent of the applicable values from Table
III or Figure III shall govern the source.
   If two (2) or more process units connect to a single stack or chimney each
unit shall for the purpose of computing the maximum allowable emission rate
using Table III or Figure III be considered a separate entity.
   (c)   No person shall cause or allow the operation of any process equipment
having a process weight rate of less than one hundred (100) pounds per hour or
an uncontrolled mass rate of emissions of less than ten (10) pounds per hour
unless such process equipment is equipped with control equipment or is
installed in accordance with acceptable engineering practices common to the
particular industry and as approved by the Commissioner to control the emission
of particulate matter.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
CHAPTER 271 – SULFUR COMPOUNDS LIMITATIONS
271.01   Emission of Sulfur Oxides from Fuel-Burning Equipment
271.02   Emission of Sulfur Compounds from Process Equipment
Cross-reference:
   Emission defined, CO
251.25
   Exemptions, CO
Ch. 261
   Fuel-burning equipment defined, CO
251.28
   Process equipment defined, CO
251.50
§ 271.01 Emission of Sulfur Oxides from Fuel-Burning Equipment
   (a)   Except as otherwise specified in this section, no person shall cause
or permit emission of sulfur dioxide from any stack in excess of the rates
specified below.
      (1)   For fossil fuel-fired steam generating units between ten (10.0) and
three hundred fifty(350) x ten (10) BTU’s per hour total rated capacity of heat
input, the emission rate in pounds in sulfur dioxide per million (1,000,000)
BTU actual heat input shall be calculated by the following equation:
         EL = 7.014Q - 0.3014
         where Q is the total rated capacity of heat input in million
(1,000,000) BTU per hour and EL is the allowable emission rate in pounds of
sulfur dioxide per million (1,000,000) BTU actual heat input.
      (2)   For fossil fuel-fired units equal to or greater than three hundred
fifty million (350,000,000) BTU per hour total rated capacity, one and two-
tenths (1.20) pounds of sulfur dioxide per million (1,000,000) BTU of actual
heat input.
      (3)   The Cleveland Electric Illuminating Company or any subsequent owner
or operator of the Lake Shore Power Plant located in Cleveland shall not cause
or permit the emission of sulfur dioxide from any stack at the Lake Shore Plant
in excess of the following rates:
         A.   One and three-tenths (1.30) pounds of sulfur dioxide per million
(1,000,000) BTU of actual heat input from unit no. 18;
         B.   One and nine-tenths (1.90) pounds of sulfur dioxide per million
(1,000,000) BTU of actual heat input for units 91 through 94.
      (4)   The City of Cleveland or any subsequent owner or operator of the
Division Pumping Station located at Cleveland shall not cause or permit the
emission of sulfur dioxide from any stack at the Division Pumping Station in
excess of four and two- tenths (4.20) pounds of sulfur dioxide per million
(1,000,000) BTU of actual heat input.
      (5)   No present or subsequent owner or operator of the fossil fuel-fired
steam generating units listed herein shall cause or permit the emission of
sulfur dioxide from any stack attached to the identified boilers in excess of
one (1.00) pounds of sulfur dioxide per million (1,000,000) BTU of actual heat
input:
 
Company                                                  Boiler Identification
Cleveland Electric Illuminating Co., Hamilton Ave. Steam All
Plant
Republic Steel                                           234, 1, 2, A, B and C
Jones and Laughlin Steel                                 30
 
      (6)   No present or subsequent owner or operator of the fossil fuel-fired
steam generating units listed herein shall cause or permit the emission of
sulfur dioxide from any stack attached to the identified boilers in excess of
five-tenths (0.50) pounds of sulfur dioxide per million (1,000,000) BTU of
actual heat input:
 
Company                             Boiler Identification
Jones and Laughlin Steel            22, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 31, 32, 33,
                                    34 and 35
United States Steel Cuyahoga-Lorain 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6
Works
DuPont                              18
Harshaw Chemical                    7 and 8
Standard Oil of Ohio                7, 9 and 10
 
      (7)   The Hupp Company or any subsequent owner or operator of Hupp
facilities in Cleveland shall not cause or permit emission of sulfur dioxide
from any stack attached to boilers 1 through 3 at this facility in excess of
three and five-tenths (3.50) pounds of sulfur dioxide per million (1,000,000)
BTU of actual heat input.
      (8)   No present or subsequent owner or operator of the Medical Center
located in Cleveland shall cause or permit the emission of sulfur dioxide from
any stack attached to boilers 3 through 8 at the Medical Center in excess of
four and six-tenths (4.60) pounds of sulfur dioxide per million (1,000,000) BTU
of actual heat input.
      (9)   The General Motors Corporation or any subsequent owner or operator
of the Fisher Body Plant at Cleveland shall not cause or permit the emission of
sulfur dioxide from any stack attached to boiler 7, 8 and 9 at this facility in
excess of two and one-tenth (2.10) pounds of sulfur dioxide per million
(1,000,000) BTU of actual heat input.
   (b)   Nothing in subsection (a) hereof shall prohibit the use of fuel in
fuel-burning equipment with a sulfur content greater than the maximum amount
permitted by this section, provided that the fuel-burning equipment is equipped
with such control apparatus as to continually prevent the emission of any
sulfur oxides in amounts greater than those that would be emitted from the
burning in the same fuel-burning equipment without such control apparatus of
fuel containing the maximum amount of sulfur by weight that is permitted in
subsection (a) hereof.
   (c)   The percentage by weight of sulfur in the fuel shall be determined in
accordance with the methods of the American Society for Testing Materials
(ASTM).
   (d)   For the purpose of this section all emissions of sulfur oxides shall
be expressed as concentrations of sulfur dioxide.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 271.02 Emission of Sulfur Compounds from Process Equipment
   (a)   In addition to the requirements of Section
277.08, except as otherwise specified in this section, no person shall cause or
permit the emission of sulfur dioxide from any stack in excess of six (6.00)
pounds of sulfur dioxide per ton of actual process weight input.
   (b)   No owner or operator, unless otherwise specified in this section,
shall cause or permit the combustion to by-product coke oven gas from any stack
containing a total sulfur content expressed as hydrogen sulfide in excess of
one hundred seventy (170) grains of hydrogen sulfide per one hundred (100) dry
standard cubic feet of coke oven gas or the emission of sulfur dioxide from any
stack in excess of eighty-six hundredths (0.86) pounds of sulfur dioxide per
million (1,000,000) BTU actual heat input. Fuel-burning equipment subject to
Section
271.01 (a)(1) and (2) are not subject to this limitation.
   (c)   The Republic Steel Corporation or any subsequent owner or operator of
Republic Steel facilities located in Cleveland shall not cause or permit the
combustion of by-product coke oven gas at the basic oxygen furnace shop, open
hearth shop, blast furnaces 1, 4 and 5, foundry, P-Anneals 1-4, and car thaw 1-
1 through 1-4, containing a total sulfur content expressed as hydrogen sulfide
in excess of two hundred forty (240) grains of hydrogen sulfide per one hundred
(100) dry standard cubic feet of coke oven gas or the emission of sulfur
dioxide from any stack at the above facilities in excess of one and two-tenths
(1.20) pounds of sulfur dioxide per million (1,000,000) BTU actual heat input.
   (d)   The Republic Steel Corporation or any subsequent owner or operator of
the Republic Steel facilities located in Cleveland shall not cause or permit
the emission of sulfur dioxide from any stack attached to the sinter plant at
this facility in excess of zero (0.00) pounds of sulfur dioxide per million
(1,000,000) BTU actual heat input.
   (e)   The DuPont Company or any subsequent owner or operator of the DuPont
Company sulfuric acid production units at Cleveland shall not cause or permit
the emission of sulfur dioxide in excess of ten (10.0) pounds of sulfur
dioxider per ton of one hundred percent (100%) sulfuric acid production.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
CHAPTER 273 – HYDROCARBON LIMITATIONS
273.01   Emission of Organic Materials from Stationary Sources
Cross-reference:
   Emission defined, CO
251.25
   Exemptions, CO
Ch. 261
   Organic materials defined, CO
251.43
   Stationary source defined, CO
251.62
§ 273.01 Emission of Organic Materials from Stationary Sources
   (a)   Storage of Volatile Photochemically Reactive Materials.
      (1)   No person shall place, store, hold in any stationary tank,
reservoir or other container of more than sixty-five thousand (65,000) gallons
capacity, any volatile photochemically reactive material unless such tank,
reservoir or other container is a pressure tank capable of maintaining working
pressures sufficient at all times to prevent vapor or gas loss to the
atmosphere or is designed and equipped with one (1) of the following vapor loss
control devices:
         A.   A floating pontoon or double-deck- type cover equipped with
closure seals to enclose any space between the cover’s edge and compartment
wall. This control equipment shall not be permitted if the volatile
photochemically reactive material has a vapor pressure of twelve and five-
tenths (12.5) pounds per square inch absolute or greater under actual storage
conditions. All tank gauging or sampling devices shall be gas-tight except when
tank gauging or sampling is taking place;
         B.   A vapor recovery system which reduces the emission of organic
materials into the atmosphere by at least ninety percent (90%) by weight. All
tank gauging or sampling devices shall be gas-tight except when tank gauging or
sampling is taking place;
         C.   Other equipment or means of air pollution control as may be
approved by the Commissioner.
      (2)   No person shall place, store or hold in any stationary storage
vessel of more than five hundred (500) gallon capacity any volatile
photochemically reactive material unless such vessel is equipped with a
permanent submerged fill pipe, is loaded through the use of a portable loading
tube which can be inserted below the liquid level line during loading
operations or is a pressure tank as described in subsection (a)(1) hereof or is
fitted with a vapor recovery system as described in subsection (a)(1)B. hereof.
   (b)   Volatile Photochemically Reactive Materials Loading Facilities.
      (1)   No person shall load in any one day more than forty thousand
(40,000) gallons of any volatile photochemically reactive material into any
tank truck, trailer or railroad tank car from any loading facility unless the
loading facility is equipped with a vapor collection and disposal system
properly installed, in good working order, in operation and consisting of one
(1) of the following:
         A.   An adsorber system or condensation system which processes and
recovers at least ninety percent (90%) by weight of all vapors and gases from
the equipment being controlled;
         B.   A vapor handling system which directs all vapors to a fuel gas
system;
         C.   Other equipment or means for purposes of air pollution control as
may be acceptable to and approved by the Commissioner.
      (2)   All loading from facilities subject to the provisions of
subsections (b)(1)A. and B. hereof shall be accomplished in such a manner that
all displaced vapors and gases shall be vented only to the vapor collection
system. A means shall be provided to prevent liquid drainage from the loading
device when it is not in use or to accomplish complete drainage before the
loading device is discontinued.
   (c)   Volatile Photochemically Reactive Material/Water Separation.
      (1)   No person shall use any compartment of any vessel or device
operated for the recovery of volatile photochemically reactive materials from
an effluent water separator which recovers two hundred (200) gallons a day or
more of any volatile photochemically reactive material unless such compartment
is equipped with one (1) of the following vapor loss control devices properly
installed, in good working order and in operation:
         A.   A solid cover with all openings sealed and totally enclosing the
liquid contents of the compartment. All gauging and sampling devices shall be
gas-tight except when gauging or sampling is taking place;
         B.   A floating pontoon or double-deck type cover equipped with
closure seals to enclose any space between the cover’s edge and compartment
wall. All gauging and sampling devices shall be gas-tight except when gauging
or sampling is taking place;
         C.   A vapor recovery system which reduces the emission of organic
materials into the atmosphere by at least ninety percent (90%) by weight. All
gauging and sampling devices shall be gas-tight except when gauging or sampling
is taking place;
         D.   Other equipment or means of air pollution control as may be
approved by the Commissioner.
   (d)   Operations Using Liquid Organic Materials.
      (1)   A person shall not discharge more than fifteen (15) pounds of
organic materials into the atmosphere in any one day, nor more than three (3)
pounds in any one (1) hour, from any article, machine, equipment or other
contrivance in which any liquid organic material or substance containing liquid
organic material comes into contact with flame or is baked, heat-cured, or
heat-polymerized, in the presence of oxygen, unless said discharge has been
reduced by at least eighty-five percent (85%).
      (2)   A person shall not discharge more than forty (40) pounds of organic
material into the atmosphere in any one (1) day, nor more than eight (8) pounds
in any one (1) hour, from any article, machine, equipment or other contrivance
used under conditions other than described in subsection (d)(1) hereof for
employing, applying, evaporating or drying any photochemically reactive
material or substance containing such photochemically reactive material, unless
such discharge has been reduced by at least eighty-five percent (85%).
      (3)   Any series of articles, machines, equipment or other contrivances
designed for processing a continuously moving sheet, web, strip or wire which
is subjected to any combination of operations described in subsections (d)(1)
(2) hereof involving any photochemically reactive material, or substance
containing such photochemically reactive material, shall be subject to
compliance with subsection (d)(2) hereof. Where only non-photochemically
reactive materials or substances containing only non- photochemically reactive
materials are employed or applied, and where any portion or portions of such
series of articles, machines, equipment or other contrivances involves
operations described in subsection (d)(1) hereof, such portions shall be
collectively subject to compliance with subsection (d)(1) hereof.
      (4)   Emissions of organic materials to the atmosphere from the cleanup
with photochemically reactive materials of any article, machine, equipment or
other contrivance described in subsections (d)(1), (2) or (3) hereof, shall be
included with the other emissions of organic materials from that article,
machine, equipment or other contrivance for determining compliance with this
section.
      (5)   Emissions of organic materials to the atmosphere resulting from air
or heated drying of products for the first twelve (12) hours after their
removal from any article, machine, equipment or other contrivance described in
subsections (e)(1), (2) or (3) hereof, shall be included with other emissions
of organic materials from that article, machine, equipment or other contrivance
for determining compliance with this section.
      (6)   Emissions of organic materials into the atmosphere required to be
controlled by subsections (d)(1), (2) or (3) hereof shall be reduced by:
         A.   Incineration, provided that ninety percent (90%) or more of the
carbon in the organic material being incinerated is oxidized to carbon dioxide;
or
         B.   Adsorption; or
         C.   Processing in a manner determined by the Commissioner to be not
less effective than subsection (d)(6)A. or B. above.
      (7)   A person incinerating, adsorbing or otherwise processing liquid
organic materials pursuant to this rule shall provide, properly install, and
maintain in calibration, in good working order and in operation, devices as
specified in the authority to construct or the permit to operate, or as
specified by the Commissioner for indicating temperatures, pressures, rates of
flow or other operating conditions necessary to determine the degree and
effectiveness of air pollution control.
      (8)   Any person using liquid organic materials or substances containing
liquid organic materials shall supply the Commissioner upon request and in the
manner and the form prescribed by the Commissioner, written evidence of the
chemical composition, physical properties and amount consumed for each organic
solvent used.
      (9)   The provisions of subsection (d) hereof shall not apply to:
         A.   The use of equipment for which other requirements are specified
by (a), (b) and (c) hereof, or which are exempt from air pollution control
requirements by such provisions;
         B.   The spraying or other employment of insecticides, pesticides or
herbicides;
         C.   The use of any material, in any article, machine, equipment or
other contrivance described in subsections (d)(1), (2), (3) or (4) hereof if:
            1.   The volatile content of such material consists only of water
and liquid organic material; and
            2.   The liquid organic material comprises not more than twenty
percent (20%) of such volatile content; and
            3.   The volatile content is not a photochemically reactive
material.
         D.   The use of any material, in any article, machine, equipment or
other contrivance described in subsections (d)(1), (2), (3) or (4) hereof if:
            1.   The volatile content of such material does not exceed twenty
percent (20%) by volume of such material; and
            2.   The volatile content is not a photochemically reactive
material.
         E.   The use, in any article, machine, equipment or other contrivance
described in subsections (d)(1), (2), (3) or (4) hereof, of liquid organic
materials which exhibit a boiling point higher than two hundred twenty degrees
Fahrenheit (220°F) at five-tenths (0.5) millimeter mercury absolute pressure,
or having an equivalent vapor pressure, unless such liquid organic material is
exposed to temperatures exceeding two hundred twenty degrees Fahrenheit
(220°F).
         F.   The use of any material, in any article, machine, equipment or
other contrivance described in subsections (d)(1), (2), (3) or (4) hereof if it
can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Commissioner that the emissions
of organic materials into the atmosphere from such article, machine, equipment
or other contrivance are not photochemically reactive. In case of conflict in
the interpretation of this subsection, the definition of “not photochemically
reactive” mentioned in this subsection, or the results of the test made to show
compliance, the determination made by the Commissioner shall govern.
   (e)   Architectural Coatings.
      (1)   A person shall not sell or offer for sale for use in containers of
greater than one (1) gallon capacity, any architectural coating containing a
photochemically reactive material.
      (2)   A person shall not employ, apply, evaporate or dry any
architectural coating, purchased in containers of greater than one (1) gallon
capacity, containing a photochemically reactive material.
      (3)   A person shall not thin or dilute for application any architectural
coating with a photochemically reactive material.
   (f)   Disposal and Evaporation of Solvents.
      (1)   A person shall not, during any one day, dispose of a total of more
than one and one-half (1.5) gallons of any volatile photochemically reactive
material, or dispose of any substance containing more than one and one-half
(1.5) gallons of any volatile photochemically reactive material, by any means
which will permit the evaporation of such volatile photochemical reactive
material into the atmosphere.
   (f)   Waste Gas Disposal.
      (1)   No person shall emit a waste gas stream from any ethylene producing
plant or other ethylene emission source into the atmosphere unless the waste
gas stream is properly burned at one thousand three hundred degrees Fahrenheit
(1,300°F) for three-tenths (0.3) seconds or greater in a direct-flame
afterburner or an equally effective device as may be approved by the
Commissioner
      (2)   No person shall emit organic materials to the atmosphere from a
waste gas flare system unless such materials are burned by smokeless flares or
an equally effective control device as approved by the Commissioner.
      (3)   The provisions of subsections (g)(1) and (2) hereof shall not apply
to emissions from emergency relief and vapor blowdown systems. Emissions from
emergency relief and vapor blowdown systems shall be controlled upon special
order of the Commissioner by burning smokeless flare or equally effective
device as may be approved by the Commissioner.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
CHAPTER 275 – CARBON MONOXIDE LIMITATIONS
275.01   Emission from Stationary Sources
Cross-reference:
   Emission defined, CO
251.25
   Exemptions, CO
Ch. 261
   Stationary source defined, CO
251.62
§ 275.01 Emission from Stationary Sources
   The provisions of this section shall be applicable to all existing
stationary sources located within a region classified Priority 1 for carbon
monoxide by Regulation EP-11-06, of any subsequent revision, of the Director of
the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency and to all new stationary sources
regardless of location.
   (a)   All new stationary carbon monoxide emission sources shall minimize
carbon monoxide emissions by use of the best available control techniques and
operating practices in accordance with best current technology.
   (b)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to preclude the use of
alternative means to abate emissions, if such alternative is approved by the
Commissioner and will not result in emissions significantly greater than would
result from the application of the means specified herein.
   (c)   No person shall emit the carbon monoxide gases generated during the
operation of a grey iron cupola, blast furnace or basic oxygen steel furnace
unless they are burned at one thousand three hundred degrees Fahrenheit
(1,300°F) for three-tenths (0.3) seconds or greater in a direct-flame
afterburner, equipped with an indicating pyrometer which is positioned in the
working area at the operator’s eye level or such other equivalent device to
burn up the carbon monoxide that may be approved for use by the Commissioner.
   (d)   No person shall emit carbon monoxide waste gas stream from any
catalyst regeneration of a petroleum cracking system, petroleum fluid coker or
other petroleum process into the atmosphere, unless the waste gas stream is
burned at one thousand three hundred degrees Fahrenheit (1,300°F) for three-
tenths (0.3) seconds or greater in a direct-flame afterburner or boiler,
equipped with an indicating pyrometer which is positioned in the working area
at the operator’s eye level or such other equivalent device to burn up the
carbon monoxide that may be approved for use by the Commissioner.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
CHAPTER 277 – MISCELLANEOUS LIMITATIONS
277.01   Blast Furnace Slips
277.02   Demolition of Buildings
277.03   Emissions from By-Product Coke Plant
277.04   Emission of Chromic Acid from Hard Chrome Electro-Plating Process
277.05   Emission of Hydrogen Chloride Gas from Hydrochloric Acid Production
277.06   Emission of Hydrogen Fluoride Gas from Hydrofluoric Acid Production
277.07   Fugitive Emissions
277.08   Nuisance
277.09   Open Burning
277.10   Other Emissions
277.11   Sandblasting and/or Building Cleaning
277.12   Spray Applications of Fiberated Cementitious Products
Cross-reference:
   Definitions, CO
Ch. 251
   Demolition, CO
Ch. 3115
   Exemptions, CO
Ch. 261
§ 277.01 Blast Furnace Slips
   (a)   Emissions from blast furnaces shall be kept to a minimum. No person
shall cause or allow any blast furnace to emit air contaminants, as a result of
a slip, more than sixty (60) times in any consecutive twelve (12) month period
or more than six (6) times in any consecutive thirty (30) day period. For the
purpose of this section, a blast furnace slip is defined as a sudden emission
of gas containing particulate matter of shade or density equal to or greater
than No. 2 of the Ringelmann Scale or forty percent (40%) opacity from the
relief valves at the top of the furnace.
   (b)   If a violation of the provisions of subsection (a) hereof occurs, the
Commissioner may require the owner or operator of any blast furnace to equip
such blast furnace with observing or recording devices to record all blast
furnace slips. Such devices shall be approved by the Commissioner.
   (c)   All devices used for observing and recording blast furnace slips shall
be maintained in good order. Safe and adequate means for inspection of such
devices shall be provided by the person responsible for the blast furnace.
   (d)   All persons responsible for blast furnaces shall make available to the
Commissioner, on request, the records of the required observation and recording
devices. These records shall be deemed as an admission by the responsible
person of the number of blast furnace slips occurring, but they shall not be
deemed as a limit on the Commissioner’s action to present evidence that a
greater number of slips occurred than the records indicate.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 277.02 Demolition of Buildings
   (a)   No person shall cause or allow demolition of any existing building,
structure or portion thereof within the City without obtaining a permit to
demolish from the Commissioner of Building of the City of Cleveland. The
Commissioner of Building shall forward to the Commissioner of Air Pollution
Control a copy of each permit to demolish.
   (b)   Application for permit to demolish shall be made on forms prepared by
the Commissioner of Building and shall contain such information as the
Commissioners of Building and Air Pollution Control deem necessary.
   (c)   In addition to the requirements of Section
277.07, procedures to be followed to prevent particulate matter from becoming
airborne during demolition of buildings or structures shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:
      (1)   Asbestos materials used to insulate or fireproof any boiler, pipe
or load-supporting structural member shall be wetted and removed before
wrecking of load-supporting members is begun. This procedure shall be followed,
where practicable, with all other asbestos-lined surfaces;
      (2)   Asbestos containing debris shall be wetted adequately to insure
that such debris remains wet during all stages of demolition and related
handling operations;
      (3)   No pipe or load-supporting structural member covered with asbestos
insulating or fireproofing material shall be dropped or thrown to the ground
but shall be lowered or taken to ground level;
      (4)   No asbestos containing debris shall be thrown or dropped to the
ground from any floor to any floor below. For buildings or structures fifty
(50) feet or greater in heights, asbestos debris shall be transported to the
ground via dust-tight chutes or containers.
   (d)   A person shall be assigned supervisory authority for all aspects of
the demolition operation and shall be available at the demolition site at all
times during the demolition operation.
   (e)   Failure of any person to comply with any of the requirements of
subsections (c) and (d) hereof shall be sufficient grounds for the Commissioner
of Building to revoke any permit.
   (f)   In cases of emergency any existing building, structure or portion
thereof may be demolished prior to obtaining a permit to demolish from the
Commissioner of Building if such building, structure or portion thereof is or
may be dangerous to human safety or property if the demolition was deferred.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 277.03 Emissions from By-Product Coke Plant
   (a)   For the purpose of this section the term “by- product coke plant”
means a plant used in connection with the distillation process to produce coke
in which the volatile matter in coal is expelled, collected, and recovered.
Such plant consists of, but is not limited to, coal and coke handling
equipment, by-product chemical plant and other equipment associated with and
attendant to the coking chambers or ovens making up a single battery operated
and controlled as a unit.
   (B)   Visible Air Contaminants from Operation of Coke Oven Battery.
      (1)   Charging Emissions.
         A.   No person shall discharge into the atmosphere during the charging
cycle of a coke oven battery from the charging holes, larry car or standpipes
any visible air contaminants except for a cumulative total not to exceed two
hundred (200) seconds over a period of five (5) consecutive charges between
March 31, 1978 and December 31, 1978 and one hundred fifty (150) seconds over a
period of five (5) consecutive charges on or after January 1, 1979.
         B.   The emissions from the charging cycle shall include all emissions
from the time that the gate(s) on a larry car coal hopper is (are) opened or
mechanical feeds start the flow of coal into the ovens until the last charging
hole lid is replaced.
      (2)   Charging Hole Port Emissions.
         A.   No person shall discharge into the atmosphere visible air
contaminants at any time from more than five percent (5%) of the charging hole
ports on any one (1) battery during any fifteen (15) consecutive minutes.
         B.   For the purpose of this subsection the denominator shall be the
total number of charging hole ports on the battery and the numerator shall be
the number of charging ports for operating ovens from which there was a visible
emission during an inspection excluding oven(s) being charged and the two (2)
ovens being decarbonized which follow the last oven being charged in accordance
with the operating schedule. The inspection shall be made by a single
observation performed as rapidly as conditions permit and inclusive of all
ports.
      (3)   Standpipe (Offtake Pipes) Emissions.
         A.   No person shall discharge into the atmosphere visible air
contaminants at any time for more than twelve percent (12%) of the offtake
piping (standpipes) of any coke oven battery during any fifteen (15)
consecutive minutes.
         B.   For the purpose of this subsection the denominator shall be the
total number of offtake pipes on the battery and the numerator shall be the
number of offtake pipes for operating ovens from which there was a visible
emission during an inspection excluding oven(s) being charged and the two (2)
ovens being decarbonized which follow the last oven being charged in accordance
with the operating schedule. The inspection shall be made by a single
observation performed as rapidly as conditions permit and inclusive of all
offtake pipes.
      (4)   Coke Oven Doors.
         A.   No person shall discharge into the atmosphere from any opening on
or seal of a coke oven door visible air contaminants, except for nonsmoking
flame, from more than sixteen percent (16%) of the coke oven doors on any one
(1) battery during any twenty (20) consecutive minutes.
         B.   No person shall fail to adjust, repair or replace a coke oven
door, found to be leaking for thirty (30) minutes or more after an oven is
charged, prior to the next coking cycle which starts during the daylight turn.
         C.   No person or operator of a coke oven battery shall fail to
maintain coke oven doors and a coke oven door repair facility capable of prompt
and efficient repair of coke oven doors and seals. No person shall fail
maintain an inventory of one (1) coke door for twelve (12) coke ovens operated.
         D.   For the purpose of this subsection an oven door and the
associated chuck door on the pusher side of the battery shall be considered as
one (1) door. The denominator shall be the number of coke oven doors for
operating ovens on any battery and the numerator shall be the number of coke
oven doors or seals which have one (1) or more visible emissions during an
inspection excluding oven(s) being charged.
      (5)   Pushing Emissions.
         A.   No person shall discharge into the atmosphere during the pushing
cycle of a coke oven battery visible air contaminants greater than fifteen
percent (15%) opacity except for accumulative total not to exceed one hundred
eighty (180) seconds over a period of three (3) consecutive pushes.
         B.   For the purpose of this section the pushing cycle shall begin
when the coke oven door is removed and shall end when the quench car enters the
quench tower.
      (6)   Combustion Stack Emissions. No person shall discharge into the
atmosphere from the combustion stack of a coke oven battery visible air
contaminants in excess of the limitations as set forth in Section
265.01.
   (c)   Unloading, Handling, Transfer and Storage of Coal and Coke. No person
shall cause, suffer, allow or permit coal or coke to be unloaded, handled,
transferred or stored without taking all necessary and reasonable precautions
to prevent particulate matter from becoming airborne. Such precautions shall be
taken as set forth in Section
277.07.
   (d)   Coke Quenching Tower.
      (1)   No person shall cause or allow the operation of a coke quenching
tower unless such tower is equipped with effective interior baffles.
      (2)   No person shall cause or allow the wet quenching of coke unless the
quality of make-up water used for such quenching is equivalent to the quality
of water established for the nearest stream or river by regulation of the Ohio
Environmental Protection Agency, except that water from the nearest stream or
river or treated process water may be used for the quenching of coke. For the
purpose of this section, treated process water means waste water treated
physically and/or chemically for the removal of suspended solids, phenols,
cyanides, ammonia, oil, grease and/or other substances to the degree approved
by the Commissioner.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 277.04 Emission of Chromic Acid from Hard Chrome Electro-Plating Process
   No person or operator shall cause or permit the operation of a hard chrome
electro-plating process unless the emission of chromic acid is reduced by at
least ninety-eight percent (98%) before being released into the atmosphere.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 277.05 Emission of Hydrogen Chloride Gas from Hydrochloric Acid Production
   No person shall cause or permit the operation of a hydrochloric acid plant
unless the emission of hydrogen chloride gas from such production plant is
reduced to at least five-tenths (0.50) pounds per ton of hydrochloric acid
produced expressed at twenty degrees Baume (20°Be).
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 277.06 Emission of Hydrogen Fluoride Gas from Hydrofluoric Acid Production
   No person shall cause or permit the operation of a hydrofluoric acid plant
unless the emission or hydrogen fluoride gas from such production plant is
reduced as follows:
   (a)   To four-tenths (0.40) pounds per ton of anhydrous hydrofluoric acid
produced per hour from the anhydrous gas generation and anhydrous hydrofluoric
acid production;
   (b)   To fifteen hundredths (0.15) pounds per ton of seventy percent (70%)
hydrofluoric acid produced per hour from the blending operation;
   (c)   To forty-five hundredths (0.45) pounds per ton of anhydrous
hydrofluoric acid produced per hour from the storage and loading operations.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 277.07 Fugitive Emissions
   (a)   General Provisions. No person shall cause, allow or permit any
materials to be handled, transported or stored, or a building, its
appurtenances or a road to be used, constructed, altered, repaired or
demolished without taking all necessary and reasonable precautions to prevent
particulate matter from becoming airborne. Such precautions shall include, but
not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   Use, where possible, water or chemicals for control of dust in the
demolition of existing buildings or structures, construction operations, the
grading of roads or the clearing of land;
      (2)   Application of asphalt, oil, water or suitable chemicals on dirt
roads, materials stockpiles and other surfaces which can create airborne dusts;
      (3)   Installation and use of hoods, fans and control equipment to
enclose, contain, capture and vent the handling of dusty materials. Adequate
containment methods shall be employed during sandblasting or other similar
operations;
      (4)   Covering at all times when in motion open bodied vehicles
transporting materials likely to become airborne;
      (5)   Conduct of agricultural practices such as tilling of land,
application of fertilizers, etc., in such manner as to prevent dust from
becoming airborne;
      (6)   The paving of roadways and their maintenance in a clean condition;
      (7)   The prompt removal of earth or other material from paved streets
onto which earth or other material has been deposited by trucking or earth
moving equipment or erosion by water or other means.
   (b)   Visible Emissions from Fugitive Emission Sources. In addition to the
provisions of subsection (a) hereof, no person shall cause or permit the
discharge into the atmosphere of any visible air contaminant resulting from
fugitive emission sources in excess of the limitations, as set forth in Section
265.01, or beyond the property line of the property on which the emissions
originate.
   (c)   Emission of Air Contaminants from Buildings, Equipment, Storage Areas
or Material Handling Operations. When dust, fumes, gases, mist, odorous matter,
vapors, smoke or other particulate matter or any combination thereof escape
from a building, equipment, storage area or material handling operation in such
a manner and amount as to cause a nuisance or to violate any provision of this
Code, the Commissioner may issue a written order in accordance with Section
255.04, requiring that the building, equipment, storage area or material
handling operation, in which processing, handling and storage are done, be
tightly closed, ventilated, hooded or controlled in such a way that all air and
gases and air or gasborne material leaving the building, equipment, storage
area or material handling operation are treated by removal or destruction of
air contaminants before discharge into the atmosphere.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 277.08 Nuisance
   The emission or escape of air contaminants into the open air from any source
or sources or control equipment in such manner or in such amounts, as to
endanger or tend to endanger the health, comfort, safety or welfare of the
public, or is reasonably offensive and objectionable to the public, or shall
cause unreasonable injury or damage to property or interfere with the
comfortable enjoyment of property or normal conduct of business, is hereby
found and declared to be a public nuisance. No person shall cause, permit or
maintain any such public nuisance.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 277.09 Open Burning
   (a)   No person shall cause or allow open burning within the City without
obtaining a permit to open burn from the Commissioner except as set forth in
subsection (d) hereof. The permit fee shall be based on the cost basis as set
forth in Section
263.01.
   (b)   No permit to open burn shall be issued by the Commissioner except for
the following purposes:
      (1)   Prevention or control of disease or pests;
      (2)   Ceremonial purposes. Ceremonial fires shall be less than five (5)
feet by five (5) feet by five (5) in dimension and shall burn no longer than
three (3) hours;
      (3)   Instruction in methods of fire fighting or for research in the
control of fire;
      (4)   In emergency or other extraordinary circumstances for any purpose
determined by the Commissioner.
   (c)   Application for permit to open burn shall be made on forms prepared by
the Commissioner and shall contain such information as the Commissioner may
deem necessary.
   (d)   A permit to open burn shall not be required from the Commissioner for
open burning of the following nature:
      (1)   Non-commercial cooking of foods for human consumption;
      (2)   Heating tar, welding, acetylene torches and highway flares;
      (3)   Heating of clean and noncontaminated smokeless fuels for warmth of
outdoor workers.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 277.10 Other Emissions
   Air contaminants not specifically covered by provisions of this Code may be
the subject of tests, studies and orders of abatement by the Commissioner in
accordance with Section
255.04.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 277.11 Sandblasting and/or Building Cleaning
   (a)   No person shall cause or allow the sandblasting and cleaning of a
building or structure without obtaining a permit to sandblast and/or clean from
the Commissioner. The permit fee shall be based on the cost basis as set forth
in Section
263.01.
   (b)   Application for permit to sandblast and/or clean shall be made on
forms prepared by the Commissioner and shall contain such information as the
Commissioner deems necessary.
   (c)   No permit for the sandblasting and/or cleaning of a building or
structure shall be granted until the applicant proves to the satisfaction of
the Commissioner that:
      (1)   Adequate containment of dust and water droplets shall be furnished;
      (2)   Provisions for complete clean-up after sandblasting and/or cleaning
shall be provided;
      (3)   One (1) person shall be assigned full time supervisory authority
for all aspects of the operation.
   (d)   In addition to the requirements of Section
277.07, the Commissioner may require any control methods deemed necessary to
adequately control excessive particulate matter and other pollutants during
sandblasting and/or cleaning operations.
   (e)   The Commissioner is authorized to regulate, at his or her discretion,
the times and hours of sandblasting and/or cleaning operations.
   (f)   Sandblasting of buildings and structures shall be of “wet-method”
application wherein water is entrained with the cleaning medium to prevent
excessive dust during cleaning operations.
   (g)   No person shall cause or allow any dry sandblasting methods of
cleaning unless such methods permit the nozzle to be operated within a
tarpaulin enclosure equipped with suitable means of funneling the dispersed
sand and debris into a suitable container to prevent the waste materials from
becoming airborne.
   (h)   Failure of a person to comply with any of the requirements of
subsections (c), (d), (e), (f) and (g) hereof shall be sufficient grounds for
the Commissioner to revoke any permit.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 277.12 Spray Applications of Fiberated Cementitious Products
   (a)   No person shall cause or allow the use of a cementitious product or
compounds containing mineral fibers, whenever such product or compounds are
applied to a surface utilizing a spray or pneumatic means of application,
excluding the spraying or other use of refractory materials in ovens, furnaces,
ladles or other metallurgical process equipment, without obtaining a permit for
the spraying of such product or compounds from the Commissioner of Building.
The Commissioner of Building shall forward to the Commissioner of Air Pollution
Control a copy of each permit for the spraying of such product or compounds.
   (b)   Application for a permit to spray cementitious products or compounds
containing mineral fibers shall be made on forms prepared by the Commissioner
of Building and shall contain such information as the Commissioners of Building
and Air Pollution Control deem necessary.
   (c)   No person shall cause, permit or allow the spraying of fiberated
cementitious products or compounds unless the following procedures are taken:
      (1)   Provisions are made for adequate containment of dust and overspray;
      (2)   Provisions are made for complete cleanup after spraying;
      (3)   All workers and other persons present are provided with, and use,
approved respiratory devices and clothing.
   (d)   A person shall be assigned supervisory authority for all aspects of
the spraying operation and shall be available at the spraying site at all times
during the operation.
   (e)   Failure of any person to comply with any of the requirements of
subsections (c) and (d) hereof shall be sufficient grounds for the Commissioner
of Building to revoke any permit.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
CHAPTER 279 – PROCEDURES AND OTHER REQUIREMENTS
279.01   Breakdown of Equipment (Malfunctions)
279.02   Source Operation Without Control Equipment and Exceptions
279.03   Circumvention
279.04   Data Registration
279.05   Right of Entry
Cross-reference:
   Abatement orders, CO
255.04
   Exemptions, CO
Ch. 261
   Penalties, CO
Ch. 287
Statutory reference:
   Prohibitions, RC 3704.05
§ 279.01 Breakdown of Equipment (Malfunctions)
   (a)   Emissions exceeding any of the limits established under this Code, as
direct result of the breakdown of any emission source or control equipment,
shall not be deemed to be in violation of such limits, provided the owner or
operator immediately advises the Commissioner of the breakdown and no later
than four (4) hours after such breakdown advises the Commissioner of the
immediate action taken or to be taken; and outlines a corrective program
acceptable to the commissioner in writing by certified mail within five (5)
days after the occurrence of such breakdown.
   (b)   In the event that the Commissioner disapproves the proferred
corrective program, submitted under subsection (a) hereof or that the repairs
to the emission source or control equipment cannot be completed within twenty-
four (24) hours from the time of breakdown, the Commissioner may, at his or her
discretion, issue a written order to the person owning, operating or in control
of such source or equipment to immediately discontinue the operation of such
source or equipment or to substantially reduce emissions until such time as
corrective measures have been completed. Should the person to whom such order
is issued fail to act upon such order, the Commissioner may seal such source or
equipment, without further notice for failure to comply with such order.
   (c)   If under this section, the number of breakdowns of any single emission
source or control equipment exceeds three (3) in any one (1) year period, the
Commissioner may require an owner or operator to submit a satisfactory
maintenance program for such source or equipment. Failure to maintain such
source or equipment in accordance with such a maintenance program shall be
grounds for revocation of a permit to operate.
   (d)   No person shall fail to report a breakdown of any emission source or
control equipment, as provided for in subsection (a) hereof, that results in
the discharge into the atmosphere of air contaminants in excess of any of the
limits established under this Code.
   (e)   No person shall continue to operate any emission source or control
equipment following a breakdown of said source or control equipment, that
causes the discharge into the atmosphere of air contaminants in excess of any
of the limits established under this Code except as otherwise provided for in
subsections (a) and (h) hereof.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 279.02 Source Operation Without Control Equipment and Exceptions
   (a)   No person shall operate or cause to be operated any source or any
equipment pertaining thereto that discharges any air contaminants into the
atmosphere, when control equipment has been installed to permit operation in
conformity with the provisions of this Code and such control equipment is not
being operated, except as set forth in subsections (b) and (c) hereof.
   (b)   Exception for scheduled maintenance of control equipment.
      (1)   In the event that it becomes necessary to shutdown any control
equipment for scheduled maintenance unaccompanied by shutdown of the emission
source, it shall not be deemed to be a violation of subsection (a) hereof,
provided the person owning, operating or in charge of such source notifies the
Commissioner at least seventy-two (72) hours prior to the planned shutdown of
the intent to shutdown such equipment and provided further that the
Commissioner gives written approval of the proffered planned maintenance
schedule. Prior notice shall include, but is not limited to, the following:
         A.   Identification and location of the specific control equipment,
including number of permit to operate issued by the Commissioner, to be taken
out of service;
         B.   The expected length of time that the air pollution control
equipment will be out of service;
         C.   The nature and quantity of emissions of air contaminants likely
to occur during the shutdown period;
         D.   Measures such as the use of offshift labor and equipment that
will be taken to minimize the length of the shutdown period;
         E.   The reasons that it would be impossible or impractical to
shutdown the source operation during the maintenance period;
         F.   A demonstration that any interim control measures have reduced or
will reduce emissions from the source during the shutdown period.
      (2)   The Commissioner retains the responsibility to evaluate any report
submitted pursuant to this section. Upon a determination that a shutdown was or
has become avoidable or was induced or prolonged in bad faith or that the
requirements of subsections (b)(1)D., E. and F. hereof have not been fulfilled,
then the Commissioner shall take appropriate action under the provisions of
this Code.
   (c)   Exception for Breakdown of Equipment (Malfunctions). The requirement
of subsection (a) shall not apply where the only reason for the failure to
operate the control equipment, when the source is operating, is because of the
breakdown of such equipment, and provided further that the owner or operator of
such control equipment complies with the provision of Section
279.01(a).
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 279.03 Circumvention
   No person shall install, modify or use any air contaminant source or control
equipment or any equipment pertaining thereto for the purpose of diluting or
concealing an emission without resulting in a reduction in the total release of
air contaminants to the atmosphere nor shall a person do anything or commit any
act with the intent to distort stack test emission results or visible emission
opacity readings.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 279.04 Data Registration
   (a)   The Commissioner may require a periodic data registration and shall
prepare appropriate forms for such purpose. The data to be registered shall
include plans and specifications for any air contaminant source of control
equipment and the submission required under this section is in addition to the
submission of plans and specifications under Sections
257.01 and
259.03. The Commissioner may use such information to prepare emission
inventories.
   Plans and specifications for an air contaminant source or control equipment
shall show type of installation, the form and dimension of such equipment, the
location of sources or emissions, dimensions of the building or part thereof in
which equipment is located, amount of work to be accomplished by such
equipment, type of fuel used, means of limited emissions to conform to
limitations set forth in this Code and written evidence to substantiate
information required, such as test data, calculated values, material balance,
maximum quantity of fuel to be burned per hour, operating requirements, purpose
and use of equipment, means of ventilating room in which equipment is located,
raw material used, products produced, operating schedules and such other
information as may be required by the Commissioner.
   (b)   No person shall fail to timely supply the Commissioner with required
information, data, reports or other documentation as and when required.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 279.05 Right of Entry
   The Commissioner or his or her authorized representative or representatives
may enter upon private or public property, including improvements thereon, at
any reasonable time or when a source is being operated or when a violation of
the applicable provisions of this Code has occurred or may occur, for the
purpose of making inspections, conducting tests and examining records or
reports pertaining to any emission of air contaminants and of determining if
there are any actual or potential emissions from such premises, and if so, to
determine the sources, amounts, contents and extent of such emissions or to
ascertain compliance with sections of this Code, any orders or regulations
adopted thereunder or any other determination of the Commissioner. If entry or
inspection authorized by this section is refused, hindered or thwarted, the
Commissioner or his or her authorized representative may by affidavit apply
for, and any judge of a court of record may issue, an appropriate inspection
warrant necessary to achieve the purposes of this Code within the court’s
territorial jurisdiction.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
CHAPTER 281 – HAZARDOUS AIR POLLUTANTS
281.01   Definition and Designation
281.02   Source Reporting
281.03   Asbestos Emission Standard
281.04   Beryllium
281.05   Mercury Emission Standard
Cross-reference:
   Abatement orders, CO
255.04
   Asbestos defined, CO
251.12
   Emergency episodes, CO
Ch. 283
§ 281.01 Definition and Designation
   (a)   “Hazardous air pollutants” mean any air contaminants which may cause
or contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious
irreversible or incapacitating reversible, illness to the public and have been
so designated as hazardous pollutants pursuant to Section 112 of the Clean Air
Act, by this Code, or by the Commissioner by rule and regulation.
   (b)   Asbestos, beryllium and mercury are hereby designated as hazardous air
pollutants.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 281.02 Source Reporting
   (a)   The owner or operator of any existing source of potential hazardous
air pollutant emissions shall report to the Commissioner, within ninety (90)
days after the effective date of this Code, the following information:
      (1)   Name and address of owner or operator;
      (2)   Location of source;
      (3)   Type of hazardous air pollutant potentially emitted;
      (4)   Description of the nature, size, design and method of operation of
the source including each point of emission of each hazardous pollutant;
      (5)   Concentration of emission, and total weight released per day;
      (6)   Description of existing control equipment for each emission point.
   (b)   The owner or operator of any new source of potential hazardous air
pollutant emissions shall include the information listed in subsection (a)
hereof part of the installation permit application, as described in Section
257.01.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 281.03 Asbestos Emission Standard
   (a)   No person shall cause or allow the discharge into the atmosphere of
any visible emission from any air contaminant source or control equipment
engaged in the processing or manufacturing of any asbestos- containing product.
   (b)   No person shall cause or allow the demolition of any building or
structure, or parts thereof, where a risk of public exposure to asbestos fibers
from the dislodging of asbestos containing materials is present, or without
obtaining a permit to demolish from the Commissioner of Building, as required
by Section
277.02(a). Adequate precautions to prevent or reduce asbestos dust emissions
shall be taken as prescribed in Section
277.02(a).
   (c)   Spraying of Asbestos Containing Products.
      (1)   No person shall cause or allow the use of asbestos containing spray
products for outdoor application to surfaces.
      (2)   No person shall cause or allow the use of any asbestos-containing
spray product for the indoor application to surfaces without obtaining a permit
to spray such product from the Commissioner. The permit fee shall be based on
the cost basis as set forth in Section
263.01.
      (3)   Application for permit to spray any asbestos containing spray
product for the indoor application to surfaces shall be made on forms prepared
by the Commissioner and shall contain such information as the Commissioner
deems necessary.
      (4)   No permit for the spraying of any asbestos-containing spray product
for the indoor application to surfaces shall be granted until the applicant
proves to the satisfaction of the Commissioner that:
         A.   Adequate containment of dust and overspray shall be furnished;
         B.   Provisions for complete clean-up after spraying shall be
provided;
         C.   Sufficient and approved respiratory devices and clothing shall be
used by all workers and other persons present;
         D.   One (1) person shall be assigned full time supervisory authority
for all aspects of the operation.
      (5)   Failure of a person to comply with any of the requirements of
subsection (c)(4) hereof shall be sufficient grounds for the Commissioner to
revoke any permit.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 281.04 Beryllium
   (a)   Emission Standard. No person shall cause or allow the discharge to the
atmosphere from any air contaminant source or control equipment the emission of
greater than ten (10) grams of beryllium in any twenty-four (24) hour period,
except as provided in subsection (b) hereof.
   (b)   In lieu of the requirement in subsection (a) hereof, an owner or
operator may request written approval from the Commissioner to meet an ambient
air concentration limit, at the property line where the emissions originate, of
one-hundredth (0.01) micrograms per cubic meter, averaged over any consecutive
thirty (30) day period. Approval of such tests may be granted by the
Commissioner provided that:
      (1)   At least three (3) years of data is available which demonstrates to
the satisfaction of the Commissioner that the ambient limit shall not be
exceeded;
      (2)   The owner or operator submits a report to the Commissioner within
ninety (90) days after the effective date of the Code as provided in Section
281.02, and such report includes the following additional information: a
complete description of sampling methods and analysis; averaging technique;
factors affecting dispersion; and air sampling data, including concentration
and location where measurements were made.
   (c)   No person shall cause or allow the burning of beryllium and/or
beryllium containing waste except in incinerators, which shall comply with the
emission standards in subsection (a) hereof and all applicable provisions of
the Code.
   (d)   Ambient Air Monitoring for Beryllium.
      (1)   Air contaminant sources or control equipment subject to subsection
(b) hereof shall locate air monitoring sites in accordance with a plan approved
by the Commissioner. Such sites shall be located in such a manner as is
calculated to detect maximum concentrations of beryllium in the ambient air.
      (2)   Monitoring sites shall be operated continuously except for
reasonable allowance for maintenance, calibration, changing filters or repair.
      (3)   Filters shall be analyzed and concentrations calculated within
thirty (30) days after filters are collected. Records shall be retained for a
minimum of two (2) years and shall be made available for inspection by the
Commissioner or his or her representative.
      (4)   Concentrations measured at all monitoring sites shall be reported
to the Commissioner every thirty (30) days.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 281.05 Mercury Emission Standard
   (a)   No person shall cause or allow the discharge into the atmosphere from
any air contaminant source or control equipment the emission of greater than
two thousand three hundred (2,300) grams of mercury in any twenty-four (24)
hour period, except as set forth in subsection (b) hereof.
   (b)   No person shall cause or allow the discharge into the atmosphere from
sludge incineration plants, sludge drying plants or a combination thereof that
processes wastewater treatment plant sludges, greater than three thousand two
hundred (3,200) grams of mercury per twenty-four (24) hour period.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
CHAPTER 283 – EMERGENCY EPISODES
283.01   Episode Prevention
283.02   Declaration of an Air Pollution Episode
283.03   Emission Control Action Programs
283.04   Emergency Orders
283.05   Breakdowns (Malfunctions) During an Episode
283.06   Scheduled Maintenance of Control Equipment During an Episode
Cross-reference:
   Commission to notify of excessive safe levels, CO
255.02
Statutory reference:
   Emergency action, declaration and enforcement, RC 3704.032
§ 283.01 Episode Prevention
   This chapter is designed to prevent the excessive buildup of air pollutants
during air pollution episodes, thereby preventing the occurrence of an
emergency due to the effects of these pollutants on the health of persons.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 283.02 Declaration of an Air Pollution Episode
   (a)   Pursuant to RC 3704.032, or as subsequently amended, and pursuant to
regulations issued thereunder, the Governor of the State of Ohio may declare
that an air pollution alert, air pollution warning or air pollution emergency
exists affecting any or all sources within the City of Cleveland.
   (b)   Orders pursuant to the declaration of an air pollution alert, air
pollution warning or air pollution emergency shall take effect upon issuance,
and no person to whom an order is directed shall fail to initiate compliance
measures immediately upon receiving notice.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 283.03 Emission Control Action Programs
   (a)   Any person responsible for the operation of a source of air
contaminant which emits twenty-five hundredths (0.25) tons per day or more of
air contaminants for which air quality standards have been adopted shall
prepare emission control action programs consistent with good industrial
practice and safe operating procedure for reducing the emission of air
contaminants into the outdoor atmosphere during periods of an air pollution
alert, air pollution warning and air pollution emergency. Emission control
action programs shall be designed to reduce or eliminate emissions of air
contaminants into the outdoor atmosphere in accordance with the objectives set
forth in Tables IV to VIII which are made a part of this section.
   (b)   Emission control action programs as required under subsection (a)
hereof shall be in writing and show the source of air contamination, the
approximate amount of reduction of contaminants, the approximate time required
to effect the program, a brief description of the manner in which the reduction
will be achieved during each stage of an air pollution episode and such other
information as the Commissioner deems pertinent.
   (c)   Emission control action programs shall be filed with the Commissioner
at the following times:
      (1)   Existing sources; not later than ninety (90) days after adoption of
this Code;
      (2)   New sources; with application for permit to install or modify;
      (3)   The provisions of subsection (c)(1) hereof shall not apply if an
emission control action program was filed with the Division of Air Pollution
Control, as agent for the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency in Cuyahoga
County, prior to the adoption of this Code.
   (d)   During a condition of air pollution alert, air pollution warning and
air pollution emergency, emission control action programs as required by
subsection (a) hereof shall be made available on the premises to the
Commissioner or his or her authorized representative.
   (e)   Emission control action programs shall be subject to review and
approval by the Commissioner. If, and in the opinion of the Commissioner, such
emission control action programs do not effectively carry out the objectives as
set forth in Tables IV to VIII, the Commissioner may disapprove such emission
control action programs, state his or her reasons for disapproval and order the
preparation of amended emission control action programs within the time period
specified in the order.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 283.04 Emergency Orders
   When the Governor declares an air pollution alert, air pollution warning or
air pollution emergency the following procedures shall immediately be put into
effect:
   (a)   Air Pollution Alert.
      (1)   Any one or combination of air contaminants: “Any person responsible
for the operation of a source of air contamination shall take all air pollution
alert actions as required for such source of air contamination; and shall
particularly put into effect, the emission control action programs for an air
pollution alert.”
      (2)   Suspended particulate matter:
         A.   “There shall be no open burning by any person of tree waste,
vegetation, refuse or debris in any form.”
         B.   “The use of incinerators for the disposal of any form of solid
waste will be limited to the hours between 12:00 noon and 4:00 pm.”
         C.   “Persons operating fuel-burning equipment which requires boiler
lancing or soot blowing shall perform such operations only between the hours of
12:00 noon and 4:00 pm.”
      (3)   Nitrogen oxides, carbon monoxide and hydrocarbons:
         A.   “There shall be no open burning by any person of tree waste,
vegetation, refuse or debris in any form.”
         B.   “The use of incinerators for the disposal of any form of solid
waste shall be limited to the hours between 12:00 noon and 4:00 pm.”
   (b)   Air Pollution Warning.
      (1)   Any one (1) or combination air contaminants: “Any person
responsible for the operation of a source of air contamination shall take all
air pollution warning actions as required for such source of air contamination;
and shall particularly put into effect the emission control action programs for
an air pollution warning.”
      (2)   Suspended particulate matter:
         A.   “There shall be no open burning by any person of tree waste,
vegetation, refuse or debris in any form.”
         B.   “The use of incinerators for the disposal of any form of solid
waste or liquid waste shall be prohibited.”
         C.   “Persons operating fuel-burning equipment which requires boiler
lancing or soot blowing shall perform such operations only between the hours of
12:00 noon and 4:00 pm.”
   (c)   Air Pollution Emergency.
      (1)   Any one or combination of air contaminants:
         A.   “Any person responsible for the operation of a source of air
contamination shall take all air pollution emergency actions as listed as
required for such source of air contamination and shall particularly put into
effect the emission control action programs for an air pollution emergency.”
         B.   “All manufacturing establishments will institute such action as
will result in maximum reduction of air contaminants from their operations by
ceasing, curtailing or postponing operations which emit air contaminants to the
extent possible without causing injury to persons or damage to equipment.”
         C.   “All places of employment described below shall immediately cease
operations:”
            “Mining and quarrying of non- metallic minerals.”
            “All contract construction work except that which must proceed to
avoid physical harm.”
            “Wholesale trade establishments, i.e., places of business primarily
engaged in selling merchandise to retailers, to industrial, commercial,
institutional or professional users or to other wholesalers or acting as agents
in buying merchandise for or selling merchandise to such persons or companies.”
            “All offices of local, County and State government including
authorities, joint meetings and any other public body, except to the extent
that such offices must continue to operate in order to enforce the requirements
of this order or are vitally essential to the preservation of order, safety,
health utility services and other related services, pursuant to City ordinance
or State statute.”
            “All retail trade establishments, except pharmacies and stores,
primarily engaged in the sale of food.”
            “Banks; credit agencies other than banks; securities and
commodities brokers, dealers, exchanges and services; offices of insurance
carriers, agents and brokers; real estate offices.”
            “Wholesale and retail laundries; laundry services and cleaning and
dyeing establishments; photographic studios; beauty shops, barber shops, shoe
repair shops.”
            “Advertising offices; consumer credit reporting, adjustment and
collection agencies; duplicating, addressing, blue-printing, photocopying,
mailing, mailing list and stenographic services, equipment rental services;
commercial testing laboratories.”
            “Establishments rendering amusement and recreation services,
including motion picture theaters.”
            “Elementary and secondary schools, colleges, universities,
professional schools, junior colleges, vocational schools and public and
private libraries.”
         D.   “There shall be no open burning by any persons of tree waste,
vegetation, refuse or debris in any form.”
         E.   “The use of incinerators for the disposal of any form of solid
waste or liquid waste shall be prohibited.”
         F.   “The use of motor vehicles is prohibited except in emergencies
with the approval of City or State police.”
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 283.05 Breakdowns (Malfunctions) During an Episode
   (a)   Pursuant to the declaration of an air pollution alert, air pollution
warning or air pollution emergency by the Governor of the State of Ohio, if
emissions exceeding any of the limits established under this Code are being
discharged into the atmosphere as a direct result of breakdown of any emission
source or control equipment, the Commissioner may order the owner or operator
of such a source or control equipment to immediately discontinue operation of
such source or equipment or to substantially reduce emissions for the duration
of the air pollution episode.
   (b)   No person shall fail to comply with any order issued by the
Commissioner in accordance with subsection (a) hereof without prior written
approval of the Commissioner.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 283.06 Scheduled Maintenance of Control Equipment During an Episode
   (a)   Pursuant to the declaration of an air pollution alert, air pollution
warning or air pollution emergency by the Governor of the State of Ohio, the
Commissioner may order temporary suspension of any approved proffered planned
maintenance schedule, that necessitates the shutdown of any control equipment
unaccompanied by the shutdown of the emission source. In the event that it
would be impossible to restore such control equipment to immediate operation,
the Commissioner may, at his or her discretion, order the owner or operator of
the emission source to immediately discontinue operation of such source or to
substantially reduce emissions for the duration of the air pollution episode.
   (b)   No person shall fail to comply with any order issued by the
Commissioner in accordance with subsection (a) hereof without prior written
approval of the Commissioner.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
CHAPTER 285 – TESTING AND MONITORING EQUIPMENT
285.01   Emission Test Methods
285.02   Sampling and Testing
285.03   Test Facilities and Access
285.04   Source Monitoring and Recording Equipment
Cross-reference:
   Appeals, CO
255.03
   Commissioner to conduct tests and establish monitoring, CO
255.02
   Equipment breakdowns, CO
279.01
   Right of entry, CO
279.05
§ 285.01 Emission Test Methods
   Emission tests shall be undertaken by standard methods as published and
prescribed in the Federal Register dated December 23, 1971, Volume 36, Number
247, Part II, entitled “Standards of Performance for New Stationary Sources” or
as amended or modified. The above specifications may be modified or adjusted by
the Commissioner to suit specific sampling conditions or needs based upon
practice, judgment or experience. Updating of these standards and modifications
thereof shall be published in rules and regulations of the Commissioner.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 285.02 Sampling and Testing
   (a)   The Commissioner is hereby authorized to conduct, or cause to be
conducted, at the expense of any person owning, operating or in charge of any
source or control equipment, any test or tests of any new or existing source or
control equipment which in his or her judgment may result in emissions in
excess of the limitations contained in this Code or when the emissions from any
such source or control equipment may exceed the limits of emissions provided
for herein. All tests shall be conducted in a manner approved by the
Commissioner and a complete detailed test report of such test or tests shall be
submitted to him or her. When tests are taken by the owner or independent
testers employed by the owner, the Commissioner shall require that the tests be
conducted by reputable, qualified personnel and shall stipulate that a
qualified representative or representatives of the Division of Air Pollution
Control be present during the conduct of such tests. The Commissioner may
stipulate a reasonable time limit for the completion of such test and
submission of test reports.
   (b)   Nothing in this section concerning tests conducted by and paid for by
any person or his or her authorized agent shall be deemed to abridge the rights
of the Commissioner or his or her representatives to conduct separate or
additional tests of any source or control equipment on behalf of the City,
whether or not such tests relate to emissions controlled by specific
limitations under this Code.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 285.03 Test Facilities and Access
   (a)   It shall be the responsibility of the owner or operator of the source
or control equipment tested to provide, at his or her expense, utilities,
facilities and reasonable and necessary openings in the system or stack, and
safe and easy access thereto, to permit samples and measurements to be taken.
   (b)   All new sources of air contaminants created after the effective date
of this Code may be required by the Commissioner to provide utilities,
facilities and adequate openings in the system or stack, and safe and easy
access thereto, to permit measurements and samples to be taken.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 285.04 Source Monitoring and Recording Equipment
   (a)   When a source has on two (2) or more occasions violated any section of
this Code, the Commissioner may require that the source be equipped with
monitoring and recording devices within a reasonable period of time that will
provide a satisfactory measure of performance. Monitoring programs or devices
for parameters that control a specific emission may be used in lieu of direct
monitoring of the specific air contaminant with the consent of the
Commissioner. Monitoring records so required shall be retained for two (2)
years and shall be made available to the Commissioner or his or her authorized
representative upon request. At such time that the source demonstrates reliable
performance, the owner or operator of such source may petition the Commissioner
to have this requirement lifted.
   (b)   All new sources of air contaminants, installed after the effective
date of this Code, may be required to install monitoring and recording devices
that will provide a satisfactory measure of performance. Monitoring programs or
devices for parameters that control a specific emission may be used in lieu of
direct monitoring of the specific air contaminant with the consent of the
Commissioner. Monitoring records so required shall be retained for two (2)
years and shall be made available to the Commissioner or his or her authorized
representative upon request. At such time as this source demonstrates
continuing compliance with emission limitation, the owner or operator of such
source may petition the Commissioner to have this requirement lifted.
   (c)   When requiring monitoring and recording devices, the Commissioner
shall give consideration to technical feasibility and economic reasonableness.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
CHAPTER 287 – PENALTIES
287.01   Sealing
287.02   On Site Citations
287.03   Penalties
Cross-reference:
   Abatement orders, CO
255.04
   Seal defined, CO
251.55
Statutory reference:
   State penalties, RC 3704.99
§ 287.01 Sealing
   (a)   Any person who has been found to have violated the provisions of this
Code three (3) or more times within a twelve (12) month period shall be
notified by registered or certified mail to show cause before the Commissioner
within ten (10) days why the offending equipment may not be sealed. The notice
shall be directed to the last known address of the person to be notified, or if
the person or his or her whereabouts is unknown, the notice shall be posted on
or near the premises at which the violations have occurred. If upon the
hearing, at which the violator or his or her agent or attorney may appear and
be heard, the Commissioner finds that adequate corrective measures have not
been taken, he or she may seal the equipment until such time as corrective
measures have been taken.
   (b)   Sealing may also be ordered by the Commissioner and effected after
reasonable notice:
      (1)   On any air contaminant source or control equipment being operated
without a permit to operate or variance as required by this Code.
      (2)   When necessary repairs or alterations are not accomplished within
the time limit specified;
      (3)   In cases of emergency, the air contaminant source or control
equipment may be sealed without notice when the operation of such air
contaminant source or control equipment is or may reasonably be dangerous to
health or safety;
      (4)   When control equipment has been installed in order to enable an
operation or process to meet the conditions of a permit to operate, and such
control equipment is not being operated, the air contaminant source may be
sealed;
      (5)   When test facilities and access required under Section
285.03 are not provided;
      (6)   When an air contaminant source or control equipment, or proposed
air contaminant source or control equipment, has been installed or modified, or
is being installed or modified, without permits to install or modify, as
required by Section
257.01, the air contaminant source and/or control equipment, or proposed air
contaminant source and/or control equipment, may be sealed without notice;
      (7)   When source monitoring and/or recording equipment required under
Section
285.04 has not been provided;
      (8)   When any information, data, reports, or programs required under
provisions of this Code or by the Commissioner have not been provided.
   Pursuant to Section
259.09, a prima facie evidence of violation will support the action of the
Commissioner in sealing certain equipment, as provided therein.
   Sealing of equipment shall not be a bar to other legal action against the
owner or operator thereof.
   (c)   No person shall break or remove a seal or operate any air contaminant
source or control equipment sealed by the Commissioner unless such breaking,
removal or use is authorized in writing by the Commissioner.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 287.02 On Site Citations
   Violations of the provisions of this Code may be cited at the time and place
of observation of violations by the Commissioner or such air pollution control
personnel specified by the Commissioner from a list of personnel trained to
make such observations. Upon failure of the person cited to accept such waiver
ticket, the Commissioner or his or her representative shall note such refusal
and proceed as in other violations to cause a complaint and summons to issue.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
§ 287.03 Penalties
   (a)   No person shall violate any provision of this Code nor participate in
the violation of its provisions.
   (b)   Whoever violates Sections
265.02 (a) or
277.09 (a) or participates in the violation of such sections is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor on a first offense and shall be fined not more than one
hundred dollars ($100.00). On a second or subsequent offense if less than
twelve (12) months have elapsed since the last offense of the same provision,
such person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree and shall be fined
not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned not more than sixty
(60) days, or both.
   (c)   Whoever violates Sections
265.01,
265.02 (b),
265.03,
267.01,
267.02,
267.03,
277.01 (a),
277.03,
277.07 (a),
277.07 (b) or
279.02 (a) or participates in the violations of such sections is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor on a first offense and shall be fined not more than one
hundred dollars ($100.00). On a second or subsequent offense if less than
twelve (12) months have elapsed since the last offense of the same provision,
such person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined
not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisoned not more than six
(6) months, or both.
   (d)   Whoever violates any provision of this Code, except as provided in
subsections (b) and (c) hereof, is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree
and shall be fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisoned
not more than six (6) months, or both.
   (e)   Each days violations shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
subject to the penalties set forth in this section.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
CHAPTER 289 – CONSTITUTIONALITY
289.01   Severability
Cross-reference:
   Rules and regulations, CO
255.07
   Variances, CO
259.10
§ 289.01 Severability
   If any clause, sentence, paragraph or part of this Code or the application
thereof to any person or circumstances shall for any reason be judged by a
court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, such
judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder of this Code and
the application of such provisions to other persons or circumstances, but shall
be confined in its operation to the controversy in which such judgment shall
have been rendered and to the person, firm, corporation or circumstances
involved. It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent of Council that
this ordinance would have been adopted had such invalid provisions not been
included.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
CHAPTER 291 – ADVISORY COMMITTEE
291.01   Establishment; Members Term, Vacancy and Duties
Cross-reference:
   Commissioner to recommend changes to Code and rules and regulations, CO
255.02
   Rules and regulations, CO
255.07
§ 291.01 Establishment; Members Term, Vacancy and Duties
   (a)   There is hereby established an Industrial Air Pollution Advisory
Committee to be composed of not more than ten (10) members.
   (b)   The purpose of such Committee shall be to meet, discuss, make
recommendations and issue advisory opinions regarding matters relating to the
Air Pollution Code of the City of Cleveland, State of Ohio or Federal Codes, or
any rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, as they affect industrial
and commercial enterprises in the City.
   (c)   The committee shall meet at least once every three (3) months or more
often at the call of the chairman.
   (d)   Two (2) members of the committee shall be appointed by Council; three
(3) members shall be appointed by the Mayor and the remaining five (5) members
shall be representatives from business, industrial and commercial enterprises
or associations and citizens groups operating in the City. These five (5)
members shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the approval of Council.
   (e)   All members shall serve for a term of one (1) year and may be
reappointed at the end of their respective terms. Members shall serve without
compensation. If any member resigns, or otherwise is unable to continue to
serve as a member of the Committee, such vacancy shall be filled in the same
manner as the original appointment for the unexpired term thereof.
   (f)   The Committee may, at any time, report to Council any matters or
suggested changes relating to the Air Pollution Code of the City or the rules
and regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
   (g)   The committee shall issue an annual report no later than December 31
of each year regarding matters discussed during the previous year, including
any recommendations regarding the Air Pollution Code of the City or any other
law, rule or regulation affecting air pollution in the City, and in addition
may advise the Mayor or Council, upon their request, concerning any matter
involving air pollution in the City.
   (h)   A majority of all the members of such Committee shall constitute a
quorum to transact business and to issue any report, recommendation or advisory
opinion. A chairman shall be selected by a majority of the members of such
Committee, at the first meeting thereof and shall serve for one (1) year.
(Ord. No. 857-A-76. Passed 6-27-77, eff. 6-30-77)
APPENDICES A, B, C, D
APPENDIX A – TABLE I
   Sources and Processes to Be Equipped with Air Cleaning Equipment for the
Control of Odorous Matter
   1.   Rendering Cookers
   2.   Animal Blood Dryers
   3.   Asphalt Oxidation
   4.   Asphalt Roofing Manufacture
   5.   Brake Shoe Debonding
   6.   Varnish Cookers
   7.   Paint Drying or Baking Ovens
   8.   Meat Smokehouse
   9.   Coffee Roasting
   10.   Fabric Backing and Fabric Coating Baking Ovens
   11.   Ovens for Curing of Binders in Mineral and Wool Production
   12.   Tear Gas Manufacture
   13.   Source of Hydrogen Sulfide or Mercaptans Excluding the Water or Air
Quenching of Slag
   14.   Manufacture of Rubber or Rubber Products
   15.   Refining of Crude Oil and Manufacture and Storage of Petroleum
Products
   16.   Decomposition of Waste
   17.   Sewage and Waste Treatment
   18.   Printing and Other Graphic Arts Processes
   19.   Foundry Operations Including Core Ovens
   20.   Paper and Pulp Processing
   21.   Textile, Fibers and Associated Processes
   22.   Soap Detergents and Kindred Products
   23.   Scrap Processing
APPENDIX B – FIGURE 1
Figure I is available as a PDF, click HERE
APPENDIX B – TABLE II
Maximum Allowable Particulate Emissions from Fuel Burning Equipment
Total Input/Hr.  Maximum Rate of Emissions
Millions of Btu. Pounds of Particulate/Million Btu.
Total Input/Hr.  Maximum Rate of Emissions
Millions of Btu. Pounds of Particulate/Million Btu.
1 to 10          0.4
15               0.35
30               0.29
50               0.24
70               0.22
100              0.2
500              0.12
1,000 and over   0.1
 
   Interpolation of the data in this table for values between 10 and 1,000
millions of Btu not given shall be accompanied by us of the equation E = 51.27
H - 0.311, where E = maximum allowable particulate emission rate (# - 106 Btu)
and H = total heat input in Btu/Hr.
APPENDIX C – FIGURE II
Figure II is available as a PDF, click HERE
APPENDIX C – TABLE III
Allowable Rate of Emission Based on Process Weight Rate
Process Weight   Rate of   Process Weight    Rate of
Rate             Emission  Rate              Emission
Lb./Hr. Tons/Hr. Lb./Hr.   Lb./Hr. Tons/Hrs. Lb./Hr.
Process Weight   Rate of   Process Weight    Rate of
Rate             Emission  Rate              Emission
Lb./Hr. Tons/Hr. Lb./Hr.   Lb./Hr. Tons/Hrs. Lb./Hr.
100     0.05     0.551     16000   8         16.5
200     0.1      0.877     18000   9.00      17.9
400     0.2      1.4       20000   10        19.2
600     0.3      1.83      30000   15        25.2
800     0.4      2.22      40000   20        30.5
1000    0.5      2.58      50000   25        35.4
1500    0.75     3.38      60000   30        40
2000    1        4.1       70000   35        41.3
2500    1.25     4.76      80000   40        42.5
3000    1.5      5.38      90000   45        43.6
3500    1.75     5.96      100000  50        44.6
4000    2        6.52      120000  60        46.3
5000    2.5      7.58      140000  70        47.8
6000    3        8.56      160000  80        49
7000    3.5      9.49      200000  100       51.2
8000    4        10.4      1000000 500       69
9000    4.5      11.2      2000000 1000      77.6
10000   5        12        6000000 3000      92.7
12000   6        13.6
 
   Interpolation of the data in this table for process weight rates up to
60,000 lb./hr. shall be accomplished by use of the equation E = 4.10P0,67 and
interpolation and extrapolation of the data for process weight rates in excess
of 60,000 lb./hr. shall be accomplished by use of the equation: E = 55.0P0,11 -
40, where E = rate of emission in lb./hr. and P = process weight rate in tons/
hr.
APPENDIX C – FIGURE III
Figure III is available as a PDF, click HERE
APPENDIX D – TABLE IV. EMISSION REDUCTION OBJECTIVES FOR PARTICULATE MATTER
Source of Air Air Pollution Alert Air Pollution Warning Air Pollution Emergency
Contamination
Source of Air Contamination                                                  Air Pollution Alert                                                             Air Pollution Warning                                                           Air Pollution Emergency
1.   Coal or oil-fired electric power generating facilities.              a.   Substantial reduction by utilization of fuels having lowest available asa.   Maximum reduction by utilization of fuels having lowest available ash   a.   Maximum reduction by utilization of fuels having lowest available ash
                                                                             content.                                                                        content.                                                                        content.
                                                                             b.   Maximum utilization of mid- day (12:00 Noon to 4:00 p.m.) atmospheric   b.   Maximum utilization of mid- day (12:00 Noon to 4:00 p.m.) atmospheric   b.   Maximum utilization of mid- day (12:00 Noon to 4:00 p.m.) atmospheric
                                                                             turbulence for boiler lancing and soot blowing.                                 turbulence for boiler lancing and soot blowing.                                 turbulence for boiler lancing and soot blowing.
                                                                             c.   Substantial reduction by diverting electric power generation to facilitic.   Maximum reduction by diverting electric power generation to facilities  c.   Maximum reduction by diverting electric power generation to facilities
                                                                             outside of Alert Area.                                                          outside of Warning Area.                                                        outside Emergency Area.
2.   Coal or oil-fired process steam generating facilities.               a.   Substantial reduction by utilization of fuels having lowest available asa.   Maximum reduction by utilization of fuels having lowest available ash   a.   Maximum reduction by reducing heat and steam demands to absolute
                                                                             content.                                                                        content.                                                                        necessities consistent with preventing equipment damage.
                                                                             b.   Maximum utilization of mid- day (12:00 Noon to 4:00 p.m.) atmospheric   b.   Maximum utilization of mid- day (12:00 Noon to 4:00 p.m.) atmospheric   b.   Maximum utilization of mid- day (12:00 Noon to 4:00 p.m.) atmospheric
                                                                             turbulence for boiler lancing and soot blowing.                                 turbulence for boiler lancing and soot blowing.                                 turbulence for boiler lancing and soot blowing.
                                                                             c.   Reduction of steam load demands consistent with continuing plant        c.   Reduction of steam load demands consistent with continuing plant        c.   Taking the action called for in the emergency plan.
                                                                             operations.                                                                     operations.
                                                                                                                                                             d.   Making ready for use a plan of action to be taken if an emergency
                                                                                                                                                             develops.
3.   A.   Manufacturing, processing, and mining industries.            a.   Substantial reduction of air contaminants from manufacturing operations a.   Maximum reduction of air contaminants from manufacturing operations by, a.   Elimination of air contaminants from manufacturing operations by ceasing,
AND                                                                          curtailing, postponing, or deferring production and allied operations.          necessary, assuming reasonable economic hardship by postponing production and   curtailing, postponing or deferring production and allied operations to the
B.   Other persons required by the Commissioner to prepare standby plans.                                                                                 allied operations.                                                              extent possible without causing injury to persons or damage to equipment.
                                                                             b.   Maximum reduction by deferring trade waste disposal operations which emib.   Maximum reduction by deferring trade waste disposal operations which emib.   Elimination of air contaminants from trade waste disposal processes which
                                                                             particles, gases, vapors or malodorous substances.                              particles, gases, vapors or malodorous substances.                              emit particles, gases, vapors or malodorous substances.
                                                                             c.   Reduction of heat load demands for processing consistent with continuingc.   Reduction of heat load demands for processing consistent with continuingc.   Maximum reduction of heat load demands for processing.
                                                                             plant operations.                                                               plant operations.
4.   Refuse disposal operations.                                          a.   Maximum reduction by prevention of open burning.                        a.   Maximum reduction by prevention of open burning.                        a.   Maximum reduction by prevention of open burning.
                                                                             b.   Substantial reduction by limiting burning of refuse in incinerators to tb.   Complete elimination of the use of incinerators.                        b.   Complete elimination of the use of incinerators.
                                                                             hours between 12:00 Noon and 4:00 p.m.
 
APPENDIX D – TABLE V. EMISSION REDUCTION OBJECTIVES FOR SULFUR OXIDES
Source of Air Air Pollution Alert Air Pollution Warning Air Pollution Emergency
Contamination
Source of Air Contamination                                                 Air Pollution Alert                                                             Air Pollution Warning                                                           Air Pollution Emergency
1.   Coal or oil-fired electric power generating facilities.             a.   Substantial reduction by utilization of fuels having lowest available   a.   Maximum reduction by utilization of fuels having lowest available sulfura.   Maximum reduction by utilization of fuels having lowest available sulfur
                                                                            sulfur content.                                                                 content.                                                                        content.
                                                                            b.   Substantial reduction by diverting electric power generation to facilitib.   Maximum reduction by diverting electric power generation to facilities  b.   Maximum reduction by diverting electric power generation to facilities
                                                                            outside of Alert Area.                                                          outside of Warning Area.                                                        outside of Emergency Area.
2.   Coal or oil-fired process steam generating facilities.              a.   Substantial reduction by utilization of fuels having lowest available   a.   Maximum reduction by utilization of fuels having the lowest available   a.   Maximum reduction by reducing heat and steam demands to absolute
                                                                            sulfur content.                                                                 sulfur content.                                                                 necessities consistent with preventing equipment damage.
                                                                            b.   Reduction of steam load demands consistent with continuing plant        b.   Reduction of steam load demands consistent with continuing plant        b.   Taking the action called for in the emergency plan.
                                                                            operations.                                                                     operations.
                                                                                                                                                            c.   Making ready for use a plan of action to be taken if an emergency
                                                                                                                                                            develops.
3.   A.   Manufacturing and processing industries.                    a.   Substantial reduction of air contaminants from manufacturing operations a.   Maximum reduction of air contaminants from manufacturing operations by, a.   Elimination of air contaminants from manufacturing operations by ceasing,
AND                                                                         curtailing, postponing, or deferring production and allied operations.          necessary, assuming reasonable economic hardship by postponing production and   curtailing, postponing or deferring production and allied operations to the
B.   Other person required by the Commissioner to prepare standby plans.                                                                                 allied operations.                                                              extent possible without causing injury to persons or damage to equipment.
                                                                            b.   Maximum reduction by deferring trade waste disposal operations which emib.   Maximum reduction by deferring trade waste disposal operations which emib.   Elimination of air contaminants from trade waste disposal processes which
                                                                            particles, gases, vapors or malodorous substances.                              particles, gases, vapors or malodorous substances.                              emit particles, gases, vapors, or malodorous substances.
                                                                            c.   Reduction of heat load demands for processing consistent with continuingc.   Reduction of heat load demands for processing consistent with continuingc.   Maximum reduction of heat load demands for processing.
                                                                            plant operations.                                                               plant operations.
 
APPENDIX D – TABLE VI. EMISSION REDUCTION FOR NITROGEN OXIDES
Source of Air Air Pollution Alert Air Pollution Warning Air Pollution Emergency
Contamination
Source of Air Contamination                                                  Air Pollution Alert                                                             Air Pollution Warning                                                           Air Pollution Emergency
1.   Steam-electric power generating facilities.                          a.   Substantial reduction by utilization of fuel which results in the       a.   Maximum reduction by utilization of fuels which results in the formationa.   Maximum reduction by diverting electric power generation to facilities
                                                                             formation of less air contaminant.                                              of less air contaminant.                                                        outside of Emergency Area.
                                                                             b.   Substantial reduction by diverting electric power generation to facilitib.   Maximum reduction by diverting electric power generation facilities
                                                                             outside of Alert Area.                                                          outside of Warning Area.
2.   Process steam generating facilities.                                 a.   Substantial reduction by utilization of fuel which results in the       a.   Maximum reduction by utilization of fuel which results in the formation a.   Maximum reduction by reducing heat and steam demands to absolute
                                                                             formation of less air contaminant.                                              less air contaminant.                                                           necessities consistent with preventing equipment damage.
                                                                             b.   Reduction of steam load demands consistent with continuing plant        b.   Reduction of steam load demands consistent with continuing plant
                                                                             operations.                                                                     operations.
                                                                                                                                                             c.   Making ready for use a plan of action to be taken if an emergency
                                                                                                                                                             develops.
3.   A.   Manufacturing and processing industries.                     a.   Substantial reduction of air contaminants from manufacturing operations a.   Maximum reduction of air contaminants from manufacturing operations by, a.   Elimination of air contaminants from manufacturing operations by ceasing,
AND                                                                          curtailing, postponing, or deferring production and allied operations.          necessary, assuming reasonable economic hardship by postponing production and   curtailing, postponing or deferring production and allied operations to the
B.   Other persons required by the Commissioner to prepare standby plans.                                                                                 allied operations.                                                              extent possible without causing injury to persons or damage to equipment.
                                                                             b.   Maximum reduction by deferring trade waste disposal operations which emib.   Maximum reduction by deferring trade waste disposal operations which emib.   Elimination of air contaminants from trade waste disposal processes which
                                                                             particles, gases, vapors or malodorous substances.                              particles, gases, vapors or malodorous substances.                              emit particles, gases, vapors or malodorous substances.
                                                                             c.   Reduction of heat load demands for processing consistent with continuingc.   Reduction of heat load demands for processing consistent with continuingc.   Maximum reduction of heat load demands for processing.
                                                                             plant operations.                                                               plant operations.
4.   Stationary internal combustion engines.                              a.   Reduction of power demands for pumping consistent with continuing       a.   Reduction of power demands for pumping consistent with continuing       a.   Maximum reduction by reducing power demands to absolute necessities
                                                                             operations.                                                                     operations.                                                                     consistent with personnel safety and preventing equipment damage.
                                                                                                                                                             b.   Maximum reduction by utilization of fuels or power source which results b.   Maximum reduction by utilization of fuels or power source which results in
                                                                                                                                                             the formation of less air contaminants.                                         the formation of less air contaminants.
5.   Refuse disposal operations.                                          a.   Maximum reduction by prevention of open burning.                        a.   Maximum reduction by prevention of open burning.                        a.   Maximum reduction by prevention of open burning.
                                                                             b.   Substantial reduction by limiting burning of refuse in incinerators to tb.   Complete elimination of the use of incinerators.                        b.   Complete elimination of the use of incinerators.
                                                                             hours between 12:00 Noon and 4:00 p.m.
 
APPENDIX D – TABLE VII. EMISSION REDUCTION OBJECTIVES FOR HYDROCARBONS
 
Source of Air Contamination                                                  Air Pollution Alert                                                             Air Pollution Warning                                                           Air Pollution Emergency
1.   Petroleum products storage and distribution.                         a.   Substantial reduction of air contaminants by curtailing, postponing, or a.   Maximum reduction of air contaminants by assuming reasonable economic   a.   Elimination of air contaminants by curtailing, postponing, or deferring
                                                                             deferring transfer operations.                                                  hardship by postponing transfer operations.                                     transfer operations to the extent possible without causing damage to equipment.
2.   Surface coating and preparation.                                     a.   Substantial reduction of air contaminants by curtailing, postponing or  a.   Maximum reduction of air contaminants by assuming reasonable economic   a.   Elimination of air contaminants by curtailing, postponing, or deferring
                                                                             deferring transfer operations.                                                  hardship by postponing transfer operations.                                     transfer operations to the extent possible without causing damage to equipment.
3.   A.   Manufacturing and processing industries.                     a.   Substantial reduction of air contaminants from manufacturing operations a.   Maximum reduction of air contaminants from manufacturing operations by, a.   Elimination of air contaminants from manufacturing operations by ceasing,
AND                                                                          curtailing, postponing, or deferring production and allied operations.          necessary, assuming reasonable economic hardship by postponing production and a curtailing, postponing or deferring production and allied operations to the
B.   Other persons required by the Commissioner to prepare standby plans.                                                                                 allied operations.                                                              extent possible without causing injury to persons or damage to equipment.
 
APPENDIX D – TABLE VIII. EMISSION REDUCTION OBJECTIVES FOR CARBON MONOXIDE
 
Source of Air Contamination                                                  Air Pollution Alert                                                             Air Pollution Warning                                                           Air Pollution Emergency
1.   A.   Manufacturing industries.                                                                                                                    a.   Maximum reduction of air contaminants from manufacturing operations by, a.   Elimination of air contaminants from manufacturing operations by
AND                                                                          a.   Substantial reduction of air contaminants from manufacturing operations necessary, assuming reasonable economic hardship by postponing production and   ceasing, curtailing, postponing or deferring production and allied
B.   Other persons required by the Commissioner to prepare standby plans. curtailing, postponing or deferring production and allied operations.           allied operations.                                                              operations to the extent possible without causing injury to persons or
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             damage to equipment.
2.   Refuse disposal operations.                                          a.   Maximum reduction by prevention of open burning.                        a.   Maximum reduction by prevention of open burning.                        a.   Maximum reduction by prevention of open burning.
 
PART THREE: LAND USE CODE
Part IIIA: Land Use Code – Planning and Housing
Title I: Planning
   Chapter
301   Transit Oriented Development and Transportation Demand Management
   Chapter
303   Business Revitalization (BR) District
Title III: Streets and Platting
   Chapter
305   Street Naming and House Numbering
   Chapter
307   Street Dedication
   Chapter
309   Subdivision Regulations
Title V: Community Development Code
   Chapter
311   Purpose and Scope
   Chapter
313   Initiation and Preparation of Plan
   Chapter
315   Adoption of Plan
   Chapter
317   Approval of Plan
   Chapter
319   Plan Amendment
   Chapter
321   Administration of Plan
   Chapter
323   Neighborhood Conservation
   Chapter
324   Elimination of Spot Blight
Part IIIB: Land Use Code – Zoning Code
Title VII: Zoning Code
   Chapter
325   Definitions
   Chapter
327   Enforcement and Penalty
   Chapter
329   Board Of Zoning Appeals
   Chapter
331   Building Zone Maps
   Chapter
333   Changes and Amendments
   Chapter
334   Planned Unit Development Overlay District
   Chapter
335   Use Districts
   Chapter
336   Urban Garden District
   Chapter
337   Residential Districts
   Chapter
338   Manufactured Housing Park (MHP) District
   Chapter
339   Parking Districts
   Chapter
340   Institutional-Research (I-R) Districts
   Chapter
341   Design Review
   Chapter
342   Open Space and Recreation (OSR) Districts
   Chapter
343   Business Districts
   Chapter
344   Midtown Mixed-Use District
   Chapter
345   Industrial Districts
   Chapter
346   Live-Work Overlay Districts
   Chapter
347   Specific Uses Regulated
   Chapter
348   Form Districts
   Chapter
349   Off-Street Parking and Loading
   Chapter
350   Sign Regulations
   Chapter
351   Riparian Setbacks and Wetlands Setbacks
   Chapter
352   Landscaping, Screening, and Parking Lot and Public Garage Lighting
   Chapter
353   Height Regulations
   Chapter
354   Wireless Telecommunications Facilities
   Chapter
354A   Wind Energy Facilities
   Chapter
355   Area Requirements
   Chapter
356   Central Business District (CBD)
   Chapter
357   Yards and Courts
   Chapter
358   Fence Regulations
   Chapter
359   Nonconforming Uses
Title VIIA: Cleveland Neighborhood Form-Based Code
   Chapter
3001   Introductory Provisions
   Chapter
3002   Zoning Districts
   Chapter
3003   Use Regulations
   Chapter
3004   Development Standards
   Chapter
3005   Administration
   Chapter
3006   Definitions
   Chapter
3007   Zoning Maps
Part IIIC: Land Use Code – Housing Code
Title IX: Housing Code
   Chapter
361   Purpose and Scope
   Chapter
363   Definitions
   Chapter
365   Rental Registration and Lead-Safe Certification
   Chapter
367   Enforcement and Penalty
   Chapter
369   Residential Occupancy Standards
   Chapter
371   Rental Dwelling Standards
   Chapter
373   Rooming Occupancy Standards
   Chapter
375   Landlords and Tenants
Part IIID: Land Use Code – Fire Prevention Code
Title XI: Fire Prevention Code
   Chapter
381   Enforcement and General Provisions
   Chapter
383   Flammable Liquids
   Chapter
385   Flammable Materials and Gases
   Chapter
387   Explosives, Including the Indoor and Outdoor Display of Pyrotechnics,
Flame Effects, and Lasers
   Chapter
389   Fire Extinguishing Equipment
   Chapter
391   Fire Alarm and Detection Systems; Fire Drills
   Chapter
392   Smoke Detectors, Smoke Alarms, and Carbon Monoxide Alarms
   Chapter
393   Hazardous Chemicals: Right-To-Know Code
   Chapter
394   Hazardous Material Transportation
   Chapter
395   Unnecessary Fire Alarms
   Chapter
396   Notification, Environmental Abatement and Securing of Closed or Vacated
Facilities
   Chapter
397   Emergency Rapid Entry Systems
Part IIIE: Land Use Code – Building Code
Title XIII: Building Code
   Chapter
3101   Scope, Definitions and Standards
   Chapter
3103   Enforcement and Penalty
   Chapter
3104   Civil Enforcement
   Chapter
3105   Permits and Occupancy Certificates
   Chapter
3106   Registration of Vacant Buildings and Certificates of Compliance for
Vacant Buildings
   Chapter
3107   Registration of Contractors
   Chapter
3109   Encroachments
   Chapter
3111   Ohio Building Code
   Chapter
3113   Outdoor Signs and Displays
   Chapter
3114   Fire Limits
   Chapter
3115   Demolition and Moving
   Chapter
3116   Construction and Post-Construction Site Storm Water Runoff Control
   Chapter
3117   Private Swimming Pools
   Chapter
3121   Residential Building Code of Ohio for One, Two, or Three-Family
Dwellings
   Chapter
3123   Miscellaneous Occupancy
   Chapter
3125   Excavations, Soils and Foundations
   Chapter
3126   Fills, Excavations, Soils, and Grading
   Chapter
3127   Wood Construction
   Chapter
3129   Loads
   Chapter
3131   Heating, Ventilating and Air Conditioning
   Chapter
3133   Plumbing
   Chapter
3135   Gas Piping and Appliances
   Chapter
3137   Electrical Wiring
   Chapter
3139   Refrigeration
   Chapter
3141   Elevators
   Chapter
3143   Exterior Walls and Appurtenances; Parking Garages
   Chapter
3167   Flood Plain Management
   Chapter
3169   Manufactured Homes
PART IIIA: LAND USE CODE – PLANNING AND HOUSING
TITLE I: PLANNING
   Chapter
301   Transit Oriented Development and Transportation Demand Management
   Chapter
303   Business Revitalization (BR) District
CHAPTER 301 – TRANSIT ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT AND TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT
301.01   Statement of Purpose
301.02   Definitions
301.03   Applicability
301.04   Exemptions from and Alternative Regulations to the Zoning Code
301.05   Transportation Demand Management Program Standards
301.06   Transportation Demand Management Plan Review
301.07   Transportation Demand Management Registration and Implementation
301.08   Transportation Demand Management Registration Application
301.09   Transportation Demand Management Registration Issuance; Renewal
301.10   Appeals
301.99   Penalties
§ 301.01 Statement of Purpose
   These regulations are adopted for the following purposes: to support the
implementation of the general plan, as amended, adopted by the City Planning
Commission in accordance with § 76-2; to create neighborhoods where every
resident can survive and thrive, and where their needs and desired amenities
can be reached quickly and safely via a variety of transportation modes
including walking, biking, transit, and motor vehicles; to support the welfare
of the region's bus and rail transit system by permitting compact land use and
development suitable to the sustainable operation and expansion of transit
services across the City of Cleveland; to support the City of Cleveland in
reaching goals described in its adopted Climate Action Plan related to
environmental sustainability, the reduction of carbon emissions and
decarbonization, and transportation equity; and to promote public health,
safety, and general welfare of the people of the City of Cleveland.
(Ord. No. 801-2023. Passed 8-16-23, eff. 3-15-24)
§ 301.02 Definitions
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   "Director" means the Director of the City Planning Commission.
   (b)   "Headway(s)" means the distance or duration between vehicles in a
transit system measured in space or time.
   (c)   "High Frequency Transit Station" means any bus and rail stop or
station with service headways of fifteen (15) minutes or less at any given time
of day.
   (d)   "Single Occupancy Vehicle Trips" or "SOV Trips" is a measure of the
number of trips from an origin to a destination conducted by a sole occupant of
a motor vehicle.
   (e)   "Transportation Demand Management" or "TDM" means design features,
incentives, and tools implemented by a Transit Oriented Development Project to
meet the City's goals stated in Section
301.01 and the TDM Standards adopted pursuant to Section
301.05.
   (f)   "Transportation Demand Management Menu" or "TDM Menu" means the
specific TDM options available to TOD Projects to comply with the requirements
of TDM Program, as established and maintained in the TDM Program Standards.
   (g)   "Transportation Demand Management Plan" or "TDM Plan" means a Transit
Oriented Development Project's plan describing compliance with the
Transportation Demand Management Program Standards.
   (h)   "Transportation Demand Management Program" or "TDM Program" means the
requirement that Transit Oriented Development Projects incorporate
Transportation Demand Management in the proposed projects.
   (i)   "Transportation Demand Management Program Standards" or "TDM Program
Standards" means all the rules and requirements as adopted by the City Planning
Commission pursuant to Section
301.05.
   (j)   "Transportation Demand Management Tier" or "TDM Tier" means the
category assigned based on the characteristics of a TOD Project as defined by
the TDM Program Standards adopted by the City Planning Commission pursuant to
Section
301.05.
   (k)   "Transit Oriented Development Project" or "TOD Project" means any land
use development, including new construction, that changes or expands the use(s)
on a parcel of land entirely or partially within the Transit Oriented
Development Zone.
   (l)   "Transit Oriented Development Zone" or "TOD Zone" is the area within
1/4 mile radius of a High Frequency Transit Station and that is depicted in the
TDM Program Standards.
   (m)   "Vehicle Miles Traveled" or "VMT" is a measure of the distance in
miles traveled in a personal automobile via expected trips generated by a TOD
Project and more fully described in the TDM Program Standards adopted by the
City Planning Commission.
(Ord. No. 801-2023. Passed 8-16-23, eff. 3-15-24)
§ 301.03 Applicability
   (a)   No building permit or final certificate of occupancy shall be issued
by the City without the submission to and approval by the Director of a TDM
Plan submitted by, or on behalf of, the property owner for a TOD Project that
is assigned a TDM Tier of one (1) or greater in accordance with the TDM Program
Standards.
   (b)   No final certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the City without
the issuance of a Certificate of Registration required under Section
301.07.
   (c)   Exception. No TOD Project consisting of five thousand (5,000) square
feet or fewer shall be subject to the TDM Program Standards.
(Ord. No. 801-2023. Passed 8-16-23, eff. 3-15-24)
§ 301.04 Exemptions from and Alternative Regulations to the Zoning Code
   Notwithstanding other provisions in the Zoning Code, TOD Projects are exempt
from all requirements for a minimum number of off-street vehicular parking
spaces in the Zoning Code.
(Ord. No. 801-2023. Passed 8-16-23, eff. 3-15-24)
§ 301.05 Transportation Demand Management Program Standards
   (a)   Within 90 days of the effective date of this chapter, the City
Planning Commission shall adopt the TDM Program Standards. The TDM Program
Standards shall be made publicly available in print and published in the City
Record and on the City Planning Commission's website and shall become effective
30 days after publication in the City Record.
   (b)   The TDM Program Standards shall be updated from time to time, as
deemed appropriate by the City Planning Commission, to reflect best practices
in the field of Transportation Demand Management.
   (c)   When preparing, adopting, or updating the TDM Program Standards, the
City Planning Commission shall be guided by the Statement of Purpose of Section
301.01, specifically the goals to reduce SOV Trips and VMT, increase transit
ridership, and increase mode shift to modes of transportation alternative to
the motor vehicle, and shall abide by the following:
      (1)    The requirements of the TDM Program, as set forth in the TDM
Program Standards, shall be proportionate to the total amount of VMT and/or SOV
Trips produced by TOD Projects.
      (2)   The TDM Program Standards shall provide flexibility for TOD
Projects to achieve the purposes of the TDM Program in a way that best suits
the circumstances of each TOD Project, including a menu of options from which
to choose, known as the TDM Menu.
      (3)   Each of the TDM Menu options shall be assigned a number of points
reflecting its relative effectiveness at reducing VMT/SOV Trips, as approved by
the City Planning Commission.
      (4)   The TDM Program Standards shall establish TDM Tiers to determine
the minimum threshold of points required for compliance by TOD Projects with
the TDM Program. TDM Tiers shall be determined by such metrics deemed
appropriate by the City Planning Commission and shall include square footage by
use and gross square footage as one criterion and any other combination of
criteria related to TOD Projects such as:
         A.   total number of housing units
         B.   total number of anticipated employees
or other criteria as determined by the City Planning Commission.
   (d)   The TDM Program Standards shall specify the requirements for a TDM
Plan, including the administrative process for submission, review, and approval
by the Director.
(Ord. No. 801-2023. Passed 8-16-23, eff. 3-15-24)
§ 301.06 Transportation Demand Management Plan Review
   (a)   The Director of Building and Housing shall forward Building Permit
applications and proposed TDM Plans, if applicable, to the Director of City
Planning.
   (b)   A proposed TDM Plan shall be reviewed in conjunction with any other
necessary reviews required by the City.
   (c)   Compliance with the TDM Program, including compliance with the
finalized TDM Plan, shall be a condition of approval for the TOD Project.
   (d)   The TOD Project shall be subject to the TDM Program Standards in
effect at the time of its first application. If the City Planning Commission
has issued revised TDM Program Standards subsequent to the date of the TOD
Project's first application was filed, then the applicant may elect to have the
TOD Project be subject to the later-approved TDM Program Standards.
(Ord. No. 801-2023. Passed 8-16-23, eff. 3-15-24)
§ 301.07 Transportation Demand Management Registration and Implementation
   No person, firm or corporation shall implement a use or change use within
the TOD Zone without a current Transportation Demand Management Registration
("TDM Registration") for a TOD Project required to submit a plan, or fail to
implement a plan approved, under division (a) of Section
301.03.
(Ord. No. 801-2023. Passed 8-16-23, eff. 3-15-24)
§ 301.08 Transportation Demand Management Registration Application
   Every applicant for a TDM Registration required by this chapter shall make
an application in writing to the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses,
which application shall provide the following information:
   (a)   The name and address of the applicant, and, if a partnership, the
names and addresses of all partners, and, if a corporation, the name, date and
state under which incorporated, and the names and addresses of the officers and
statutory agent.
   (b)   The address of the subject property or the facility or structure
subject to the TDM Plan.
   (c)   The TDM Plan and any required documentation specified in the TDM
Program Standards adopted by the City Planning Commission pursuant to Section
301.05.
   (d)   Any proposed revisions to a previously approved TDM Plan by the
applicant.
   (e)   Such other information as the Commissioner deems pertinent or
necessary to carry into effect the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 801-2023. Passed 8-16-23, eff. 3-15-24)
§ 301.09 Transportation Demand Management Registration Issuance; Renewal
   (a)   Registration Issuance. On receipt of an application for a TDM
Registration, the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses shall transmit the
application to the Director of City Planning for review. The Director shall,
within sixty (60) days of receipt of the application, notify the Commissioner
of Assessments and Licenses whether the application has been approved. On
notification of approval, the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses shall
issue the TDM Registration on a form promulgated by the Commissioner for that
purpose.
   (b)   Registration Renewal. All registrations issued under this section
shall be valid for a period not to exceed one (1) year except as otherwise
provided below and shall expire October 31 of every year. Applicants who have
maintained compliance with their approved TDM Plan for a continuous period of
three (3) years shall be issued a registration for a three (3) year period.
Registrations may be renewed if an application for renewal containing the
information listed in Section
301.08 is submitted to the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses not less
than ninety (90) days before expiration of the previous registration.
   (c)   Registration Extension. If an application for a registration renewal
has been submitted in accordance with the provisions of Sections
301.08 and
301.09 of this chapter, and if, before the existing registration has expired,
the City has not taken all administrative and legislative action required for
approval of the renewal of the registration (including, if applicable, the
granting of an encroachment permit), the Commissioner of Assessments and
Licenses shall extend the existing registration on a month-by-month basis until
the City has taken action as required by this chapter, but for no more than
three (3) months.
   (d)   Applicability to Premises. Registrations issued under this section
shall apply only to the premises described in the application, and a separate
application and registration shall be required for each noncontiguous site
operated. The registration shall not be assignable or transferable.
   (e)   Registration Fee. Each application for a new or renewal registration
shall be accompanied by a fee set by the Board of Control.
(Ord. No. 801-2023. Passed 8-16-23, eff. 3-15-24)
§ 301.10 Appeals
   Any denial of a TDM registration, and any civil penalty imposed under
Section
301.99, may be appealed in writing to the Board of Zoning Appeals within thirty
(30) days of the date of the decision.
(Ord. No. 801-2023. Passed 8-16-23, eff. 3-15-24)
§ 301.99 Penalties
   Whoever violates Section
301.07 may be subject to a civil penalty of up to one thousand dollars
($1,000.00).
(Ord. No. 801-2023. Passed 8-16-23, eff. 3-15-24)
CHAPTER 303 – BUSINESS REVITALIZATION (BR) DISTRICT
303.01   Statement of Purpose – Repealed
303.02   District Establishment – Repealed
303.03   Criteria For District Designation – Repealed
303.04   District Mapping – Repealed
303.05   Applicability – Repealed
303.06   Local Design Review Advisory Committee – Repealed
303.07   Administrative Procedures – Repealed
303.08   Design Guidelines – Repealed
303.09   Adopted District Plans – Repealed
303.10   Demolition and Moving – Repealed
303.11   Exclusions – Repealed
§ 303.01 Statement of Purpose – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1827-08. Passed 2-9-09, eff. 2-11-09)
§ 303.02 District Establishment – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1827-08. Passed 2-9-09, eff. 2-11-09)
§ 303.03 Criteria For District Designation – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1827-08. Passed 2-9-09, eff. 2-11-09)
§ 303.04 District Mapping – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1827-08. Passed 2-9-09, eff. 2-11-09)
§ 303.05 Applicability – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1827-08. Passed 2-9-09, eff. 2-11-09)
§ 303.06 Local Design Review Advisory Committee – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1827-08. Passed 2-9-09, eff. 2-11-09)
§ 303.07 Administrative Procedures – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1827-08. Passed 2-9-09, eff. 2-11-09)
§ 303.08 Design Guidelines – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1827-08. Passed 2-9-09, eff. 2-11-09)
§ 303.09 Adopted District Plans – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1827-08. Passed 2-9-09, eff. 2-11-09)
§ 303.10 Demolition and Moving – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1827-08. Passed 2-9-09, eff. 2-11-09)
§ 303.11 Exclusions – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1827-08. Passed 2-9-09, eff. 2-11-09)
TITLE III: STREETS AND PLATTING
   Chapter
305   Street Naming and House Numbering
   Chapter
307   Street Dedication
   Chapter
309   Subdivision Regulations
CHAPTER 305 – STREET NAMING AND HOUSE NUMBERING
305.01   Street Suffixes
305.02   Classification of Thoroughfares
305.03   Building Numbering
305.04   Display of Numbering
305.05   Failure to Display Building Numbering
305.06   Names of Streets and Highways
305.07   Street Maps
305.08   Defacing or Failing to Display Proper Numbers
305.09   Reserved
305.99   Penalty
   Note: The legislative history of this chapter, except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 63410-A, passed
September 22, 1924.
Charter reference:
   Street vacation or change of name, Charter §
176
Statutory reference:
   Power to regulate building numbering, RC 715.26
§ 305.01 Street Suffixes
   All thoroughfares in the section bounded by Lake Erie, easterly City limits,
Euclid Avenue and Ontario Street, except numbered streets shall have the suffix
N.E., meaning northeast, added to the name of the thoroughfare. All
thoroughfares in the section bounded by Euclid Avenue, the easterly City
limits, southerly City limits to the River, the River to Canal Street extended,
Canal Street to Huron Street and Ontario Street except numbered streets shall
have the suffix S.E., meaning southeast, added to the name of the thoroughfare.
All thoroughfares in the section bounded by Lake Erie, Ontario Street to Huron
Street, Huron Street to the River, the River south to the Cincinnati Slip, from
Cincinnati Slip west to Lorain Street, Lorain Street, to the City limits, the
west City limits to Lake Erie, except numbered streets shall have the suffix
N.W., meaning northwest, added to the name of the thoroughfare. All
thoroughfares in the section bounded by Ontario Street by way of Vinegar Hill
to Canal Street, Canal Street to the River, the River south to the southerly
City limits, the southerly City limits and westerly City limits to Lorain
Street, Lorain Street to the River at Cincinnati Slip and north along the River
to Huron Street, except numbered streets, shall have the suffix S.W., meaning
southwest, added to the name of the thoroughfare.
(Ord. No. 72366. Passed 2-8-26)
§ 305.02 Classification of Thoroughfares
   As used in this chapter, “thoroughfare” means all ways used or opened for
public travel, whatever their present designation. All thoroughfares running in
a general east and west direction shall be called avenues. All thoroughfares
running in a general north and south direction shall be called streets. All
diagonal thoroughfares shall be called roads. All short or disconnected
thoroughfares running in a general north and south direction shall be called
places. All short or disconnected thoroughfares running in a general east and
west direction shall be called courts. All curved thoroughfares shall be called
drives.
§ 305.03 Building Numbering
   In general, one (1) number on each side of the thoroughfare will be allowed
for each twenty (20) feet in the residence section of the City, and ten (10)
feet in the business section of the City. Even numbers shall be placed on the
right hand of all thoroughfares, progressing with the numbers, all odd numbers
on the left hand. All avenues and courts will be numbered in blocks, the first
number in each being the 100 corresponding to the street number at the
beginning of the block, blocks running in the same direction as street numbers.
The house numbers on streets and places shall in general be continuous from
north to south, and so arranged that numbers on parallel streets will be in the
same block. All streets and places north of Euclid Avenue between Ontario
Street and the intersection of Euclid Avenue and Mayfield Road S.E. shall be
numbered from 1999 at Euclid Avenue, backward.
   All streets and places north of Mayfield Road S.E. shall be numbered from
1999 at Mayfield Road S.E. backward. All streets and places south of Euclid
Avenue between Ontario Street and the intersection of Euclid Avenue and
Mayfield Road S.E. shall be numbered from 2000 at Euclid Avenue, then upward
progressing southerly. All streets and places south of Mayfield Road S.E. shall
be numbered from 2000 at Mayfield Road S.E. then upward progressing southerly.
All streets and places north of Lorain Avenue between the Cuyahoga River and
West 58th Street shall be numbered from 1999 at Lorain Avenue backward. All
streets and places north of Madison Avenue N.W. between West 58th Street and
the westerly City limits shall be numbered from 1999 at Madison Avenue N.W.
backward. All streets and places south of Lorain Avenue between the Cuyahoga
River and West 58th Street shall be numbered from 2000 at Lorain Avenue upward,
progressing southerly. All streets and places south of Madison Avenue N.W.
between West 58th Street and the westerly City limits shall be numbered from
2000 at Madison Avenue N.W. upward progressing southerly.
   The Public Square shall be numbered beginning at the west intersection of
Superior Avenue, the even numbers around the south half of the Square, one (1)
number for each ten (10) feet, and the odd numbers around the north half of the
Square for each ten (10) feet.
§ 305.04 Display of Numbering
   The owner, agent, lessee or other person in charge of any building in the
City upon a street to which street numbers of buildings have been assigned by
the Commissioner of Engineering and Construction, shall cause the proper number
of such building to be displayed on the fanlight, transom, door, entrance steps
or gate, or at the nearest practical point to the entrance of such building in
such a manner that the number may at all times be plainly legible from the
sidewalk in front of such building. As used in this section, “front” means that
side of the building which faces the street on which the number of such
building or premises on which such building is situated, has been allotted, and
that the number shall be displayed on such side of such building or premises.
(Ord. No. 88316. Passed 10-14-29)
§ 305.05 Failure to Display Building Numbering
   No owner, lessee, agent or other person in charge of any building in the
City, upon a street to which numbers of buildings have been assigned by the
Commissioner of Engineering and Construction, shall fail to display the proper
number of such building, as provided in Section
305.04.
(Ord. No. 88316. Passed 10-14-29)
§ 305.06 Names of Streets and Highways
   The streets and highways of the City shall, until changed by ordinance,
continue to bear names authorized prior to October 17, 1921, and as thereafter
changed or added to by ordinance, except such changes, if any, as were made by
Ordinance 63410-A, passed September 22, 1924. All streets and highways
hereafter dedicated or laid out in the City shall bear such names consistent
with the system provided for in Sections
305.01 and
305.02, as appear on the plat approved by the Platting Commissioner and
accepted by Council.
(Ord. No. 72366. Passed 2-8-26)
§ 305.07 Street Maps
   (a)   As used in this chapter, “house” means any dwelling house, business
block or building used for business purposes. “Street” means any street,
avenue, lane, alley, public place or highway.
   (b)   The Commissioner of Engineering and Construction shall prepare maps of
all streets required to be numbered, drawn to an accurate scale, showing all
intersecting streets and the location of the fronts of all houses and each
front doorway in the same. The whole length of the street shall be divided up
into spaces or lots of twenty (20) or ten (10) feet front as provided in
Section
305.03. A number shall be given for each space, and the number coinciding most
nearly with the location of any doorway shall be the number of the same;
consecutive numbers shall be placed directly opposite on lines at right angles
to the street. All numbers placed on houses under these sections shall be
indicated on the maps. The maps shall be bound in convenient volumes, kept on
file in the office of the Commissioner and shall be the property of the City.
§ 305.08 Defacing or Failing to Display Proper Numbers
   No person shall take down, deface or falsify any number put up in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter. No person shall retain any number or make
use of any number other than as provided under this chapter. No owner, agent or
occupant of any property shall refuse or neglect to number as required by this
chapter.
(Ord. No. 1017-94. Passed 10-17-94, eff. 10-26-94)
§ 305.09 Reserved
§ 305.99 Penalty
   (a)   Whoever fails to comply with the provisions of Section
305.05 shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than
seventy- five dollars ($75.00) and not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00).
   (b)   Whoever fails to comply with the provision of Section
305.08 shall be fined not less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) and not
more than two hundred dollars ($200.00).
(Ord. No. 1162-96. Passed 9-16-96, eff. 9-24-96)
CHAPTER 307 – STREET DEDICATION
307.01   Streets, Alleys and Watercourses on Plats
307.02   General Street Construction Requirements
307.03   Certificate of Title to Accompany Plats
307.04   Director of Public Service to Examine and Recommend Plats
   Note: The legislative history of this chapter, except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 63410-A, passed
September 22, 1924.
Charter reference:
   Duty to keep streets open, in repair and free of nuisances, Charter §
173
   Effect of platting, Charter §
172
   Required contents of plat, Charter §
169
   Requirements for street dedication, Charter §
175
Cross-reference:
   Acceptance of streets, CO
309.23
   Grade requirements; monuments, CO
309.16
   Plat drawing and contents, CO
309.02 et seq.
   Street locations and widths, CO
309.08 et seq.
   Street maps, CO
305.07
§ 307.01 Streets, Alleys and Watercourses on Plats
   Before any plat of land wherein any new streets or alleys are opened and
laid out within the City limits shall be recommended by the Director of Public
Service or approved by Council, such streets and alleys shall, if there are
other streets or alleys already laid out adjacent thereto, be a continuation of
such streets or alleys, as near as practicable, and all streets and alleys
shall be properly defined by stone monuments set in the ground. The streets,
alleys and lots so laid out shall be properly figured and numbered so that they
can be located from the stone monuments. All streams, watercourses or ditches,
if any, shall be accurately laid down on the plat or map, and where the surface
of the ground is broken or uneven, the same shall be so indicated by proper
topographical delineations.
§ 307.02 General Street Construction Requirements
   All streets so laid out shall be graded and the gutters cut out to a proper
grade, and where any street crosses a stream or watercourse, the same shall be
spanned by a proper culvert or bridge. All streets and alleys shall be so
graded and arranged that persons can drive through or over them with safety;
all of which shall be done to the acceptance of the Director of Public Service.
§ 307.03 Certificate of Title to Accompany Plats
   All plats submitted, wherein new streets and alleys are laid out to be
dedicated to public use, shall be accompanied by a certified abstract of title
to date, showing the proposed streets and alleys to be clear and free of all
incumbrances, which abstract, or a certified copy thereof, shall be filed in
the office of the Director of Public Service, and shall become the property of
the City.
§ 307.04 Director of Public Service to Examine and Recommend Plats
   The Director of Public Service shall examine and recommend any such plat or
allotment, to the person making the same, to the effect that, whenever the
streets and alleys are properly graded and the watercourses are properly
bridged, etc., as provided in Section
307.02, the Director will pass upon and recommend to Council that the plat or
allotment, if otherwise conforming to the provisions of this chapter, be
approved.
CHAPTER 309 – SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
309.01   Platting Rules Adopted; Subdivision Defined
309.02   Plat Drawing Requirements
309.03   Terminals and Monuments
309.04   Surveyor’s Statement
309.05   Filing and Drawing Street Profiles
309.06   Certificate of Title to Dedicated Lands
309.07   Reserve Strips
309.08   Street Locations and Widths
309.09   Minimum Street Widths; Use of Alleys
309.10   Use of Intersecting Streets
309.11   Continuation of Existing Streets in New Allotments
309.12   Increased Street-Width Requirements
309.13   Use of Dead-End Streets
309.14   Street Extensions to Unallotted Property
309.15   Acquiring Property for Streets Outside Allotment
309.16   Grade Requirements; Monuments
309.17   Allotment Owner Responsible for Culverts, Bridges, Repaving, Etc.
309.18   Special Improvements for Streets
309.19   Water Connections in Sewerless Districts
309.20   Water and Sewerage Facilities Required for Plat Approval
309.21   Bond for Plat Approval
309.22   Disposition of Approved Plat
309.23   Acceptance of Streets
309.24   Territorial Jurisdiction
309.25   Reserved
309.26   Approval of Nonconforming Lots
309.28   Fee for Plan Review for Lot Splits and Lot Consolidations
Charter reference:
   Alteration of streets by Council, Charter §
174
   Effect of platting, Charter §
172
   Platting Commissioner’s powers and duties, Charter §
171
Cross-reference:
   Street dedication, CO
Ch. 307
   Underground electrical wiring required in new subdivisions, CO
521.10
Statutory reference:
   Plat acknowledgement and recording, RC 711.06
   Violation of rules and regulations, RC 711.102
§ 309.01 Platting Rules Adopted; Subdivision Defined
   (a)   The following rules and regulations relative to the platting of land
and the dedication of new streets to be shown on such plats heretofore approved
by the Platting Commissioner and the Planning Commission are hereby adopted and
promulgated.
   (b)   “Allotment” or “subdivision” are used in this chapter synonymously and
refer to any subdivision of land into either streets and lots or into lots, and
intended to be recorded as a plat.
(Ord. No. 72120. Passed 12-28-25)
§ 309.02 Plat Drawing Requirements
   The plat of a proposed subdivision shall be drawn in ink upon good quality
tracing cloth. It shall ordinarily be drawn to either the scale of one (1) inch
equals one hundred (100) feet, or one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet. All
dimensions shall be shown in feet and decimals of a foot. The plat shall be
complete and consistent in itself as to all measurements. The streets shown on
the plat shall be named as required by Chapter
305.
(Ord. No. 72120. Passed 12-28-25)
§ 309.03 Terminals and Monuments
   The plat shall show the location of the terminals of existing streets in
adjoining property, with such dimensions as are necessary to show their
relation to streets which are being dedicated by the plat. The plat shall show
the location of monuments placed on the ground to define street lines.
(Ord. No. 72120. Passed 12-28-25)
§ 309.04 Surveyor’s Statement
   The plat shall contain a statement from the surveyor preparing the same,
definitely identifying the land proposed to be dedicated to the public, as
provided by law.
(Ord. No. 72120. Passed 12-28-25)
§ 309.05 Filing and Drawing Street Profiles
   Profiles of the streets to be dedicated, showing existing surface elevation
and proposed grades of such streets, shall be filed with the Commissioner of
Engineering and Construction. Profiles shall be made upon cross section tracing
cloth to the scale of one (1) inch horizontal equals one hundred (100) feet and
one (1) inch vertical equals ten (10) feet. When required by the Platting
Commissioner a topographical map of the territory to be allotted shall be
furnished in addition to the street profiles.
(Ord. No. 72120. Passed 12-28-25)
§ 309.06 Certificate of Title to Dedicated Lands
   An abstract or certificate of title, meeting the approval of the Director of
Law, of the lands to be dedicated, shall be furnished to the City to become its
property.
(Ord. No. 72120. Passed 12-28-25)
§ 309.07 Reserve Strips
   No plat or map of a proposed street or allotment showing reserve strips
controlling access to public ways, or showing strips of land which will not
prove taxable for special improvements, will be approved. However, such reserve
strips may be shown when the control and disposal of land comprising such
strips are definitely placed with the City under conditions meeting the
approval of the Platting Commissioner and the Director of Law.
(Ord. No. 72120. Passed 12-28-25)
§ 309.08 Street Locations and Widths
   The location and widths of proposed streets shall be such as to fit in with
any plan of street development adopted by the Planning Commission. Due regard
shall be given to existing streets or streets capable of being established in
surrounding property so that streets may be laid out through adjacent or
neighboring allotments with reasonable continuity of location and width.
(Ord. No. 72120. Passed 12-28-25)
§ 309.09 Minimum Street Widths; Use of Alleys
   The minimum width of any proposed street shall be fifty (50) feet between
property lines, provided that in the subdivision of the property a minimum
depth of lots of one hundred (100) feet can be obtained. In narrow parcels
alongside of developed property, or where less width would be required in order
to secure lots one hundred (100) feet in depth, a narrower street may be
permitted upon the approval of the Planning Commission. Alleys, meaning streets
less than twenty (20) feet in width, may be laid out in the rear of lots
fronting on an adjoining street when such lots do not exceed one hundred fifty
(150) feet in depth. At the intersection of streets the rounding of corners may
be required.
(Ord. No. 72120. Passed 12-28-25)
§ 309.10 Use of Intersecting Streets
   Where practical, an intersecting street shall be provided, so that no block
will be longer than 1,000 feet.
(Ord. No. 72120. Passed 12-28-25)
§ 309.11 Continuation of Existing Streets in New Allotments
   In order that proposed streets may be so nearly coterminus as possible with
existing streets in adjoining allotments, due provision shall be made for the
direct continuation of all existing streets which extend to the boundaries of a
proposed allotment. In case of adjacent allotments, separated by existing
thoroughfares, due provisions shall be made for continuing, in a practical
manner, such of the existing streets through the proposed allotment as may be
necessary for public requirements, subject to the approval of Council, and
provided that in cases where there is a departure from the direct continuation
of such streets, Council shall be advised thereof in writing by the Platting
Commissioner, prior to the approval of the plat by Council.
(Ord. No. 72120. Passed 12-28-25)
§ 309.12 Increased Street-Width Requirements
   The Platting Commissioner may require wider streets than fifty (50) feet,
whenever in his or her judgment, provisions for public travel make the wider
street desirable, or wherever any general plan of street development adopted by
the Planning Commission requires the establishment of streets of greater width.
In general, streets of not less than one hundred (100) feet wide may be
required at intervals not greater than six thousand (6,000) feet, and streets
not less than eighty (80) feet wide, at intervals not greater than three
thousand (3,000) feet.
(Ord. No. 72120. Passed 12-28-25)
§ 309.13 Use of Dead-End Streets
   No so called dead-ended streets will be approved for dedication except where
physical conditions make the extension of such a street impractical. In such
cases a dead-end street may be approved, provided that adequate turning space
for vehicles is placed at the dead-end.
   Turning spaces shall be of sufficient size to provide for a paved circular
space of at least sixty (60) feet in diameter, or of a rectangular space
twenty-five (25) feet wide and eighty (80) feet long, having its eighty (80)
foot dimension placed symmetrically perpendicular to the line of the street,
both of such spaces being exclusive of any sidewalk space.
(Ord. No. 72120. Passed 12-28-25)
§ 309.14 Street Extensions to Unallotted Property
   Where the land for a proposed allotment adjoins unallotted property capable
of being allotted, then the streets in such proposed allotment need only be
carried to the boundaries thereof.
(Ord. No. 72120. Passed 12-28-25)
§ 309.15 Acquiring Property for Streets Outside Allotment
   Where, in order to comply with the requirements of the Planning Commission,
it is necessary to acquire property for a street outside of the boundaries of
the land to be allotted, the land required for the street may be acquired by
the City, but the expense thereof shall be borne by the owners of the
allotment.
(Ord. No. 72120. Passed 12-28-25)
§ 309.16 Grade Requirements; Monuments
   (a)   Before approval will be given upon any plat dedicating streets to
public use, except as hereinafter provided, the streets shall have been graded
to a grade approved by the Commissioner of Engineering and Construction, and
sidewalks shall have been constructed of stone or cement in accordance with the
City’s specifications, to a width meeting the approval of the Commissioner.
   (b)   Stone monuments, provided with drill holes, to indicate all street
lines, shall be placed at street intersections, at points of change of
alignment and at ends of streets, should the same not be at a street
intersection. The monuments shall be of suitable hard stone free from
ingredients likely to cause disintegration and shall be at least twenty (20)
inches in depth, five (5) inches wide and five (5) inches long. The monuments
shall be set so that their tops will be approximately ten (10) inches below the
established grade of the street.
(Ord. No. 72120. Passed 12-28-25)
§ 309.17 Allotment Owner Responsible for Culverts, Bridges, Repaving, Etc.
   All culverts or bridges necessary within the limits of the streets to be
dedicated, all box culverts and drainage outlets necessary to carry surface
drainage and all of the work necessary in the intersections of the proposed
streets, with existing street, including the repaving of such intersections and
providing catch basins at such locations, shall be done by the owner of the
proposed allotment, or land proposed for dedication, and all to the approval
and satisfaction of the Commissioner of Engineering and Construction.
(Ord. No. 72120. Passed 12-28-25)
§ 309.18 Special Improvements for Streets
   Special improvements such as sewer, water and paving, may be provided by
those dedicating the proposed streets, provided that such work is done in
accordance with the City’s standard specifications and ordinances governing
such work.
(Ord. No. 72120. Passed 12-28-25)
§ 309.19 Water Connections in Sewerless Districts
   Whenever, in any part of the City, there are no sewer facilities available,
no water connections will be made by the Division of Water to any property in
any such sewerless district, unless the Commissioner of Water has first
received the assurance in writing from the Commissioner of Engineering and
Construction, that the providing of sewerage is within reasonable prospect. In
the absence of such assurance, the Commissioner of Health may in special cases,
approve such water connections where the health and welfare of the public will
not be jeopardized by such action.
(Ord. No. 72120. Passed 12-28-25)
§ 309.20 Water and Sewerage Facilities Required for Plat Approval
   No plat of a proposed street or allotment will be entitled to the approval
of the Platting Commissioner unless it is possible to supply proper water and
sewage facilities thereon as a part of the existing or proposed water and
sewerage systems of the City.
(Ord. No. 72120. Passed 12-28-25)
§ 309.21 Bond for Plat Approval
   Should it not be desirable or possible to do all of the work herein required
to place proposed streets in acceptable condition prior to the submission of
the plat to Council for approval, provided that a suitable bond from an
approved surety company, acceptable to the Director of Law, is given to the
City, under the terms of which bond the completion of the work shall be assured
within the time fixed by such bond.
(Ord. No. 72120. Passed 12-28-25)
§ 309.22 Disposition of Approved Plat
   Any map or plat laying out streets or lots, when approved by the Platting
Commissioner, shall have such approval endorsed thereon, whereupon the map or
plat, after the approval by Council has been noted thereon, shall be retained
by the City until it is delivered to the County Recorder for record. All fees
required in connection with the recording of the map or plat shall be paid by
the property owners causing same to be made.
(Ord. No. 72120. Passed 12-28-25)
§ 309.23 Acceptance of Streets
   After the map or plat referred to in this chapter has been recorded and the
required improvements in a street are made, an ordinance accepting such a
street as a public thoroughfare may be passed by Council.
(Ord. No. 72120. Passed 12-28-25)
§ 309.24 Territorial Jurisdiction
   Sections
309.02 to
309.05,
309.08 to
309.14 and
309.22 shall apply to the approval of plats or maps of land lying outside of,
but within three (3) miles of the limits of the City of Cleveland, over which
the Planning Commission or the Platting Commissioner has platting control,
except that the plat of land not within the City need not be submitted to
Council and shall be delivered by the City to the County Surveyor after
approval.
(Ord. No. 72120. Passed 12-28-25)
§ 309.25 Reserved
§ 309.26 Approval of Nonconforming Lots
   In the case of an application to subdivide and/or consolidate land so as to
create a lot or lots which do not meet minimum lot area or lot width
requirements as established in the Zoning Code, the City Planning Commission
may approve such an application if it determines that the resulting lots will
be similar in area and width to lots which are common in the immediate vicinity
and further determines that such lots can be developed in a manner which will
not be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare.
(Ord. No. 2047-95. Passed 12-18-95, eff. 12-23-95)
§ 309.28 Fee for Plan Review for Lot Splits and Lot Consolidations
   Each application to the Platting Commissioner to begin the process for a lot
split or a lot consolidation shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) per plat.
(Ord. No. 2393-02. Passed 2-3-03, eff. 2-3-03)
TITLE V: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
   Chapter
311   Purpose and Scope
   Chapter
313   Initiation and Preparation Of Plan
   Chapter
315   Adoption Of Plan
   Chapter
317   Approval Of Plan
   Chapter
319   Plan Amendment
   Chapter
321   Administration Of Plan
   Chapter
323   Neighborhood Conservation
   Chapter
324   Elimination Of Spot Blight
CHAPTER 311 – PURPOSE AND SCOPE
311.01   Short Title
311.02   Purpose to Eliminate Deterioration
311.03   General Scope
311.04   The Workable Program for Community Improvements
Cross-reference:
   Conformity of community development plan to Workable Program, CO
313.05
   Conformity of neighborhood conservation plan to Workable Program, CO
323.05
   Determination of slum and blight, CO
313.02
   Duties of Commissioner of Community Development, CO
137.02
   Neighborhood conservation plan to prevent recurrence of substandard
conditions, CO
323.06
   Project agreement to prevent recurrence of slum and deterioration, CO
321.17
§ 311.01 Short Title
   This Title Five of Part Three – Public and Private Land Use Regulations of
the Codified Ordinances, shall be known as the “Community Development Code of
the City of Cleveland”, and is hereinafter sometimes referred to as “this
Code”.
(Ord. No. 1492-66. Passed 12-12-66, eff. 12-14-66)
§ 311.02 Purpose to Eliminate Deterioration
   Within the scope of this Code, the purpose of this Code is the development
and implementation of a program, within the framework of coordinated and
comprehensive planning for the elimination or prevention of slum, blight and
deterioration so as to preserve and protect the health, safety and welfare of
its inhabitants and to achieve the best urban environment for the efficient
social and economic functioning of the City.
(Ord. No. 1492-66. Passed 12-12-66, eff. 12-14-66)
§ 311.03 General Scope
   The provisions of this Code shall be supplementary to all other provisions
of these Codified Ordinances relating to the planned development,
redevelopment, renewal, rehabilitation and conservation of all areas of the
City. In the event of conflict between any other provisions of these Codified
Ordinances and the provisions of this Code, the provisions of this Code shall
prevail, as related to the functions of the Department of Community
Development.
(Ord. No. 1492-66. Passed 12-12-66, eff. 12-14-66)
§ 311.04 The Workable Program for Community Improvements
   (a)   The Workable Program for Community Improvements, adopted annually to
meet the requirements for Federal assistance in financing community development
projects in order to accomplish the purpose of community development, consists
of:
      (1)   Adequate building and occupancy codes and ordinances;
      (2)   A comprehensive community plan including land use plans, zoning and
subdivision plans for public improvements, thoroughfares, and community
facilities;
      (3)   Neighborhood analysis to determine the location and extent of
blight and recommendations for remedial action;
      (4)   Administrative organization to attack the problem of slums and
blight community-wide;
      (5)   Financing of needed facilities, enforcement of codes and zoning and
subdivision regulations and of needed trained personnel;
      (6)   Housing for displaced families; and
      (7)   Citizen participation in the program of eliminating slum blight.
   (b)   The essential planning, platting, zoning, building, housing, licensing
and nuisance abatement regulations as well as the necessary procedures to
promote a proper environment for adequate family life in the City are intended
to be provided under the separate chapters of these Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 1492-66. Passed 12-12-66, eff. 12-14-66)
CHAPTER 313 – INITIATION AND PREPARATION OF PLAN
313.01   Planning Commission to Prepare Community Development Plan
313.02   Determination of Slum and Blight
313.03   Contents of Community Development Plan
313.04   Rehabilitation or Conservation Defined
313.05   Conformity of Plan to General Plan and Workable Program
313.06   Provision to Prevent Recurrence of Blight or Substandard Areas and
Discrimination
313.07   Relocation of Displaced Families
Cross-reference:
   Amendments to plan; public hearing, CO
Ch. 319
   Contents of neighborhood conservation plan, CO
323.03
   Neighborhood conservation plan to prevent recurrence of substandard
conditions, CO
323.06
   Purpose and provisions of Workable Program for Community Improvements, CO
311.04
   Purpose of community development plan, CO
311.02
   Relocation of families displaced by neighborhood conservation plan, CO
323.07
§ 313.01 Planning Commission to Prepare Community Development Plan
   When the Planning Commission, as a result of investigation and study, at the
request of the Mayor or Council, or upon its own initiative, finds that there
exists a slum and blighted or deteriorating area within the City, it shall
prepare with the assistance of the Department of Community Development, a
community development plan for the area which shall be designated, “Community
Development Plan for Area”.
(Ord. No. 1492-66. Passed 12-12-66, eff. 12-14-66)
§ 313.02 Determination of Slum and Blight
   An area shall be determined to be a blighted or deteriorated area if:
   (a)   A preponderance of the structures therein is detrimental to the public
health, safety or welfare by reason of age, dilapidation, overcrowding, faulty
arrangement, lack of ventilation or sanitary facilities, or any combination of
these factors, and which is detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare
because a preponderance of structures within the area fails to conform in one
or more respects to the provisions of these Codified Ordinances relating to
building, housing and sanitation; or
   (b)   There is a preponderance of defective or inadequate street layout, or
faulty lot layout in relation to size, adequacy, accessibility or usefulness,
or unsanitary or unsafe conditions, or deterioration of site improvements, or
conditions which endanger life or property by fire or other causes. However, at
least twenty-five percent (25%) of the structures in the area must be
structurally deficient in the same manner and to the same extent as set forth
in subsection (a) hereof.
(Ord. No. 1492-66. Passed 12-12-66, eff. 12-14-66)
§ 313.03 Contents of Community Development Plan
   A community development plan adopted pursuant to the provisions of the
Charter and these Codified Ordinances may include clearance and redevelopment,
rehabilitation or conservation, or any combination or part thereof, and shall
include a land use plan showing thoroughfares and street right-of-way,
location, character and extent of public and private land ownership,
institutional or occupational public uses and use and occupancy purposes within
the area, including any contemplated public housing. The plan shall designate
areas of land acquisition, demolition and redevelopment of structures and of
rehabilitation and conservation as may be proposed to be carried out in the
plan, including a statement of methods and standards under which it is to be
accomplished and the necessary conditions to be applied in order to extend the
rehabilitation and conservation by the owners of existing properties. A
statement of the special conditions under which properties not designated for
acquisition may be acquired or under which properties identified to be acquired
may be exempted from acquisition, or both shall also be included. The plan or
its supporting documentation shall include a statement of the relationship of
the plan to definite objectives of the City respecting appropriate land uses,
improved traffic and transportation, public utilities, recreational and
community facilities and other public improvements.
(Ord. No. 1492-66. Passed 12-12-66, eff. 12-14-66)
§ 313.04 Rehabilitation or Conservation Defined
   “Rehabilitation” or “conservation”, as used in this chapter, may include but
shall not be limited to the restoration and renewal of a deteriorating area by
carrying out plans for a program of repair and rehabilitation of buildings or
other improvements in accordance with the community development plan, and the
purchase, repair and rehabilitation for guidance purposes and resale, and the
purchase, rehabilitation, repair and retention for rental purposes or resale,
and the purchase and resale for rehabilitation purposes by the City, of
buildings located in the community development area which, under the plan, are
to be repaired or rehabilitated for dwelling use or related facilities.
(Ord. No. 1492-66. Passed 12-12-66, eff. 12-14-66)
§ 313.05 Conformity of Plan to General Plan and Workable Program
   The community development plan for each community development area shall
conform to the General Plan of the City as adopted by official action of the
Planning Commission pursuant to Charter Section
76-2, and as the General Plan may be amended from time to time by the
Commission, and to the general development plan for the district of the City
within which the community development area lies, and with the Workable Program
for Community Improvement of the City for the elimination and prevention of
slums and blight.
(Ord. No. 1492-66. Passed 12-12-66, eff. 12-14-66)
§ 313.06 Provision to Prevent Recurrence of Blight or Substandard Areas and
Discrimination
   The community development plan shall include the provision that every
contract for the sale, lease, use, rehabilitation or redevelopment of the
property within such area shall contain such restrictions and conditions as are
deemed necessary to prevent a recurrence of blighted or substandard areas,
provided that no such restriction shall be based upon race, religion, color,
sex, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, national origin, age,
disability, ethnic group or Vietnam-era or disabled veteran status; shall
indicate what covenants, restrictions and conditions of such contracts shall be
covenants running with the land; shall provide appropriate remedies for any
breach of covenants or conditions; shall provide that each redevelopment
contract for the sale, lease, use or redevelopment of the property within such
area, and conveyance of land pursuant thereto shall contain conditions and
covenants which shall run with the land which shall provide that there shall be
no discrimination against or segregation of any person or group of persons
based upon race, religion, color, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity or
expression, national origin, age, disability, ethnic group or Vietnam-era or
disabled veteran status in the sale, lease, sublease, transfer, occupancy,
tenure or enjoyment of such land in perpetuity; and that such redevelopment
contracts and conveyances of land within the area shall contain a covenant that
no grantee himself or herself, or any person claiming under or through him or
her, shall establish or permit any such practice or discrimination or
segregation with reference to the selection, location, number or occupancy of
tenants, lessees, sublessees or vendees in any or all of the land within such
area.
(Ord. No. 1260-08. Passed 11-30-09, eff. 12-3-09)
§ 313.07 Relocation of Displaced Families
   The Division of Relocation and Property Management shall prepare, for
presentation and acceptance with the community development plan, a statement of
a feasible method for the relocation of families displaced from the development
area, and that there are or are being provided, in the development area or
other areas not less desirable in regard to public utilities and public and
commercial facilities and at rents or prices within the financial means of the
families to be displaced from the development area, decent, safe and sanitary
dwellings for such displaced families, which displacement shall be carried out
with a minimum of hardship to site occupants.
(Ord. No. 1492-66. Passed 12-12-66, eff. 12-14-66)
CHAPTER 315 – ADOPTION OF PLAN
315.01   General Requirements for Adoption
315.02   Public Hearing Required
315.03   Notice of Public Hearing
315.04   Exception to Notice Requirements
315.05   Contents of Notice
Cross-reference:
   Community development plan filed with Clerk of Council for public
inspection, CO
317.01
   Contents of community development plan, CO
313.03
   Public hearing for amendments to plan; notice, CO
319.03
   Public hearing for neighborhood conservation plan; notice, CO
323.09 et seq.
§ 315.01 General Requirements for Adoption
   The Planning Commission after at least one (1) public hearing held pursuant
to the provisions of the Charter and these Codified Ordinances, shall adopt the
community development plan for the area described therein.
(Ord. No. 1492-66. Passed 12-12-66, eff. 12-14-66)
§ 315.02 Public Hearing Required
   Prior to the adoption of a community development plan prepared pursuant to
the provisions of the Charter and these Codified Ordinances, the Planning
Commission shall hold at least one (1) public hearing at which any persons or
organization desiring to be heard will be afforded an opportunity to be heard
on the proposed plan. The public hearing may be adjourned from time to time
without further notice.
(Ord. No. 1492-66. Passed 12-12-66, eff. 12-14-66)
§ 315.03 Notice of Public Hearing
   The Planning Commission shall give notice of the public hearing required in
this chapter once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks in the City Record and
in at least one (1) newspaper of general circulation in the locality or in such
additional manner as may be required by regulation of the agency of the Federal
government concerned therewith, when Federal financial assistance is required,
which publication shall be commenced not less than fourteen (14) days prior to
the public hearing. However, within the proposed community development area,
neighborhood development area, in the instance of a parcel of land specifically
designated for treatment, which treatment may include but not be limited to
land acquisition, demolition or redevelopment of structures, site improvements
or any combination thereof, which parcel may be denominated as “action areas”,
a notice for the hearing shall be mailed to the last known owner of the parcel
of land or at the last known address of such owners as shown by the records of
the County Auditor not less than ten (10) days prior to the public hearing.
(Ord. No. 69-69. Passed 4-28-69, eff. 4-29-69)
§ 315.04 Exception to Notice Requirements
   Notwithstanding, and as an exception to the requirements set forth in
Section
315.03, with the exception of community development plans to be financed
pursuant to the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968, Public Law 90-448,
and as amended from time to time, the Planning Commission shall publish notice
as required in Section
315.03 and mail notice to the last known owner of each parcel of land in the
community development plan area.
(Ord. No. 353-69. Passed 4-28-69, eff. 4-29-69)
§ 315.05 Contents of Notice
   The notice published or mailed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
shall:
   (a)   Identify the public body which will hold the hearing and which will
undertake the project;
   (b)   State the date, time and place of the hearing;
   (c)   Identify the project area;
   (d)   State the purpose of the hearing;
   (e)   State that the required documents comprising the community development
plan and the relocation program are available for examination at the place or
places as designated in the notice;
   (f)   State that any persons or organization desiring to be heard will be
afforded an opportunity to be heard.
(Ord. No. 69-69. Passed 4-28-69, eff. 4-29-69)
CHAPTER 317 – APPROVAL OF PLAN
317.01   Filing Plan with Clerk of Council for Public Inspection
317.02   Contents of Ordinance to Approve Plan
317.03   Approval by Council is Authority for Expenditures
317.04   Enforcement of Standards and Controls in Plan
Cross-reference:
   Council’s approval of neighborhood conservation plan is authority for
expenditures, CO
323.14
   Public hearing prior to adoption of plan, CO
315.02 et seq.
   Public inspection of neighborhood conservation plan, CO
323.12
§ 317.01 Filing Plan with Clerk of Council for Public Inspection
   The community development plan adopted pursuant to the provisions of the
Charter and these Codified Ordinances shall be deposited with Council to be
received as a matter of permanent record, and filed with the Clerk of Council
to be made available for public inspection and information.
(Ord. No. 1492-66. Passed 12-12-66, eff. 12-14-66)
§ 317.02 Contents of Ordinance to Approve Plan
   Before the community development plan for any area shall become effective,
Council by ordinance shall approve the plan. The ordinance approving the plan
submitted by the Planning Commission shall include a finding and determination
that the area is a slum and blighted or deteriorating area; that the plan has
been adopted in compliance with the provisions of Chapter
315; is in conformity with the General Plan of the City and the Workable
Program for Community Improvements for the elimination and prevention of slums
and blight and with the requirements of Chapter
313; that the plan will afford maximum opportunity consistent with the sound
needs of the City as a whole for the rehabilitation, conservation or
redevelopment of the community development area by private enterprise; that the
financial aid, if any, to be provided by the Federal government is necessary to
the execution of the plan; that the plan gives due consideration to the
provision of adequate park and recreational area and facilities, as may be
desirable for neighborhood improvement, with special consideration for the
health, safety and welfare of children residing in the general vicinity of the
site covered by the plan; and that if Federal financial assistance is required,
such other findings as may be required by that agency of the Federal government
concerned therewith.
(Ord. No. 1492-66. Passed 12-12-66, eff. 12-14-66)
§ 317.03 Approval by Council is Authority for Expenditures
   A duly enacted ordinance of Council approving the plan submitted by the
Planning Commission in its original form or as amended by Council, shall
constitute the authority to expend general tax revenues, appropriated for such
purpose, the proceeds of bonds and notes authorized, and issued for such
purpose and to accept gifts, donations and grants from the Federal government,
the State, other public bodies or from any other entity or person.
(Ord. No. 1492-66. Passed 12-12-66, eff. 12-14-66)
§ 317.04 Enforcement of Standards and Controls in Plan
   With respect to any properties redeveloped, rehabilitated or to be
redeveloped or rehabilitated as set forth in the community development plan,
the standards and controls embodied in the plan, so adopted and approved, shall
be enforceable in the same manner as the ordinances of the City.
(Ord. No. 1492-66. Passed 12-12-66, eff. 12-14-66)
CHAPTER 319 – PLAN AMENDMENT
319.01   Authority of Planning Commission
319.02   Authority of Council
319.03   Conditions when Public Hearing and Notice Required
Cross-reference:
   Authority to amend neighborhood conservation plan, CO
323.15,
323.16
   Public hearing prior to adoption of plan; notice, CO
315.02 et seq.
   Public hearing to amend neighborhood conservation plan, CO
323.17
§ 319.01 Authority of Planning Commission
   The Planning Commission may amend, modify or change any community
development plan at any time; provided that such amendment, modification or
change is approved by Council, and provided that the plan may not be amended
with respect to any land previously conveyed by the City without the consent of
the property owner thereto.
(Ord. No. 1492-66. Passed 12-12-66, eff. 12-14-66)
§ 319.02 Authority of Council
   Council may amend, modify or change any community development plan at any
time provided that any applicable Charter provisions shall be complied with,
and provided that the plan may not be amended with respect to any land
previously conveyed by the City without the consent of the property owner
thereto.
(Ord. No. 1492-66. Passed 12-12-66, eff. 12-14-66)
§ 319.03 Conditions when Public Hearing and Notice Required
   When a community development plan is amended, modified or changed pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter and if the boundaries of the area are
extended, a public hearing shall be held after published or mailed notice, in
the same manner as for the original hearing, is given to property owners not
previously notified, and if there is added a new type of development activity
which requires the acquisition of property, a public hearing shall be held
after notice by publication in the same manner as for the original hearing.
(Ord. No. 69-69. Passed 4-28-69, eff. 4-29-69)
CHAPTER 321 – ADMINISTRATION OF PLAN
321.01   Department of Community Development – Designated Local Public Agency
321.02   Director of Community Development to Apply for Financial Assistance
321.03   Rental of Field Offices
321.04   Appraisal, Title, Professional Services and Negotiations
321.05   Evaluation of Relocation Payments and Direct Loss Claims
321.06   Collection of Delinquent Rents
321.07   Selection and Payment of Professional Consultants
321.08   Contracts for Demolition of Existing Buildings and Structures
321.09   Demolition of Unsafe Buildings
321.10   Owner’s Consent for Demolition
321.11   Payment for Demolition
321.12   Project Agreements
321.13   Advertisement for Bids
321.14   Contents of Advertisement
321.15   Basis of Award of Bid
321.16   Rehabilitation and Relocation Housing
321.17   Contents of Project Agreement
321.18   Conveyance of Premises
321.19   Project Agreement for Sites Not Acquired
321.20   Ratification of Prior Proceedings
Cross-reference:
   Council’s approval of community development plan is authority for
expenditures, CO
317.03
   Duties of Director of Community Development, CO
137.02
   Enforcement of standards and controls in plan, CO
317.04
   Neighborhood conservation area designation, CO
323.02
   Neighborhood conservation plan to prevent recurrence of substandard
conditions, CO
323.06
§ 321.01 Department of Community Development – Designated Local Public Agency
   The Department of Community Development is hereby designated the local
public agency, for the purpose of exercising the powers of the City relating to
urban redevelopment, renewal, development, rehabilitation and conservation, not
required by the Charter or these Codified Ordinances to be exercised by Council
or by any other officer, office or department of the City, necessary to be
exercised in the performance of any obligation assumed pursuant to an agreement
with the Federal government, or any other public or private agency, for the
elimination of slums and the renewal and prevention of conditions of blight or
deterioration within the City.
(Ord. No. 1492-66. Passed 12-12-66, eff. 12-14-66)
§ 321.02 Director of Community Development to Apply for Financial Assistance
   The Department of Community Development shall administer the plan adopted
and approved as provided in the Charter and these Codified Ordinances. If the
ordinance approving the plan finds that assistance of the Federal government or
other public agency is necessary to enable the project to be undertaken,
including, but not limited to, the financing of the costs of acquisition,
clearance and site improvement of the land within the development area in
accordance with the plan, the Director of Community Development shall have
authority to make application to such agency for financial assistance and to do
and perform such things and acts as may be necessary for such purposes.
(Ord. No. 1492-66. Passed 12-12-66, eff. 12-14-66)
§ 321.03 Rental of Field Offices
   When the Director of Community Development determines the necessity of
establishing a field office within a project area, he or she may,
notwithstanding the provisions of other sections of these Codified Ordinances,
and as an exception thereto, enter into a rental agreement for such purpose for
a period not exceeding one hundred twenty (120) days and not subject to renewal
in an amount not in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for such period,
the cost of which shall be charged against the community development project
for the area.
(Ord. No. 1492-66. Passed 12-12-66, eff. 12-14-66)
§ 321.04 Appraisal, Title, Professional Services and Negotiations
   It is hereby determined that in the planning or execution of a community
development project it is necessary to obtain appraisals of land values, title
services and other professional services to ascertain ownership of land, to
prepare and make sites available for redevelopment or rehabilitation and
negotiations to purchase lands in community development project areas. The
Director of Community Development is hereby authorized and directed to enter
into one (1) or more written contracts for the employment of one (1) or more
persons or firms for the purpose of furnishing professional appraisal, re-use
appraisal, title services and such other professional services necessary to
make sites available for redevelopment or rehabilitation not directly connected
with the acquisition of land. The Director of Law is hereby authorized and
directed under the same terms and conditions to enter into one (1) or more
written contracts for the employment of one (1) or more persons or firms for
the purpose of furnishing appraisal, title and negotiating services for the
purchase of land in a community development area.
(Ord. No. 1492-66. Passed 12-12-66, eff. 12-14-66)
§ 321.05 Evaluation of Relocation Payments and Direct Loss Claims
   When in the administration of a community development project in which
relocation payments are to be made and when the total of the actual moving
expenses incurred or to be incurred by an eligible business concern is in
excess of, or estimated to be in excess of, three thousand dollars ($3,000.00)
by the Commissioner of Relocation and Property Management or when a direct loss
claim is made by the business concern, the Director of Community Development
may enter into one (1) or more written contracts for the employment of one (1)
or more persons or firms for the purpose of furnishing professional services
that cannot be supplied by the regularly employed personnel of the City, to
provide competent, technical evaluation of the claim for relocation payments or
of direct loss of property.
(Ord. No. 1492-66. Passed 12-12-66, eff. 12-14-66)
§ 321.06 Collection of Delinquent Rents
   The Commissioner of Relocation and Property Management is authorized to
deduct delinquent rent from any relocation benefit or payment due in the
implementation of a property management and relocation plan for a community
development project or a rehabilitation project.
(Ord. No. 815-75. Passed 6-30-75, eff. 7-5-75)
§ 321.07 Selection and Payment of Professional Consultants
   The selection of the persons or firms to be employed, pursuant to the
provisions of Sections
321.04 and
321.05 shall be made by the Board of Control, from a list of qualified persons
or firms available for such employment, as may be determined after canvass by
the appropriate director for purposes of compiling such a list. Contracts shall
be prepared by the Director of Law, executed on behalf of the City by the
authorized director and paid from the community development project account
within which the property is located.
(Ord. No. 1492-66. Passed 12-12-66, eff. 12-14-66)
§ 321.08 Contracts for Demolition of Existing Buildings and Structures
   It is hereby determined that the public improvement of the site clearance by
the demolition of existing buildings and structures upon lands acquired, or in
the process of being acquired, pursuant to the plan for the development,
renewal, rehabilitation or conservation of an area in the City, shall be made
by contract duly let to the lowest responsible bidder after competitive bidding
for a gross price in accordance with the provisions of the Charter and these
Codified Ordinances. More than one (1) building, structure or premises may be
included in the invitation to bid, and in such event, the bidder shall be asked
to submit a proposal on each, all or any combination thereof. The
specifications for such work shall provide that no building or structure shall
be removed from the premises in whole or in substantially whole condition but
shall be demolished on the premises, that the bidder shall furnish evidence of
sufficient equipment and personnel for the speedy performance of the work, that
the time for completion of the work shall be fixed by the City and that the
City reserves the right to limit the number of contracts awarded to any one (1)
bidder in order to insure the speedy completion of the site clearance of any
such area. The Director of Community Development is hereby authorized and
directed to enter into such contracts as are awarded by the Board of Control in
conformity herewith.
(Ord. No. 1492-66. Passed 12-12-66, eff. 12-14-66)
§ 321.09 Demolition of Unsafe Buildings
   Any building or structure within a community development area upon premises
included in the program of acquisition by the City pursuant to a community
development plan adopted and approved, which constitutes a hazard to the public
health and safety by reason of noncompliance with the provisions of these
Codified Ordinances relating to building and housing, or by reason of non-
occupancy, abandonment or otherwise shall be demolished in the manner
prescribed in Section
321.08.
(Ord. No. 1492-66. Passed 12-12-66, eff. 12-14-66)
§ 321.10 Owner’s Consent for Demolition
   Before proceeding to demolish any such building or structure as described in
Section
321.09, the Department of Community Development shall attempt to secure the
consent of the owner of such building or structure to such demolition, which
shall be evidenced by an instrument in writing approved by the Director of Law.
However, if such consent is not obtained, the facts shall be presented to
Council for determination by Council that such building or structure
constitutes a nuisance prejudicial to the public health and safety, requiring
abatement thereof by the demolition of such building or structure, which
demolition shall be accomplished as provided in Section
321.08.
(Ord. No. 1492-66. Passed 12-12-66, eff. 12-14-66)
§ 321.11 Payment for Demolition
   The cost and expense of demolition, pursuant to Sections
321.08 to
321.10, shall be paid out of the funds provided for the prosecution of the
community development plan for the area involved.
(Ord. No. 1492-66. Passed 12-12-66, eff. 12-14-66)
§ 321.12 Project Agreements
   When in the prosecution of a community development plan, adopted and
approved in accordance with the Charter and these Codified Ordinances, the
Director of Community Development determines that project agreements be entered
into for the sale and redevelopment or rehabilitation of a site acquired or to
be acquired within the community development area, the Director shall seek
redevelopment or rehabilitation proposals, by direct negotiations, from persons
or organizations desiring to redevelop or rehabilitate the site in conformity
with the community development plan, or the Director shall seek competitive
bids for such redevelopment or rehabilitation proposals.
(Ord. No. 435-71. Passed 5-10-71, eff. 5-17-71)
§ 321.13 Advertisement for Bids
   In the event that competitive bids for redevelopment or rehabilitation are
to be sought pursuant to Section
321.12, the Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies, at the request of the
Director of Community Development and at the direction of the Board of Control,
shall advertise for bids for the redevelopment or rehabilitation of the
specific site designated by the Director for two (2) consecutive weeks in the
City Record and such other times and in such other media as the Board, and in a
Federally assisted project, as the United States government, may require.
(Ord. No. 1492-66. Passed 12-12-66, eff. 12-14-66)
§ 321.14 Contents of Advertisement
   The advertisement required in Section
321.13 shall state that the bidder will agree to redevelop or rehabilitate the
site in such manner as will best carry out the intention of the community
development plan for such area, and shall require that the successful bidder
shall enter into a project agreement with the City in which the bidder shall
agree, in addition to such other terms and conditions as may be required by the
Board of Control, and in Federally assisted projects, the agency of the United
States government concerned therewith, to develop the land which he or she will
purchase thereunder or rehabilitate the property acquired, for such uses only
as permitted in the community development plan for the area. Such advertisement
shall further specify a fixed price for the sale of the proposed site or shall
leave the price for such sale a matter of competition between bidders, as
determined by the Board. In no event, in Federally assisted projects, shall the
price be less than the minimum fixed by re-use appraisal as approved by the
agency of the United States government concerned therewith.
(Ord. No. 1492-66. Passed 12-12-66, eff. 12-14-66)
§ 321.15 Basis of Award of Bid
   The project agreement and the site concerned shall be awarded on the basis
of the bid or the negotiated proposal by the Board of Control to the person or
organization who in the opinion of the Board will best carry out the intent of
the adopted and approved community development plan and which provides the best
use of the redevelopment or rehabilitation site as contemplated by the plan,
subject, however, to the review and approval by Council of any negotiated
proposal prior to any such award by the Board, and in Federally assisted
projects, subject to final approval by that agency of the United States
government concerned therewith.
(Ord. No. 1492-66. Passed 12-12-66, eff. 12-14-66)
§ 321.16 Rehabilitation and Relocation Housing
   When in the prosecution of a community development plan, adopted and
approved as provided in these Codified Ordinances, the Director of Community
Development determines that properties acquired by the City, to be
rehabilitated, or which have been rehabilitated, are needed to supply rental
housing for persons or families displaced by governmental action in the City,
such properties may be sold by direct sale to nonprofit corporations or such
limited distribution entities to whom Federal financing or Federally insured
financing would be available for the purposes hereof, at a price determined by
the Board of Control to be the fair re-use value based on two (2) independent
re-use appraisals, subject however, to the review and approval by Council of
any such sale prior to the authorization thereof by the Board, and in Federally
assisted projects, concurred in by that agency of the Federal government
concerned therewith. The conditions of sale, in addition to such other
conditions required in Section
321.17, that the purchasers shall rehabilitate the structures so purchased to
the rehabilitation standards of the community development plan, or if
rehabilitated by the City shall be maintained to the standards, and shall be
used for the primary purpose of supplying rental housing for persons or
families displaced by governmental action in the City.
(Ord. No. 1492-66. Passed 12-12-66, eff. 12-14-66)
§ 321.17 Contents of Project Agreement
   When authorized by the Board of Control as provided in Sections
321.15 and
321.16, the Director of Community Development shall enter into a project
agreement for the sale and development or rehabilitation of sites in the
community development project for and on behalf of the City, with the proposed
purchaser, which agreement shall contain among other things such restrictions
and covenants running with the land as set forth in the community development
plan adopted and approved in accordance with Chapters
315 and
317, and which will prevent a recurrence of slum, blighted or deteriorating
conditions, provided that no such restrictions shall be based upon race,
religion, color, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression,
national origin, age, disability, ethnic group or Vietnam-era or disabled
veteran status; shall provide appropriate remedies for any breach of the
covenants or conditions; and shall be prepared by the Director of Law and
contain such other conditions as may be required by the Board of Control and,
in Federally assisted projects, by the United States government.
(Ord. No. 1445-13. Passed 11-17-14, eff. 11-19-14)
§ 321.18 Conveyance of Premises
   The premises set forth as the development or rehabilitation site in the
project agreement shall, upon payment of the price negotiated, fixed or bid,
which price shall be determined by the Board of Control to be the fair re-use
value of the site based upon two (2) independent re-use appraisals and, in
Federally assisted projects, concurred in by the United States government, and
after compliance with the terms of the project agreement which must be met
prior to conveyance, be conveyed by official deed of the City, prepared by the
Director of Law and executed by the Mayor, in conformity with the terms and
conditions of the project agreement.
(Ord. No. 1492-66. Passed 12-12-66, eff. 12-14-66)
§ 321.19 Project Agreement for Sites Not Acquired
   When in the prosecution of a community development plan adopted and approved
as provided in Chapters 315 and 317, it is determined by the Board of Control
that it is necessary that project agreements be entered into for the
redevelopment or rehabilitation of a site or sites located within a community
development area, not yet acquired or not to be acquired by the City, the
Department of Community Development shall proceed as follows:
   (a)   No permits for construction or rehabilitation of any structure on a
site within such community development area shall be issued unless and until
the owner thereof has entered into a project agreement with the City in which
the owner shall agree, in addition to such other terms and conditions as may be
required by the Board, and in Federally assisted projects, that agency of the
United States government concerned therewith, to develop or rehabilitate the
site for such uses only as are permitted in the community development plan for
the area.
   (b)   The project agreement shall be executed by the Director of Community
Development on behalf of the City pursuant to a resolution of the Board, which
agreement shall be prepared by the Director of Law, and in Federally assisted
projects, approved by that agency of the United States government concerned
therewith.
(Ord. No. 1492-66. Passed 12-12-66, eff. 12-14-66)
§ 321.20 Ratification of Prior Proceedings
   Any and all proceedings heretofore had with reference to the determination
of the existence of slum and blighted areas, and the administration of the
procedures for the elimination of blight and slum conditions and the
rehabilitation and conservation of deteriorated and deteriorating areas in
order to prevent the recurrence or spread of such conditions of blight and
deterioration, under act and pursuant to ordinances and resolutions previously
enacted by Council, are hereby ratified, approved and confirmed. All
obligations incurred by, and rights accruing to the former Department of Urban
Renewal and Housing under authorization previously granted by Council shall be
and are hereby assumed by and transferred to the Department of Community
Development. All further proceedings relating to these and other pending
matters concerning community development areas and community development plans
and the redevelopment, rehabilitation and conservation programs within the
areas and in the plans shall be governed by the applicable provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. No. 1492-66. Passed 12-12-66, eff. 12-14-66)
CHAPTER 323 – NEIGHBORHOOD CONSERVATION
323.01   Neighborhood Conservation Plan
323.02   Criteria for Designation as Neighborhood Conservation Area
323.03   Contents of Neighborhood Conservation Plan
323.04   Rehabilitation and Conservation Defined
323.05   Conformity of Neighborhood Conservation Plan to General Plan and
Workable Program
323.06   Provision to Prevent Recurrence of Substandard Housing, Building and
Sanitary Conditions and Discrimination
323.07   Relocation of Displaced Families
323.08   Adoption of Plan
323.09   Public Hearing Required Before Plan Adopted
323.10   Notice of Hearing
323.11   Contents of Notice
323.12   Filing of Plan with Clerk of Council for Public Inspection
323.13   Contents of Ordinance to Approve Plan
323.14   Approval by Council is Authority for Expenditures
323.15   Amendment Authority of the Department of Community Development
323.16   Amendment Authority of Council
323.17   When Public Hearing and Notice Required
323.18   Administration of Neighborhood Conservation Plan
Cross-reference:
   Amending community development plan, CO
Ch. 319
   Community development plan filed with Clerk of Council for public
inspection, CO
317.01
   Determination of slum and blight, CO
313.02
   Evaluation of relocation payments for community development project, CO
321.05
   Project agreement for community development to prevent recurrence of slum
and deterioration, CO
321.17
   Public hearing for community development plan; notice, CO
315.02 et seq.
   Rehabilitation and location housing for community development project, CO
321.16
   Workable Program for Community Improvements, CO
311.04
§ 323.01 Neighborhood Conservation Plan
   When the Department of Community Development, as a result of investigation
and study, at the request of the Mayor or Council, or upon its own initiative
finds that there exists an area of the City which meets the criteria set forth
in Section
323.02, it shall prepare with the assistance of the Planning Commission, a plan
for that “Neighborhood Conservation Area” which shall be designated
“Neighborhood Conservation Plan”.
(Ord. No. 1426-75. Passed 6-23-75, eff. 6-26-75)
§ 323.02 Criteria for Designation as Neighborhood Conservation Area
   An area may qualify for designation as a neighborhood conservation area if
the following requirements are met:
   (a)   A preponderance of the structures in the area must be in violation in
at least one (1) instance of the provisions of these Codified Ordinances
relating to housing or building, which violation is determined by the
Commissioner of Housing or the Commissioner of Building to be a major
structural, electrical, heating or plumbing violation, or must be in violation
in at least three (3) instances of the provisions of these Codified Ordinances
relating to housing, building or sanitation;
   (b)   At least sixty-five percent (65%) of the structures in the area must
be residential in nature; and
   (c)   The area shall be an area in which the deteriorated conditions can be
alleviated by a plan the predominant feature of which is rehabilitation.
(Ord. No. 1426-75. Passed 6-23-75, eff. 6-26-75)
§ 323.03 Contents of Neighborhood Conservation Plan
   A neighborhood conservation plan adopted pursuant to the provisions of the
Charter and these Codified Ordinances may include limited acquisition and
clearance, planning services relevant to rehabilitation and conservation and
the provision for direct or indirect financing of such rehabilitation and
conservation or any combination or part thereof, and shall include a land use
plan showing thoroughfares and rights of way, location, character and extent of
public and private land ownership, institutional or occupational public uses,
use and occupancy purposes within the area, including any contemplated public
housing.
   The plan shall designate the area of rehabilitation and conservation as may
be proposed to be carried out in the plan, including a statement of methods and
standards under which it is to be accomplished and the necessary conditions to
be applied in order to extend the rehabilitation and conservation by the owners
of existing properties, and a statement of the special conditions under which
properties may be acquired. The plan or its supporting documentation shall
include a statement of the relationship of the plan to definite objectives of
the City respecting appropriate land uses, improved traffic and transportation,
public utilities, recreational and community facilities and other public
improvements.
(Ord. No. 1426-75. Passed 6-23-75, eff. 6-26-75)
§ 323.04 Rehabilitation and Conservation Defined
   “Rehabilitation” and “conservation”, as used in this chapter, may include
but shall not be limited to the restoration and renewal of an area or
individual structures within an area or by carrying out plans for a program of
repair and rehabilitation of buildings or other improvements, including the
direct or indirect financing of the restoration or renewal, and the limited
purchase repair and rehabilitation for guidance purposes and resale, and the
purchase, rehabilitation, repair and retention for rental purposes or resale,
and the purchase and resale for rehabilitation purposes by the City of
structures located in the neighborhood conservation area which, under the plan,
are to be repaired or rehabilitated for dwelling use or related facilities.
(Ord. No. 1426-75. Passed 6-23-75, eff. 6-26-75)
§ 323.05 Conformity of Neighborhood Conservation Plan to General Plan and
Workable Program
   The neighborhood conservation plan for such neighborhood conservation area
shall conform to the general plan of Cleveland as adopted by official action of
the Planning Commission pursuant to Charter Section
76-2 and as the general plan may be amended from time to time by the
Commission, and to the general development plan for the district of the City
within which the neighborhood conservation area lies.
(Ord. No. 1426-75. Passed 6-23-75, eff. 6-26-75)
§ 323.06 Provision to Prevent Recurrence of Substandard Housing, Building and
Sanitary Conditions and Discrimination
   The neighborhood conservation plan shall include provisions that every
contract for the sale, lease, use, rehabilitation or redevelopment of the
property within such area shall contain such restrictions and conditions as are
deemed necessary to prevent a recurrence of blighted or substandard areas,
provided that no such restriction shall be based upon race, religion, color,
sex, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, national origin, age,
disability, ethnic group or Vietnam-era or disabled veteran status, shall
indicate what covenants, restrictions and conditions of such contracts shall be
covenants running with the land and shall provide appropriate remedies for any
breach of the covenants or conditions.
(Ord. No. 1260-08. Passed 11-30-09, eff. 12-3-09)
§ 323.07 Relocation of Displaced Families
   The Division of Relocation and Property Management shall prepare, for
presentation and acceptance with the neighborhood conservation plan, a
statement of a feasible method for the relocation of families displaced from
the area, and that there are or are being provided, in the area or other areas
not less desirable in regard to public utilities and public and commercial
facilities and at rents or prices within the financial means of the families to
be displaced from the development area, decent, safe and sanitary dwellings for
such displaced families, which displacement shall be carried out with a minimum
of hardship to site occupants.
(Ord. No. 1426-75. Passed 6-23-75, eff. 6-26-75)
§ 323.08 Adoption of Plan
   The Department of Community Development in conjunction with the Planning
Commission after at least one (1) public hearing held pursuant to the
provisions of the Charter and these Codified Ordinances, shall adopt the
neighborhood conservation plan for the area described therein.
(Ord. No. 1426-75. Passed 6-23-75, eff. 6-26-75)
§ 323.09 Public Hearing Required Before Plan Adopted
   Prior to the adoption of a neighborhood conservation plan prepared pursuant
to the provisions of the Charter and these Codified Ordinances, the Department
of Community Development shall hold at least one (1) public hearing at which
any persons or organizations desiring to be heard will be afforded an
opportunity to be heard on the proposed neighborhood conservation plan. The
public hearing may be adjourned from time to time without further notice.
(Ord. No. 1426-75. Passed 6-23-75, eff. 6-26-75)
§ 323.10 Notice of Hearing
   The Department of Community Development shall give notice of the public
hearing required in this chapter once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks in
the City Record and in at least one (1) newspaper of general circulation in the
locality or in such additional manner as may be required, by regulation of the
agency of the Federal government concerned therewith, when Federal financial
assistance is required, which publication shall be commenced not less than
fourteen (14) days prior to the proposed hearing. However, within the proposed
neighborhood conservation area in the instance of a parcel of land specifically
designated for treatment, which treatment may include but not be limited to
land acquisition, demolition or redevelopment of structures, site improvements
or any combination thereof, a notice for the hearing shall be mailed to the
last known owner of the parcel of land or to the last known address of such
owners as shown by the records of the County Auditor not less than the ten (10)
days prior to the public hearing.
(Ord. No. 1426-75. Passed 6-23-75, eff. 6-26-75)
§ 323.11 Contents of Notice
   The notice published or mailed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
shall:
   (a)   Identify the public body which will hold the hearing and which will
undertake the project;
   (b)   State the date, time and place of the hearing;
   (c)   Identify the project area;
   (d)   State the purpose of the hearing;
   (e)   State that the required documents comprising the neighborhood
conservation plan and the relocation program are available for examination at
the place as designated in the notice;
   (f)   State that any persons or organization desiring to be heard will be
afforded an opportunity to be heard.
(Ord. No. 1426-75. Passed 6-23-75, eff. 6-26-75)
§ 323.12 Filing of Plan with Clerk of Council for Public Inspection
   The neighborhood conservation plan adopted pursuant to the provisions of the
Charter and these Codified Ordinances shall be deposited with Council to be
received as a matter of permanent record, and filed with the Clerk of Council
to be made available for public inspection and information.
(Ord. No. 1426-75. Passed 6-23-75, eff. 6-26-75)
§ 323.13 Contents of Ordinance to Approve Plan
   Before the neighborhood conservation plan for any area shall become
effective Council by ordinance shall approve the plan. The ordinance approving
the plan submitted by the Department of Community Development shall include a
finding and determination that the plan has been adopted in compliance with the
provisions of Sections
323.08 to
323.11; is in conformity with the general plan of the City and the workable
program for community improvement for the elimination and prevention of slums
and blight and with the requirements of Section
323.01 to
323.07; that the plan will afford maximum opportunity consistent with the sound
needs of the City as a whole for the rehabilitation, conservation or
redevelopment of the neighborhood conservation area by private enterprise; that
the financial aid, if any, to be provided by the Federal government is
necessary to the execution of the plan; that the plan gives due consideration
to the provision of adequate park and recreational area and facilities, as may
be desirable for neighborhood improvement, with special consideration for the
health, safety, and welfare of children residing in the general vicinity of the
site covered by the plan and that if Federal financial assistance is required,
such other findings by that agency of the Federal government concerned
therewith.
(Ord. No. 1426-75. Passed 6-23-75, eff. 6-26-75)
§ 323.14 Approval by Council is Authority for Expenditures
   A duly enacted ordinance of Council approving the plan submitted by the
Department of Community Development in its original form or as amended by
Council, shall constitute the authority to expend general tax revenues,
appropriated for such purpose, the proceeds of bonds and notes authorized and
issued for such purpose and accept gifts, donations and grants from the Federal
government, the State, other public bodies or from any other entity or person.
(Ord. No. 1426-75. Passed 6-23-75, eff. 6-26-75)
§ 323.15 Amendment Authority of the Department of Community Development
   The Department of Community Development may amend, modify or change any
neighborhood conservation plan at any time; provided that such amendment,
modification or change is approved by Council, and provided that the plan may
not be amended with respect to any land previously conveyed by the City without
the consent of the property owner thereto.
(Ord. No. 1426-75. Passed 6-23-75, eff. 6-26-75)
§ 323.16 Amendment Authority of Council
   Council may amend, modify or change any neighborhood conservation plan at
any time provided that all applicable Charter provisions shall be complied
with, and provided that the plan may not be amended with respect to any land
previously conveyed by the City without the consent of the property owner
thereto.
(Ord. No. 1426-75. Passed 6-23-75, eff. 6-26-75)
§ 323.17 When Public Hearing and Notice Required
   When a neighborhood conservation plan is amended, modified or changed
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and if the boundaries of the area
are extended, a public hearing shall be held after notice is published or
mailed, in the same manner as for the original hearing, to property owners not
previously notified, and if a new type of development activity is added which
requires the acquisition of property, a public hearing shall be held after
notice by publication in the same manner as for the original hearing.
(Ord. No. 1426-75. Passed 6-23-75, eff. 6-26-75)
§ 323.18 Administration of Neighborhood Conservation Plan
   Such plan shall be administered, where applicable, as set forth in Sections
321.01 to
321.09 and the officers and employees of the City charged with the
responsibilities, duties and authority to carry out community development plans
shall have the same authority, responsibilities and duties in administering a
neighborhood conservation plan.
(Ord. No. 1426-75. Passed 6-23-75, eff. 6-26-75)
CHAPTER 324 – ELIMINATION OF SPOT BLIGHT
324.01   Legislative Finding
324.02   Definitions
324.03   Blighted premises
324.04   Neighborhood
324.05   Redevelopment
324.06   Rehabilitation
324.07   Determination of Blighted Premises
324.08   Public Hearing
324.09   Procedure
324.10   Legislative Determination
324.11   Acquisition and Blight Elimination by City
324.12   Terms of Sale; Prohibition of Recurrence of Blight
324.13   Finances
324.14   Consultation with Neighborhood Organizations
324.15   Provisions of this Chapter not Limitation
324.16   Unconstitutionality
§ 324.01 Legislative Finding
   It is hereby found and determined that there exist within the City of
Cleveland premises that by reason of age, obsolescence, dilapidation,
deterioration, lack of maintenance or repair or the occurrence of drug
offenses, prostitution, gambling and other criminal acts which constitute
public nuisances at the premises or a combination thereof constitute a blight
and a nuisance upon the surrounding neighborhood because such premises are fire
hazards, health hazards, places of retreat for immoral or criminal purposes or
for the breach of the public peace, substantial and unreasonable interferences
with the reasonable and lawful use and enjoyment of other premises in the
neighborhood, or factors seriously depreciating property values in the area. It
is further found that programs aimed at specific elimination of the particular
blights or nuisances involved in neighborhoods of the City of Cleveland have
sometimes proven inadequate or ineffective, have sometimes failed to prevent
recurrence of the nuisance or blight, and have sometimes resulted merely in the
alteration of the nature or form of the nuisance or blight that previously
existed. It is further found that it therefore becomes necessary in order to
eliminate nuisance and blight and prevent recurrence of blight on the premises
for the City to obtain the title of the blighted premises and to take direct
action to remove the blight or provide for its removal by others and to make
further provisions for future development, redevelopment or use of the premises
in such a way as to prevent any recurrence of blight or nuisance on the
premises. It is further found and determined that acquisition of such blighted
property by the City in order to eliminate blight or nuisance and to prevent
its recurrence constitutes a public purpose.
(Ord. No. 1444-A-88. Passed 6-18-90, eff. 6-27-90)
§ 324.02 Definitions
   For the purpose of this chapter, the words and phrases defined in the
sections hereunder shall have the meanings therein respectively ascribed to
them, unless a different meaning is clearly indicated by the context.
(Ord. No. 1444-A-88. Passed 6-18-90, eff. 6-27-90)
§ 324.03 Blighted premises
   “Blighted premises” shall mean premises which because of their age,
obsolescence, dilapidation, deterioration, lack of maintenance or repair or
occurrence of drug offenses, prostitution, gambling and other criminal acts
which constitute public nuisances at the premises or any combination thereof,
including the ineffectiveness of House Code enforcement after lawfully issued
citations or violation notices, constitute an apparent fire hazard, place of
retreat for immoral and criminal purposes constituting a public nuisance or
repeated and serious breaches of the peace, health hazard, public safety hazard
or any combination thereof; an unreasonable interference with the reasonable
and lawful use and enjoyment of other premises within the neighborhood; or a
factor seriously depreciating property values in the neighborhood.
(Ord. No. 1444-A-88. Passed 6-18-90, eff. 6-27-90)
§ 324.04 Neighborhood
   “Neighborhood” shall mean an area of the City comprised of all premises or
parcels of land which in whole or in part are located within a radius of three
hundred (300) feet of any one (1) parcel or lot within the City.
(Ord. No. 1444-A-88. Passed 6-18-90, eff. 6-27-90)
§ 324.05 Redevelopment
   “Redevelopment” shall mean the acquisition of blighted premises, the
demolition of a structure or structures thereon, the making of site
improvements, including construction or reconstruction thereon, or the sale of
property for use in accordance with the City’s Public and Private Land Use
Regulation Code, Part Three of the Codified Ordinances of Cleveland, Ohio,
1976. Redevelopment may include the construction or improvement by the City of
any buildings for public use or for resale to private persons.
(Ord. No. 1444-A-88. Passed 6-18-90, eff. 6-27-90)
§ 324.06 Rehabilitation
   “Rehabilitation” shall mean the restoration, rehabilitation, or conservation
of blighted premises by improvement, modernization or repair of a structure or
structures thereon to bring it into conformance with applicable Housing,
Building and Zoning Code provisions of the City of Cleveland or the elimination
of criminal activity constituting a public nuisance at the premises or any
combination thereof.
(Ord. No. 1444-A-88. Passed 6-18-90, eff. 6-27-90)
§ 324.07 Determination of Blighted Premises
   (a)   The Director of Community Development, the Director of Public Safety
or the Director of Public Health and Welfare or any combination thereof, with
the consent of the member or members of Council in whose ward(s) the premises
is located, who may use a community based group located in the ward where the
premises is located to consent to the legislation, shall present to Council,
from time to time and as circumstances warrant, legislation which shall list
therein the location and ownership of premises which said director or directors
has reason to believe are blighted premises and which are located within the
City of Cleveland but outside of areas of the City designated by the other
chapters contained in this Community Development Code of the City of Cleveland,
or outside of Business Revitalization districts in which the application of
provisions contained in Chapter
324 are prohibited by supplemental guidelines, standards or plans promulgated
and approved pursuant to Section
303.09 of the Codified Ordinances. The legislation shall state briefly the
factors which would warrant the determination that the premises so listed in
the legislation are blighted. The premises so listed in the legislation shall
be only those blighted premises which, in the opinion of the Director, are such
that, in order to eliminate the existing blight and to prevent future blight,
acquisition thereof will be necessary for one (1) or more of the following
reasons which shall be stated in the legislation:
      (1)   The owner of the blighted premises cannot or will not:
         A.   Eliminate the blighted condition; and/or
         B.   Prevent recurrence of the blighted condition.
      (2)   The owner of the blighted premises has not responded to a lawful
order by the City to take action to eliminate its recurrence within thirty (30)
days after due notice of the request or order has been given by:
         A.   Posting such order or notice on the premises; or
         B.   Personal delivery; or
         C.   Mailing such order or notice to the last known address of the
owner; or
         D.   Publishing in a newspaper of general circulation a notice of the
issuance of the order relating to the premises and directing the owner to
contact the Commissioner of Building and Housing in regard to such order.
      (3)   Direct action, short of acquisition by the City to eliminate the
blight, including but not limited to clearing the premises of the debris,
demolition of blighted structures, or barricading such structure has proved to
be unsuccessful:
         A.   To eliminate the blight; or
         B.   To prevent its recurrence.
      (4)   In the opinion of the director or directors requesting the
legislation based upon conditions existing on the premises and in the
neighborhood, such direct action would be likely to prove inadequate to
eliminate blight or prevent its recurrence.
   (b)   For purposes of division (a)(1) of this section, it shall be prima
facie evidence that the owner of the blighted premises is unwilling or unable
to eliminate or prevent the recurrence of the blighted condition of the
premises if:
      (1)   The blighted premises has been condemned; or
      (2)   The blighted premises is a vacant lot which has been cited by the
Commissioner of Environmental Health more than three (3) times in a one (1)
year period or where the City has had to clean the lot at least twice during a
one (1) year period; or
      (3)   The blighted premises has been used on more than two (2) occasions
during a one (1) year period as the site for the commission of drug offenses,
prostitution, gambling or other criminal acts which constitute a public
nuisance.
   The owner’s unwillingness or inability to eliminate or prevent the
recurrence of the blighted condition of the premises may also be established
through testimony and documentary evidence of the Council committee hearings on
the legislation.
(Ord. No. 1444-A-88. Passed 6-18-90, eff. 6-27-90)
§ 324.08 Public Hearing
   Upon completion of the Administrative Review of legislation introduced in
accordance with Section
324.07, including submission of the legislation to the City Planning Commission
for report and recommendation, the Council shall set a date for public hearing
by the proper committee or committees thereof in regard to the existence of
blight on the premises and the necessity for acquisition of the premises by the
City in order to eliminate blight and prevent the recurrence thereof. Said
hearing shall be held not less than thirty (30) nor more than forty-five (45)
days from the time the legislation is received by the Clerk of Council at the
completion of the Administrative Review. Upon the fixing of a day for a public
hearing, the Clerk of Council shall promptly cause notice to be given to the
owner or owners of record of the premises and the occupants thereof, if any, or
the person in charge of the premises, if any, notifying them of the time and
place of the hearing and apprising them of their right to appear at such
hearing to show cause why the premises should not be declared to be blighted or
why the City should not acquire said premises for the purpose of eliminating
blight thereon and preventing the recurrence of blight. Notice of such hearing
shall be given by:
   (a)   Posting the notice thereon on the premises; or
   (b)   Personal service; or
   (c)   Mailing such order or notice to the last known address of the owner or
owners of record of the premises or the person in charge of the premises or to
the occupants thereof; or
   (d)   Publishing the notice in a newspaper of general circulation within the
City of Cleveland.
(Ord. No. 1444-A-88. Passed 6-18-90, eff. 6-27-90)
§ 324.09 Procedure
   At the public hearing required by Section
324.08, the legislation shall be read and shall constitute prima facie evidence
of blight on the premises and the need for the City to acquire such premises in
order to eliminate the blight and prevent recurrence of blight thereon.
Thereafter, the owner or owners, person in charge, occupant of the premises or
any person having an interest therein may proceed to show cause why the
premises should not be declared blighted or the City should not acquire said
premises for the purposes of eliminating blight or preventing its recurrence.
At the hearing, the owner or owners, person in charge of the premises or
occupant may cause to be presented to the committee or committees of Council
any records of the City pertaining to issues relevant to the hearing and may
examine City employees in regard thereto; provided that the production of such
records or the presence of such employees is required by the owner or owners,
person in charge or occupant of the premises in writing at least twenty-four
(24) hours prior to the hearing.
   If the owner or owners, person in charge or occupant of the premises does
appear and presents testimony for the purpose of showing cause why the premises
should not be declared blighted or the City should not acquire the premises for
the purposes of eliminating the blight and preventing recurrence of blight, the
director or directors requesting the legislation, or designated
representatives, shall proceed to present evidence to the committee or
committees of Council of the existence of blight on the premises and the need
to acquire the premises for elimination of the blight and the prevention of the
recurrence of the blight thereon. Members of the general public residing in the
neighborhood or who may otherwise have knowledge of the condition of such
premises may address the committee or committees at the public hearing in
regard to the proposed action by the City. The committee or committees of
Council may adjourn the public hearing, from time to time, and grant
continuances in order that further argument or evidence can be presented in
regard to the existence of blight on the premises or the need for the City to
acquire the premises in order to eliminate blight or prevent the recurrence of
blight thereon.
(Ord. No. 1444-A-88. Passed 6-18-90, eff. 6-27-90)
§ 324.10 Legislative Determination
   The committee or committees, upon completion of the public hearing provided
for in Section
324.09, shall recommend approval or disapproval of the legislation.
(Ord. No. 1444-A-88. Passed 6-18-90, eff. 6-27-90)
§ 324.11 Acquisition and Blight Elimination by City
   Upon determination of Council that a premises is blighted and that
acquisition by the City is necessary in order to eliminate the blight and
prevent recurrence of blight upon the premises, the Director of Community
Development is authorized to introduce and submit appropriate legislation to do
the following:
   (a)   Acquire the premises by purchase;
   (b)   Acquire the premises by court action exercising the City’s
constitutional right of eminent domain;
   (c)   After acquisition, to eliminate the blight by:
      (1)   Demolition and clearance of the premises by an independent
contractor or City forces, or clearance if demolition of structures is not
necessary;
      (2)   Rehabilitation by an independent contractor or by City forces;
      (3)   Sale of the blighted premises to a purchaser upon terms providing
for the elimination of the blight and prevention of its recurrence;
      (4)   Sale of the premises after demolition and clearance (if not needed
for a public purpose) for use or development.
   (d)   Any combination of the above provisions.
(Ord. No. 1444-A-88. Passed 6-18-90, eff. 6-27-90)
§ 324.12 Terms of Sale; Prohibition of Recurrence of Blight
   Premises sold under the provisions of this chapter shall provide in the
instrument of conveyance that the purchaser, successors and assigns, shall
rehabilitate or develop the premises in accordance with all applicable City
requirements and regulations; shall henceforth use the premises in accordance
with all applicable City requirements and regulations; and shall eliminate any
blight thereon and prevent the recurrence of blight. Such provisions shall be
both covenants and conditions of the conveyance. The instrument of conveyance
shall further provide for reversion to the City of Cleveland if blight does
recur upon the premises or the use, development or rehabilitation of the
premises is not carried out in accordance with the terms of the conveyance and
shall provide for a right of immediate re-entry by the City of Cleveland in
such event.
   The Director of Community Development is authorized to negotiate for the
sale of premises acquired under the provisions of this chapter which are not to
be retained by the City. No land shall be sold by the Director except pursuant
to ordinance of Council authorizing such sale which ordinance shall describe in
detail the terms and conditions upon which such sale is to be made and the
covenants to be contained in the deed from the City to the purchaser.
(Ord. No. 1444-A-88. Passed 6-18-90, eff. 6-27-90)
§ 324.13 Finances
   There is hereby established a special revenue fund entitled Elimination of
Spot Blight Fund into which all appropriations for the purpose of carrying out
the provisions of this chapter shall be placed and the Director of Finance is
hereby authorized to make expenditures from such fund for the purposes set
forth in this chapter upon receipt of voucher from the Director of Community
Development and further, the Director of Finance is hereby authorized and
directed to deposit into such fund, all proceeds from the sale of premises by
the City pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 1444-A-88. Passed 6-18-90, eff. 6-27-90)
§ 324.14 Consultation with Neighborhood Organizations
   The Director of Community Development and the member or members of Council
in whose ward(s) the premises is located is authorized to consult with
organizations and persons in a neighborhood with regard to the existence of
blighted premises therein; the establishment of a neighborhood redevelopment
plan; the means of eliminating such blight; and the possible purchase and
redevelopment of such property by neighborhood organizations.
(Ord. No. 1444-A-88. Passed 6-18-90, eff. 6-27-90)
§ 324.15 Provisions of this Chapter not Limitation
   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to limit in any way the use of any
or all other means available to the City, its officers and employees to remove
existing blight or prevent future blight, or summarily eliminate immediate
hazards to the public health or safety or criminal activity on premises
regardless of whether or not acquisition of such premises has or has not been
commenced under any provision of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 1444-A-88. Passed 6-18-90, eff. 6-27-90)
§ 324.16 Unconstitutionality
   In the event any section of this chapter or any part of any section of this
chapter is declared to be unconstitutional, such declaration shall in no way
affect the operation of any other section or part thereof of this chapter, and
the remainder of this chapter shall remain in full force and effect.
(Ord. No. 1444-A-88. Passed 6-18-90, eff. 6-27-90)
PART IIIB: LAND USE CODE – ZONING CODE
TITLE VII: ZONING CODE
   Chapter
325   Definitions
   Chapter
327   Enforcement and Penalty
   Chapter
329   Board Of Zoning Appeals
   Chapter
331   Building Zone Maps
   Chapter
333   Changes and Amendments
   Chapter
334   Planned Unit Development Overlay District
   Chapter
335   Use Districts
   Chapter
336   Urban Garden District
   Chapter
337   Residential Districts
   Chapter
338   Manufactured Housing Park (MHP) District
   Chapter
339   Parking Districts
   Chapter
340   Institutional-Research (I-R) Districts
   Chapter
341   Design Review
   Chapter
342   Open Space and Recreation (OSR) Districts
   Chapter
343   Business Districts
   Chapter
344   Midtown Mixed-Use District
   Chapter
345   Industrial Districts
   Chapter
346   Live-Work Overlay Districts
   Chapter
347   Specific Uses Regulated
   Chapter
348   Form Districts
   Chapter
349   Off-Street Parking and Loading
   Chapter
350   Sign Regulations
   Chapter
351   Riparian Setbacks and Wetlands Setbacks
   Chapter
352   Landscaping, Screening, and Parking Lot and Public Garage Lighting
   Chapter
353   Height Regulations
   Chapter
354   Wireless Telecommunications Facilities
   Chapter
354A   Wind Energy Facilities
   Chapter
355   Area Requirements
   Chapter
356   Central Business District (CBD)
   Chapter
357   Yards and Courts
   Chapter
358   Fence Regulations
   Chapter
359   Nonconforming Uses
CHAPTER 325 – DEFINITIONS
325.01   Meaning of Words and Phrases
325.02   Accessory Use or Building
325.03   Accessory Parking Space
325.04   Alley
325.05   Apartment Hotel
325.06   Apartment House
325.07   Automobile Laundry – Repealed
325.08   Auto Sales Lot – Repealed
325.09   Auto Wrecking Yard
325.092   Berm
325.10   Building
325.11   Building Line
325.111   Car Wash
325.12   Central Business District
325.120   Construction and Demolition Debris Processing Facility
325.121   Correctional Halfway House
325.13   Court
325.14   Court, Height
325.15   Court, Inner
325.16   Court, Length
325.17   Court, Outer
325.18   Court, Width
325.181   Drip Line
325.19   Dwelling House
325.191   Dwelling, Single-Family Attached
325.20   Dwelling Unit
325.21   Exception, Special
325.22   Family
325.221   Fence – Repealed
325.222   Fence Height – Repealed
325.223   Fence Open – Repealed
325.23   Floor Area
325.24   Floor Area, Gross
325.25   Front Yard
325.26   Front Yard Line
325.27   Garage, Community – Repealed
325.28   Garage, Private – Repealed
325.29   Garage, Public or Storage – Repealed
325.30   Garage, Repair – Repealed
325.31   Garage, Service – Repealed
325.32   Grade Level
325.33   Hand Laundry
325.34   Height, Building
325.35   Hotel
325.36   Institutional H Occupancy Classification
325.37   Interior Side Yard
325.38   Junk
325.39   Junk Car
325.40   Junk Yard
325.401   Kennels
325.402   Light Assembly
325.41   Lot
325.42   Lot, Corner
325.43   Lot Depth
325.431   Lot, Interior
325.44   Lot Line
325.45   Lot, Side Line
325.46   Lot Width
325.47   Main Building
325.471   Mental Health Center
325.48   Motor Freight Depot or Trucking Terminal
325.481   Motor Vehicle
325.482   Motor Vehicle Maintenance
325.483   Motor Vehicle Minor Repair
325.484   Motor Vehicle Major Repair
325.485   Motor Vehicle Sales Facility
325.486   Motor Vehicle Service Station
325.487   Motor Vehicle Service Garage
325.488   Motor Vehicle Repair Garage
325.49   Multiple Dwelling
325.50   Multiple Dwelling, Class A
325.51   Multiple Dwelling, Class B
325.52   Nonconforming Use
325.53   Nonconformity
325.532   Opacity
325.533   Open Sales Lot
325.534   Parking Garage, Community
325.535   Parking Garage, Private
325.536   Parking Garage, Public
325.54   Parkway
325.55   Public Notice
325.56   Rear Yard
325.561   Recycling
325.562   Recycling Facility
325.57   Required Yard Lines
325.570   Research Laboratory
325.571   Residential Facility
325.572   Rock Crushing
325.58   Rooming House
325.59   Row House
325.60   Service Station – Repealed
325.61   Setback Building Line
325.62   Side Yard
325.63   Side Street Yard
325.64   Reserved
325.65   Specific Building Line
325.66   Street
325.67   Street or Alley Line
325.68   Street, Residence
325.69   Street, Side
325.70   Street, Width
325.71   Structure
325.72   Tourist Home
325.721   Use, Accessory
325.723   Use, Principal
325.73   Used Car
325.731   Valet Parking Area
325.732   Wrecking Yard
325.74   Variance
325.741   Xeriscape
325.75   Yard
325.76   Skate Board Facility
325.77   Temporary Use
Cross-reference:
   General Retail Business District defined, CO
343.11
   Height limit defined, CO
353.01
   Housing Code definitions, CO
Ch. 363
   Local Retail Business District defined, CO
343.01
   Residence and Dwelling House Districts defined, CO
335.02
   Residence-Industry District defined, CO
345.01
   Service station definitions, CO
343.14
   Shopping Center District defined, CO
343.02
   Subdivision defined, CO
309.01
   University and college defined, CO
343.06
§ 325.01 Meaning of Words and Phrases
   For the purposes of this Zoning Code, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivatives shall have the meaning given in the succeeding sections.
Words used in the singular include the plural.
(Ord. No. 1105-57. Passed 4-14-58, eff. 4-15-58)
§ 325.02 Accessory Use or Building
   “Accessory use” or “building” means a subordinate use or building
customarily incident to and located on the same lot with the main use or
building.
(Ord. No. 1105-57. Passed 4-14-58, eff. 4-15-58)
§ 325.03 Accessory Parking Space
   "Accessory parking space" means an area open or enclosed, of not less than
one hundred fifty-three (153) square feet accessible from a street, exclusive
of drives or access area and to be used solely for the storage or parking of
motor vehicles for use by the owner, tenants, visitors, patients, clients,
customers or employees of the main building, structure or land use. Off-street
loading requirements shall not be considered as accessory off-street parking
spaces.
(Ord. No. 887-18. Passed 6-3-19, eff. 7-3-19)
§ 325.04 Alley
   “Alley” means any public space or thoroughfare twenty (20) feet or less in
width, but not less than ten (10) feet in width, which has been dedicated or
deeded to the public for public travel and affords access to abutting property.
(Ord. No. 1105-57. Passed 4-14-58, eff. 4-15-58)
§ 325.05 Apartment Hotel
   “Apartment hotel” means a building or part of a building used for permanent
occupancy containing living, sleeping or eating facilities, provided not more
than ten percent (10%) of the dwelling units shall be designed for transient
accommodations. Such eating facilities may include a dining room and private
bar room accessible only from the interior of the building, and such eating
facilities shall not have any exterior advertising.
(Ord. No. 1105-57. Passed 4-14-58, eff. 4-15-58)
§ 325.06 Apartment House
   “Apartment house” means a Class A multiple dwelling containing three (3) or
more dwelling units.
(Ord. No. 1105-57. Passed 4-14-58, eff. 4-15-58)
§ 325.07 Automobile Laundry – Repealed
(Ord. No. 729-09. Passed 7-1-09, eff. 7-8-09)
§ 325.08 Auto Sales Lot – Repealed
(Ord. No. 729-09. Passed 7-1-09, eff. 7-8-09)
§ 325.09 Auto Wrecking Yard
   “Auto wrecking yard” means any land, building or other structure used
primarily for the dismantling of motor vehicles for the purpose of converting
such dismantled motor vehicles into scrap metal or salvageable parts.
(Ord. No. 1105-57. Passed 4-14-58, eff. 4-15-58)
§ 325.092 Berm
   A raised landscaped mound of earth used for screening, noise reduction, or
beautification.
(Ord. No. 3077-A-89. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 7-27-91)
§ 325.10 Building
   “Building” means a structure designed, built or occupied as a shelter or
roofed enclosure for persons, animals or property. “Building” shall be
construed under this Zoning Code as if followed by the words “or parts thereof”
and shall include tents, lunch wagons, dining cars, camp cars, trailers and
other roofed structures on wheels or other supports used for residential,
business, mercantile, storage, commercial, industrial, institutional assembly,
educational or recreational purposes. For the purposes of this definition
“roof” includes an awning or other similar covering, whether or not permanent
in nature.
(Ord. No. 1105-57. Passed 4-14-58, eff. 4-15-58)
§ 325.11 Building Line
   “Building line” means the line between which and the street line or lot
line, no building or other structure or portion thereof, except as provided in
this Zoning Code, may be erected above the grade level. The building line is
considered a vertical surface intersecting the ground on such line.
(Ord. No. 1105-57. Passed 4-14-58, eff. 4-15-58)
§ 325.111 Car Wash
   “Car wash” means a building or other structure or premises, or part thereof,
used for the washing of automobiles and other motor vehicles with a gross
vehicle weight of no more than 5,000 pounds.
(Ord. No. 729-09. Passed 7-1-09, eff. 7-8-09)
§ 325.12 Central Business District
   "Central Business District" (CBD) means the area bounded as follows:
Beginning at the intersection of the center lines of West 10th Street and the
Cleveland Memorial Shoreway; thence northeasterly along said center line of the
Cleveland Memorial Shoreway to its intersection with the center line of West
3rd Street; thence northwesterly along said center line of West 3rd Street to
its intersection with the Harbor line of Lake Erie; thence northeasterly along
said Harbor line of Lake Erie to its intersection with the northwesterly
prolongation of the center line of East 12th Street; thence southeasterly along
said northwesterly prolongation and along said center line of East 12th Street
to its intersection with said center line of the Cleveland Memorial Shoreway;
thence northeasterly along said center line of the Cleveland Memorial Shoreway
to its intersection with the center line of the Inner Belt Freeway as
established by Ordinance 1845-47, effective October 22, 1947; thence southerly
and southwesterly along said center line of the Inner Belt Freeway to its
intersection with the center line of Broadway; thence northwesterly along said
center line of Broadway to its intersection with the center line of Carnegie
Avenue, S.E.; thence southwesterly along said center line of Carnegie Avenue
S.E. to its intersection with the center line of Ontario Street; thence
northwesterly along said center line of Ontario Street to its intersection with
the center line of Huron Road, N.W.; thence northwesterly along said center
line of Huron Road N.W. to its intersection with the center line of Superior
Avenue N.W.; thence westerly along said center line of Superior Avenue, N.W. to
its intersection with the center line of Old River Road; thence northwesterly
along said center line of Old River Road to its intersection with the center
line of St. Clair Avenue; thence westerly along said center line of St. Clair
Avenue and its prolongation to the center line of the Cuyahoga River; thence
northwesterly along said Cuyahoga River center line to its intersection with
the center line of the Cleveland Memorial Shoreway; thence easterly along said
center line of the Cleveland Memorial Shoreway to the place of beginning, and
as outlined on the map hereto attached be and the same is now defined as the
Central Business District.
[To_view_a_printable_PDF_file_showing_the_CBD_boundary_map,_click_here.]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4cc937dcc99cd9ae45e5f9bfbf6bc5ab64112b8f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13516.jpg]
(Ord. No. 76-18. Passed 4-2-18, eff. 4-3-18)
§ 325.120 Construction and Demolition Debris Processing Facility
   "Construction and Demolition Debris ("C&DD") Processing Facility" means any
site, location, tract of land, installation, or building that is used or
intended to be used primarily for the purpose of processing, transferring, or
recycling C&DD that was generated off the premises of the facility.
   For purposes of this definition:
   "Transferring" means the receipt or storage of C&DD, or the movement of C&DD
from vehicles or containers to a working surface and into other vehicles or
containers, for the purposes of transporting the debris to a solid waste
landfill facility, a C&DD landfill facility, or a C&DD processing facility.
   "Processing" means the temporary receipt or storage of C&DD, or the movement
of C&DD from vehicles or containers to a working surface, for purposes of
separating the debris into individual types of materials as a commodity for use
in a beneficial manner that does not constitute disposal.
   "Processing facility" does not include:
      (a)   A facility that is operating or is licensed under Ohio law as a
solid waste transfer facility or solid waste landfill facility or C&DD landfill
facility;
      (b)   Any facility that consists solely of portable containers that have
an aggregate volume of fifty (50) cubic yards or less;
      (c)   A site where "clean hard fill", which consists solely of reinforced
or non-reinforced concrete, asphalt concrete, brick, block, tile or stone, is
stored for no more than six (6) months on a permitted construction site from
which it was generated during an active permitted construction, for use on that
site, in legitimate fill operations for permitted construction purposes or to
bring the site up to a consistent grade, if stored, managed and used in
accordance with the Building Code at
Chapter 345 and
Chapter 3126 of these Codified Ordinances;
      (d)   A site where "clean hard fill," which consists solely of reinforced
or non-reinforced concrete, asphalt concrete, brick, block, tile or stone, is
stored for no more than six (6) months on a permitted construction site from
which it was generated, for use on a permitted site, other than the site from
which it was generated, for legitimate fill operations or permitted
construction purposes on another site or to bring another site up to a
consistent grade, if stored, managed and used in accordance with the Building
Code at
Chapter 345 and
Chapter 3126 of these Codified Ordinances.
   "Temporary receipt or storage" means storage of that material for no more
than sixty (60) days, as demonstrated by documentation.
(Ord. No. 806-18. Passed 7-18-18, eff. 7-20-18)
§ 325.121 Correctional Halfway House
   “Correctional halfway house” means a premises which provides room and board
and correctional oversight, pursuant to a contract to provide those services
for the Federal Bureau of Prisons or the Ohio Department of Rehabilitation and
Corrections or the Cuyahoga County Court of Common Pleas Department of
Probation or any other governmental entity with jurisdiction to provide
correctional services, to adults who have been assigned to such facility by
either a governmental authority or a court of law. Such premises may be one (1)
building or a grouping of buildings located on contiguous properties.
(Ord. No. 2215-96. Passed 4-7-97, eff. 4-7-97; Reprinted 7-2-97 CR)
§ 325.13 Court
   “Court” means an open, unoccupied space, other than a yard, bounded on two
(2) or more sides by the exterior walls of a building, or by exterior walls and
lot lines.
(Ord. No. 1105-57. Passed 4-14-58. eff. 4-15-58)
§ 325.14 Court, Height
   “Height” as applied to a court, means the vertical distance from the lowest
level of the court as actually constructed, or from the grade level, whichever
is higher, to the top of the walls bounding the court, or to the level under
consideration. In case the tops of such walls are at different elevations, the
measurement shall be taken to the average elevation of the two (2) highest
walls that are opposite.
(Ord. No. 1105-57. Passed 4-14-58, eff. 4-15-58)
§ 325.15 Court, Inner
   “Inner court” means a court enclosed on all sides by exterior walls of a
building, or by exterior walls and lot lines other than street or alley lines.
(Ord. No. 1105-57. Passed 4-14-58, eff. 4-15-58)
§ 325.16 Court, Length
   “Length”, as applied to an outer court, means the mean horizontal distance
between the open and closed ends of the court.
(Ord. No. 1105-57. Passed 4-14-58, eff. 4-15-58)
§ 325.17 Court, Outer
   “Outer court” means a court enclosed on not more than three (3) sides by
exterior walls of a building, or by exterior walls and lot lines, with one (1)
side or end open to a street or yard, or to an alley or other permanent open
public space not less than twenty (20) feet wide.
(Ord. No. 1105-57. Passed 4-14-58, eff. 4-15-58)
§ 325.18 Court, Width
   “Width,” as applied to an inner court, means its least horizontal dimension.
Width, as applied to an outer court, is the shortest horizontal dimension
measured in a direction substantially parallel with the principal open end of
such court.
(Ord. No. 1105-57. Passed 4-14-58, eff. 4-15-58)
§ 325.181 Drip Line
   The perimeter formed by the points furthest away from the trunk of a tree
where precipitation falling from the branches of that tree lands on the ground.
(Ord. No. 3077-A-89. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 7-27-91)
§ 325.19 Dwelling House
   “Dwelling house” means a detached house designed for and occupied
exclusively as the residence of not more than two (2) families, each living as
an independent housekeeping unit.
(Ord. No. 1105-57. Passed 4-14-58, eff. 4-15-58)
§ 325.191 Dwelling, Single-Family Attached
   A single-family dwelling attached to one (1) or more other single-family
dwellings by one (1) or more common vertical walls with each dwelling located
on a separate lot.
(Ord. No. 3077-A-89. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 7-27-91)
§ 325.20 Dwelling Unit
   “Dwelling unit” means one (1) or more rooms providing complete living
facilities for one (1) family, including equipment for cooking or provisions
for the same, and including rooms for living, sleeping and eating.
(Ord. No. 1105-57. Passed 4-14-58, eff. 4-15-58)
§ 325.21 Exception, Special
   “Special exception” means an exception to the provisions of this Zoning
Code, specifically mentioned in this Zoning Code as one (1) which may be
granted by and at the discretion of the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(Ord. No. 1105-57. Passed 4-14-58, eff. 4-15-58)
§ 325.22 Family
   “Family” means one (1) or more persons related by blood, adoption or
marriage, or a family foster home, living and cooking together as a single
housekeeping unit, exclusive of house-hold servants. A number of persons, but
not exceeding three (3) living and cooking together as a single housekeeping
unit though not related by blood, adoption or marriage shall be deemed to
constitute a family. A “family foster home” means a family related by blood,
adoption or marriage as defined above with no more than five (5) foster
children.
(Ord. No. 919-88. Passed 6-20-88, eff. 6-24-88)
§ 325.221 Fence – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1811-2000. Passed 2-12-01, eff. 2-20-01)
§ 325.222 Fence Height – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1811-2000. Passed 2-12-01, eff. 2-20-01)
§ 325.223 Fence Open – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1811-2000. Passed 2-12-01, eff. 2-20-01)
§ 325.23 Floor Area
   “Floor area” means a floor space enclosed by exterior walls or fire walls or
by a combination of them.
(Ord. No. 1105-57. Passed 4-14-58, eff. 4-15-58)
§ 325.24 Floor Area, Gross
   For the purpose of determining the ratio of the floor area of a building to
the area of the lot, the “gross floor area” means the sum of the gross
horizontal areas of the several floors of the building excluding areas used for
accessory garage purposes and such basement and cellar areas as are devoted
exclusively to uses accessory to the operation of the building. All horizontal
dimensions shall be taken from the exterior faces of walls, including walls or
other enclosures of enclosed porches. In computing the gross floor areas of
buildings in residence districts, areas of floors with story heights greater
than ten (10) feet shall be considered as H/10 times the gross area of the
floor, where “H” is the height of the story in feet measured from the floor
level to one (1) foot above the ceiling level for top stories, and from floor
level to floor level for other stories.
(Ord. No. 1105-57. Passed 4-14-58, eff. 4-15-58)
§ 325.25 Front Yard
   “Front yard” means a yard across the full width of the lot, extending from
the setback or specific building line or front yard line to the street line.
(Ord. No. 1105-57. Passed 4-14-58, eff. 4-15-58)
§ 325.26 Front Yard Line
   “Front yard line” means a line on or back of the street line between which
and the street line no building or other structure or portion thereof, except
as provided in this Zoning Code, may be erected above grade level. The front
yard line shall be the building line for the front of a building.
(Ord. No. 1105-57. Passed 4-14-58, eff. 4-15-58)
§ 325.27 Garage, Community – Repealed
(Ord. No. 729-09. Passed 7-1-09, eff. 7-8-09)
§ 325.28 Garage, Private – Repealed
(Ord. No. 729-09. Passed 7-1-09, eff. 7-8-09)
§ 325.29 Garage, Public or Storage – Repealed
(Ord. No. 729-09. Passed 7-1-09, eff. 7-8-09)
§ 325.30 Garage, Repair – Repealed
(Ord. No. 729-09. Passed 7-1-09, eff. 7-8-09)
§ 325.31 Garage, Service – Repealed
(Ord. No. 729-09. Passed 7-1-09, eff. 7-8-09)
§ 325.32 Grade Level
   “Grade level” means the mean elevation of the curb level opposite those
walls of the main building that are located on or within five (5) feet of the
street line; where all the walls of the main building are more than five (5)
feet back from the street line, the grade level is the mean elevation of the
ground adjoining the building on all sides.
(Ord. No. 1105-57. Passed 4-14-58, eff. 4-15-58)
§ 325.33 Hand Laundry
   “Hand laundry” means a laundry which occupies not more than one thousand two
hundred (1,200) square feet of floor space and within which not more than five
(5) persons are engaged in laundry activities.
(Ord. No. 1105-57. Passed 4-14-58, eff. 4-15-58)
§ 325.34 Height, Building
   “Building height” means the vertical distance measured from the grade level
to the average height of the coping of the street or outside wall for flat
roofs, to the deck line of mansard roofs and to the mean height between eaves
and ridge for gable, gambrel or hip roofs.
(Ord. No. 1105-57. Passed 4-14-58, eff. 4-15-58)
§ 325.35 Hotel
   “Hotel” means a building or part thereof operated as a public inn and
containing ten (10) or more guest rooms for hire.
(Ord. No. 1105-57. Passed 4-14-58, eff. 4-15-58)
§ 325.36 Institutional H Occupancy Classification
   “Institutional H Occupancy Classification” means a building classification
based on occupancy which includes all buildings in which people suffering from
physical limitation because of health or age are harbored for medical,
charitable or other care or treatment, and includes, among others:
   Hospitals;
   Sanitariums and sanatoriums;
   Infirmaries;
   Nursing homes;
   Convalescent homes;
   Old folks homes;
   Homes for the aged;
   Rest homes;
   Orphanages;
   Nurseries for children under five (5) years of age.
(Ord. No. 1105-57. Passed 4-14-58, eff. 4-15-58)
§ 325.37 Interior Side Yard
   “Interior side yard” means a side yard which is not a side street yard.
(Ord. No. 1105-57. Passed 4-14-58, eff. 4-15-58)
§ 325.38 Junk
   “Junk” means any worn out, cast-off or discarded article or material which
is ready for destruction or has been collected or stored for salvage or
conversion to some use. Any article or material which, unaltered or unchanged
and without further reconditioning, can be used for its original purpose as
readily as when new shall not be considered junk.
(Ord. No. 1105-57. Passed 4-14-58, eff. 4-15-58)
§ 325.39 Junk Car
   “Junk car” means a used car not placed in a safe operating condition for use
on the highway within thirty (30) days after it has become unsafe for use on
the highway.
(Ord. No. 1105-57. Passed 4-14-58, eff. 4-15-58)
§ 325.40 Junk Yard
   “Junk yard” means any land or building or other structure used for the
storage, collection, processing or conversion of any worn out, cast-off or
discarded metal, paper, glass or other material which is ready for destruction,
or has been collected or stored for salvage or conversion to some use.
(Ord. No. 1105-57. Passed 4-14-58, eff. 4-15-58)
§ 325.401 Kennels
   “Kennel” means a place where dogs are bred for hunting, or for sale, or for
any gain.
(Ord. No. 1900-06. Passed 6-4-07, eff. 6-7-07)
   Note: Former Section
325.401 was renumbered to
325.402 by Ord. No. 1900-06, § 2, passed 6-4-07, eff. 6-7-07.
§ 325.402 Light Assembly
   The assembly of premanufactured parts into finished products by use of small
power tools and/or hand tools and such jigs and fixtures as are necessary, but
specifically excluding any forging, metal stamping, shearing or casting
operations.
(Ord. No. 656-05. Passed 6-6-05, eff. 6-15-05)
   Note: Section
325.402 is former Section
325.401, renumbered by Ord. No. 1900-06, § 2, passed 6-4-07, eff. 6-7-07.
§ 325.41 Lot
   “Lot” (plot) means a portion or parcel of land considered as a unit, devoted
or to be devoted to a certain use or occupied by a building or group of
buildings and accessory uses that are united by a common interest or use, and
the open spaces belonging to the same. A lot may or may not be a platted lot.
(Ord. No. 1105-57. Passed 4-14-58, eff. 4-15-58)
§ 325.42 Lot, Corner
   “Corner lot” means a lot at the point of intersection of and abutting on two
(2) intersecting streets, each more than twenty (20) feet in width, the angle
of the intersection being not more than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees.
It is the land occupied or to be occupied by the corner building and its
accessory buildings. For the purposes of this Zoning Code, in computing the
area of a corner lot or in applying the yard regulations, the width shall be
considered as extending not more than fifty (50) feet from the side street line
measured at right angles thereto, or to the actual lot line, whichever distance
is less, and the depth shall be considered as one hundred fifty (150) feet, or
the actual depth, whichever is less.
(Ord. No. 1105-57. Passed 4-14-58, eff. 4-15-58)
§ 325.43 Lot Depth
   “Lot depth” means the mean distance from the street line of the lot to its
rear line measured in the mean direction of the side lines of the lot.
(Ord. No. 1105-57. Passed 4-14-58, eff. 4-15-58)
§ 325.431 Lot, Interior
   "Lot, Interior" means a lot other than a corner lot.
(Ord. No. 887-18. Passed 6-3-19, eff. 7-3-19)
§ 325.44 Lot Line
   “Lot line” means the boundary of a lot separating it from adjoining land,
public or private. It may or may not be the boundary line of a lot in a
recorded subdivision.
(Ord. No. 1105-57. Passed 4-14-58, eff. 4-15-58)
§ 325.45 Lot, Side Line
   “Lot, side line” means any lot line not a front line or a rear line. The
side line of a corner lot is the line along the narrower or less important
street, unless the lot is a sublot in a recorded subdivision and is clearly
intended to front on the narrower street.
(Ord. No. 1105-57. Passed 4-14-58, eff. 4-15-58)
§ 325.46 Lot Width
   “Lot width” means the mean width measured at right angles to its depth.
(Ord. No. 1105-57. Passed 4-14-58, eff. 4-15-58)
§ 325.47 Main Building
   “Main building” means the building or space occupied by the chief use or
activity on the premises.
(Ord. No. 1105-57. Passed 4-14-58, eff. 4-15-58)
§ 325.471 Mental Health Center
   An institution providing in-patient or out-patient care or therapy for
individuals affected by mental illness, developmental disabilities, alcoholism
or substance abuse and others needing psychological therapy but which does not
serve as a residence for such individuals.
(Ord. No. 656-05. Passed 6-6-05, eff. 6-15-05)
§ 325.48 Motor Freight Depot or Trucking Terminal
   “Motor freight depot” or “trucking terminal” means a place, building or part
thereof where merchandise, property or freight transported by motor vehicles,
including trailers, to or from outside the limits of Cuyahoga County is
received, stored, transferred, loaded, unloaded, delivered or dispatched, and
includes any parking space, gasoline filling station, service or repair shop or
other accessory service operated in conjunction therewith.
(Ord. No. 1105-57. Passed 4-14-58, eff. 4-15-58)
§ 325.481 Motor Vehicle
   Any self-propelled wheeled vehicle designed primarily for transportation of
persons or goods on public streets. Motor vehicles include automobiles, buses,
trucks, self-propelled recreational vehicles except boats, self-propelled farm
and construction implements, and both the tractor and trailer portions of
tractor-trailers. Motor vehicles exclude train and train cars, aircraft, boats,
trailers and manufactured homes.
(Ord. No. 3077-A-89. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 7-27-91)
§ 325.482 Motor Vehicle Maintenance
   “Motor vehicle maintenance” means routine maintenance services to motor
vehicles of a gross vehicle weight of no more than five thousand (5,000)
pounds, limited to such activities as the following:
   (a)   Car washing and vacuuming;
   (b)   Addition of fluids;
   (c)   Wiper blade replacement;
   (d)   Flat tire repair and replacement;
   (e)   Electrical charging; and
   (f)   Similar activities that produce minimal noise, vibration or fumes and
that exclude activities listed only under the definitions of “motor vehicle
minor repair” or “motor vehicle major repair.”
(Ord. No. 729-09. Passed 7-1-09, eff. 7-8-09)
§ 325.483 Motor Vehicle Minor Repair
   “Motor vehicle minor repair” means repairs and servicing that produce
relatively low levels of noise, vibration and fumes and, more specifically,
include the following types of repairs to motor vehicles of a gross vehicle
weight of no more than six thousand (6,000) pounds:
   (a)   “Motor vehicle maintenance” as defined in
325.482;
   (b)   Air conditioning, starting and charging service;
   (c)   Brake repair and replacement;
   (d)   Engine oil changes, fluids replacement;
   (e)   Exhaust system repair and replacement;
   (f)   Automotive electrical work other than audio sound system installation;
   (g)   Shock absorber, spring, and strut replacement;
   (h)   Upholstery work;
   (i)   Tire balancing, tire installation; wheel alignment;
   (j)   Windshield and glass installation;
   (k)   Tune-ups, diagnostics; spark plug replacement, emission control
service; and
   (l)   Other repairs of a similar nature with respect to impacts on nearby
properties.
(Ord. No. 729-09. Passed 7-1-09, eff. 7-8-09)
§ 325.484 Motor Vehicle Major Repair
   “Motor vehicle major repair” means repairs that produce relatively high
levels of noise, vibration and fumes and, more specifically, include the
following types of repairs to motor vehicles and repairs of a similar nature
with respect to impacts on nearby properties:
   (a)   Audio sound system installation;
   (b)   Auto body customizing; sun roof installation;
   (c)   Auto body sheet metal, fiberglass or plastic repair, replacement,
prepping or painting;
   (d)   Auto body or frame media blasting;
   (e)   Chassis and frame cleaning, fabrication, straightening or welding;
   (f)   Transmission repair and replacement;
   (g)   Any other types of automotive work not included in the definition of
“motor vehicle minor repair” except for automotive engine machine rebuilding
and machining, as permitted in
345.03(c)(31); and
   (h)   Any “minor repair” of motor vehicles of greater than six thousand
(6,000) pounds gross vehicle weight.
(Ord. No. 729-09. Passed 7-1-09, eff. 7-8-09)
§ 325.485 Motor Vehicle Sales Facility
   “Motor vehicle sales facility” means any land or buildings used primarily
for the sale of new or used motor vehicles fit for transportation, which may
include as an accessory use “minor repair” of motor vehicles sold from the
facility or, in the case of a new car sales facility, “minor repair” of
vehicles of the make sold in the facility.
(Ord. No. 729-09. Passed 7-1-09, eff. 7-8-09)
§ 325.486 Motor Vehicle Service Station
   “Motor vehicle service station” means a use of premises primarily for the
retail sale of gasoline or other motor vehicle fuels and oil for delivery into
automotive vehicles, and may include the retail sale of lubricants, tires,
batteries and automotive accessories; and may include the rendering of services
and repairs limited to “minor repair” of motor vehicles, as defined in Section
325.483.
(Ord. No. 729-09. Passed 7-1-09, eff. 7-8-09)
§ 325.487 Motor Vehicle Service Garage
   “Motor vehicle service garage” means a building or part thereof in which the
motor vehicle servicing and repairs performed are limited to “minor repair” of
motor vehicles as defined in Section
325.483.
(Ord. No. 729-09. Passed 7-1-09, eff. 7-8-09)
§ 325.488 Motor Vehicle Repair Garage
   “Motor vehicle repair garage” means a building or part thereof in which the
motor vehicle servicing and repairs performed may include both “minor repair”
as defined in Section
325.483 and “major repair” as defined in Section
325.484.
(Ord. No. 729-09. Passed 7-1-09, eff. 7-8-09)
§ 325.49 Multiple Dwelling
   “Multiple dwelling” means a building other than a dwelling house, row house
or institution occupied in whole or in part as a residence. It includes
apartment houses, rooming houses and other buildings classified as Class A or
Class B multiple dwellings.
(Ord. No. 1105-57. Passed 4-14-58, eff. 4-15-58)
§ 325.50 Multiple Dwelling, Class A
   “Multiple dwelling, Class A,” means a multiple dwelling occupied more or
less permanently for residence purposes by more than two (2) families and in
which the rooms are occupied in apartments, suites or groups, each comprising a
dwelling unit. Class A multiple dwellings include, among others:
   Apartment houses;
   Apartment hotels;
   Studio apartments;
   Tenement houses;
   Bachelor apartments;
   Duplex apartments;
   Kitchenette apartments;
   Garden-type apartments.
(Ord. No. 1105-57. Passed 4-14-58, eff. 4-15-58)
§ 325.51 Multiple Dwelling, Class B
   “Multiple dwelling, Class B,” means a multiple dwelling occupied, as a rule
transiently, as the more or less temporary abode of individuals or families
with or without meals, and in which, as a rule, the rooms are occupied singly
and not as dwelling units. Class B multiple dwellings include, among others:
   Lodge houses;
   Rooming houses;
   Boarding houses;
   Furnished room houses;
   Tourist homes;
   Club houses with sleeping accommodations;
   Fraternity houses;
   Sorority houses;
   Dormitories;
   Convents;
   Monasteries;
   School and college buildings containing sleeping; accommodations.
(Ord. No. 1105-57. Passed 4-14-58, eff. 4-15-58)
§ 325.52 Nonconforming Use
   “Nonconforming use” means a use of a building or premises that does not
conform to the regulations of the use district in which it is located.
(Ord. No. 1105-57. Passed 4-14-58, eff. 4-15-58)
§ 325.53 Nonconformity
   “Nonconformity” means any feature, such as location, size, bulk, height or
use of a building or premises, that does not conform to the regulations of the
district in which it is located.
(Ord. No. 1105-57. Passed 4-14-58, eff. 4-15-58)
§ 325.532 Opacity
   The percentage of vision-obscuring solid materials visible when screening is
viewed horizontally from grade level – or from the level of the roof at the
base of the screening in the case of roof-mounted screening – to the top of the
screening upon installation, or, in the case of landscape screening, starting
no later than twelve (12) months after installation.
(Ord. No. 3077-A-89. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 7-27-91)
§ 325.533 Open Sales Lot
   Open land that is used or occupied for the purpose of buying, selling, or
storing prior to sale passenger cars, trucks, motor scooters, motorcycles,
boats, trailers, recreational vehicles, manufactured homes, cemetery monuments,
nursery plants or supplies, or other merchandise.
(Ord. No. 3077-A-89. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 7-27-91)
§ 325.534 Parking Garage, Community
   “Community parking garage” means a building or part thereof for the storage
of automobiles of residents of an apartment building or other residents in the
vicinity and in which “motor vehicle maintenance” services, as defined in
Section
325.482 may be provided for vehicles stored in the garage.
(Ord. No. 729-09. Passed 7-1-09, eff. 7-8-09)
§ 325.535 Parking Garage, Private
   “Private parking garage” means a building or part thereof accessory to a
main building and providing for the storage of automobiles and electrical
charging of such vehicles and in which no occupation or business for profit is
conducted.
(Ord. No. 729-09. Passed 7-1-09, eff. 7-8-09)
§ 325.536 Parking Garage, Public
   “Public parking garage” means a building or part thereof for the storage of
motor vehicles, other than a private parking garage or a community parking
garage, and in which “motor vehicle maintenance” services, as defined in
Section
325.482 may be provided for vehicles stored in the garage.
(Ord. No. 729-09. Passed 7-1-09, eff. 7-8-09)
§ 325.54 Parkway
   “Parkway” means an arterial highway with full or partial control of access
located within a park or a ribbon of park-like development.
(Ord. No. 845-62. Passed 4-27-64, eff. 4-27-64)
§ 325.55 Public Notice
   Except as provided in Section
329.01(k), “public notice” of a hearing or procedure means notice of the time
and place thereof published in one (1) issue of the City Record at least seven
(7) days previous to the hearing.
(Ord. No. 2145-82. Passed 11-5-84, eff. 11-8-84)
§ 325.56 Rear Yard
   “Rear yard” means a yard immediately in the rear of the main building on the
lot and across the full width of the lot. It may or may not be on the opposite
side of the building from the front yard.
(Ord. No. 845-62. Passed 4-27-64, eff. 4-27-64)
§ 325.561 Recycling
   As used in this section "recycling" means processing material that would
otherwise be disposed of and returning the material to commerce as a commodity
for use in a beneficial manner that does not constitute disposal.
   As used in the definition of "recycling", "processing" means storage of not
more than forty percent (40%) of the total amount, by weight, of the recyclable
materials brought to the facility each month, as averaged monthly, for not less
than an eight (8) month rolling period in each calendar year.
(Ord. No. 806-18. Passed 7-18-18, eff. 7-20-18)
§ 325.562 Recycling Facility
   "Recycling Facility" means an engineered Facility or site where Recycling of
material is the primary objective of the Facility. For purposes of this
chapter, "Recycling Facilities" are those that are licensed by the City of
Cleveland and accept only source-separated Recyclable Materials for recycling
that are recoverable using existing technology. "Recycling Facility" includes
facilities that meet this definition and accept and process Recyclable
Materials for marketing to an end user manufacturer, but does not include any
Facility licensed by the State of Ohio as a Solid Waste Transfer Facility,
Solid Waste Disposal Facility, C&DD Disposal Facility, Composting Facility,
Scrap Tire Collection, Scrap Tire Monofill, Scrap Tire Monocell, or Scrap Tire
Recovery Facility.
(Ord. No. 806-18. Passed 7-18-18, eff. 7-20-18)
§ 325.57 Required Yard Lines
   “Required yard lines” means the lines whose location with respect to lot
lines provides required yard spaces.
(Ord. No. 845-62. Passed 4-27-64, eff. 4-27-64)
§ 325.570 Research Laboratory
   A facility for scientific research, testing, experimentation, or product
development but not primarily for manufacture, sale or storage of products.
(Ord. No. 656-05. Passed 6-6-05, eff. 6-15-05)
§ 325.571 Residential Facility
   "Residential facility" means a publicly or privately operated home or
facility, licensed pursuant to state law, that provides accommodations,
supervision, and personal care services to any of the following: (a) one (1) or
two (2) unrelated persons with mental illness; (b) one (1) or two (2) unrelated
adults who are receiving residential state supplement payments as defined in
the Ohio Revised Code; or (c) three (3) to sixteen (16) unrelated adults.
(Ord. No. 586-16. Passed 7-13-16, eff. 7-17-16)
§ 325.572 Rock Crushing
   “Rock Crushing” means any activity that uses mechanical processes to break
down rock into gravel or other small particulate matter. Rock means any man-
made or naturally formed consolidated or coherent and relatively hard mass of
material including but not limited to stone, concrete, cement, asphalt,
conglomerate or any similar material.
(Ord. No. 586-16. Passed 7-13-16, eff. 7-17-16)
§ 325.58 Rooming House
   “Rooming house” or “furnished room house” means a building or part thereof
not a hotel or inn in which sleeping rooms are available for hire as lodging
with or without meals. Where equipment for cooking or provisions for the same
are included in a sleeping room, such room shall be deemed to be a dwelling
unit.
(Ord. No. 845-62. Passed 4-27-64, eff. 4-27-64)
§ 325.59 Row House
   “Row House” has the same meaning as “townhouse unit” as defined in division
(b) of Section
337.031.
(Ord. No. 552-96. Passed 6-10-96, eff. 6-19-96)
§ 325.60 Service Station – Repealed
(Ord. No. 729-09. Passed 7-1-09, eff. 7-8-09)
§ 325.61 Setback Building Line
   “Setback building line” means a building line back of the street line.
(Ord. No. 845-62. Passed 4-27-64, eff. 4-27-64)
§ 325.62 Side Yard
   “Side yard” means a yard along the side line of a lot and extending from the
front building line to the rear yard line or, in the case of a side street
yard, to the rear lot line.
(Ord. No. 1891-68. Passed 11-4-68, eff. 11-6-68)
§ 325.63 Side Street Yard
   “Side street yard” means a side yard along the side street the width of
which extends from a setback building line to a street line.
(Ord. No. 845-62. Passed 4-27-64, eff. 4-27-64)
§ 325.64 Reserved
§ 325.65 Specific Building Line
   “Specific building line” means a setback building line indicated and located
on the Building Zone Map.
(Ord. No. 845-62. Passed 4-27-64, eff. 4-27-64)
§ 325.66 Street
   “Street” means a public thoroughfare more than twenty (20) feet wide which
has been dedicated or deeded to the public for public use.
(Ord. No. 845-62. Passed 4-27-64, eff. 4-27-64)
§ 325.67 Street or Alley Line
   “Street or alley line” means the lot line dividing the lot from,
respectively, a street or an alley.
(Ord. No. 845-62. Passed 4-27-64, eff. 4-27-64)
§ 325.68 Street, Residence
   “Residence street” means that portion of a street between its intersections
with two (2) other streets where the majority of the frontage is within a
residence district.
(Ord. No. 845-62. Passed 4-27-64, eff. 4-27-64)
§ 325.69 Street, Side
   “Side street” means the street along the side lines of a corner lot.
(Ord. No. 845-62. Passed 4-27-64, eff. 4-27-64)
§ 325.70 Street, Width
   “Street width” means the width of a street in any block between the
intersecting streets, and means the average distance between street lines on
opposite sides of the street.
(Ord. No. 845-62. Passed 4-27-64, eff. 4-27-64)
§ 325.71 Structure
   “Structure” means anything built or erected including, among other things,
outdoor pay telephones, buildings, stadia, reviewing stands, bandstands,
bleachers, booths, swimming pools, platforms, towers, bridges, trestles, bins,
fences, barriers, poles, tanks above or below ground and signs, and also means
the supporting framework or supporting parts of a building. “Structure” shall
be construed as if followed by “or parts thereof.”
(Ord. No. 1989-01. Passed 10-22-01, eff. 11-1-01 without the signature of the
Mayor)
§ 325.72 Tourist Home
   “Tourist home” means a rooming house in which transients are lodged for
hire.
(Ord. No. 845-62. Passed 4-27-64, eff. 4-27-64)
§ 325.721 Use, Accessory
   A subordinate land use located on the same lot or parcel as a Principal Use
(except as may be specifically permitted hereunder to be located on a separate
lot) and serving a purpose customarily incidental to that of the Principal Use.
(Ord. No. 3077-A-89. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 7-27-91)
§ 325.723 Use, Principal
   The main use of a lot or parcel as distinguished from an Accessory Use.
(Ord. No. 3077-A-89. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 7-27-91)
§ 325.73 Used Car
   “Used car” means a motor vehicle which, notwithstanding age or condition, is
such that it can be placed in a safe operating condition for use on the
highway.
(Ord. No. 845-62. Passed 4-27-64, eff. 4-27-64)
§ 325.731 Valet Parking Area
   An off-street parking area in which attendants in the employ of the parking
facility either park or direct the parking of all vehicles.
(Ord. No. 3077-A-89. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 7-27-91)
§ 325.732 Wrecking Yard
   Any place other than a motor vehicle repair establishment where there are
stored in the open three (3) or more motor vehicles, as defined herein, or
trailers, boats, or similar vehicles, that are not in operating condition and
have not been restored to operation within thirty (30) days of their arrival,
or where parts of such items are stored in the open.
(Ord. No. 3077-A-89. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 7-27-91)
§ 325.74 Variance
   “Variance” means a deviation from requirements of this Zoning Code granted
by the Board of Zoning Appeals in cases of practical difficulty or unnecessary
hardship under the provisions of and as limited in Sections
329.03 and
329.04.
(Ord. No. 845-62. Passed 4-27-64, eff. 4-27-64)
§ 325.741 Xeriscape
   Landscaping using native or adapted plantings characterized by low water
usage.
(Ord. No. 3077-A-89. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 7-27-91)
§ 325.75 Yard
   “Yard” means an open space on the same lot with a main building or
structure, extending between the lot line and the extreme front, rear or side
wall of the main building or structure.
(Ord. No. 845-62. Passed 4-27-64, eff. 4-27-64)
§ 325.76 Skate Board Facility
   “Skate board facility” means any structure which is erected for private or
public skate board use.
(Ord. No. 235-88. Passed 6-13-88, eff. 6-15-88)
§ 325.77 Temporary Use
   “Temporary use” means any main or accessory use in any Use District
involving the erection or occupancy of temporary structures.
(Ord. No. 2228-A-88. Passed 2-27-89, eff. 3-7-89)
CHAPTER 327 – ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY
327.01   Interpretation and Purpose
327.02   Enforcement; Permits and Certificates of Occupancy
327.03   Legal Action by Director of Law
327.04   Cases of Emergency: Immediate Vacation of Premises
327.99   Penalty
Charter reference:
   Council to provide zoning ordinances, Charter §
76-5
Cross-reference:
   Legal Action by Director of Law to implement Housing Code enforcement, CO
367.14
   Zoning Code amendment; hearing, CO
Ch. 333
Statutory reference:
   Violation of zoning ordinances, RC 713.13
§ 327.01 Interpretation and Purpose
   (a)   In addition to this Title VII, Zoning Code, Council has adopted a
Form-Based Code at Title VIIA of the Codified Ordinances which governs the land
use and zoning regulations for four (4) territorial areas of the municipality
as shown on the Zoning Maps in Title VIIA: Detroit Shoreway – Cudell, Hough,
Opportunity Corridor – New Economy and Innovation Square, and Opportunity
Corridor – Core Jobs Zone. Notwithstanding the provisions of division (c) of
this Section
327.01, the provisions of Title VIIA shall supersede the provisions of Title
VII, except where specific reference is made to the provisions of Title VII in
Title VIIA.
   (b)   In interpreting and applying the provisions of this Zoning Code, they
shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of
public health, safety, morals and general welfare. Greater or lesser
requirements, however, may be established with respect to dimensional,
quantitative, signage, landscaping and screening standards as part of a
Community Development Plan or Urban Renewal Plan, adopted or amended on or
after the effective date of this section, which establishes a generally higher
standard of design than would otherwise be required for the overall development
or project area; provided that, the introduction of any legislation to adopt or
amend a Community Development Plan or Urban Renewal Plan that has such greater
or lesser requirements must have the consent of the member or members of
Council in whose ward(s) the development or project area is located. Each
application of a provision authorizing lesser requirements shall be documented
by the City Planning Commission in the Certificate of Appropriateness which it
issues in approving a development located within such designated Plan area.
   (c)   Except as provided in divisions (a) and (b) of this Section
327.01, where this Zoning Code imposes greater restrictions upon the use of
buildings or premises or upon the height or bulk of buildings or requires
larger lots or yards than are imposed or required by other chapters of the
Codified Ordinances or by other laws, ordinances, rules or regulations, this
Zoning Code shall govern.
   (d)   Nothing contained in this Zoning Code shall be construed to remove or
render inoperative any restriction of land established by restrictive covenants
running with the land to which the City is a party.
(Ord. No. 347-2024. Passed 6-3-24, eff. 7-3-24)
§ 327.02 Enforcement; Permits and Certificates of Occupancy
   (a)   This Zoning Code shall be enforced by the Department of Building and
Division of Housing under the direction of the Director of Building and
Housing. No person shall fail to comply with any provision of this Zoning Code
or fail to comply with any lawful order issued under this Zoning Code.
   (b)   No person shall erect, alter or enlarge any building or structure
until a permit for such erection, alteration or enlargement has been issued by
the Department of Building and Housing.
   (c)   No person shall change, substitute or extend the use of any existing
building or premises until a certificate of occupancy has been issued. No
person shall permit any premises to be occupied for any new, changed,
substituted or extended use, until a certificate of occupancy has been issued.
   (d)   Before any permit or certificate of occupancy is issued, the Director
of Building and Housing shall examine or cause to be examined the application
therefor, and any plans and plot plan accompanying such application, to
ascertain whether the proposed work and use will conform to the provisions of
this Zoning Code. No permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless
the proposed work and use conform to the provisions of this Zoning Code.
   (e)   In all instances where yard and open spaces are required by this
Zoning Code, a plot plan drawn to scale shall be submitted with the application
and shall clearly indicate the proposed yards, the extent of all proposed
encroachments beyond required yard lines and the location of and distances to
buildings on adjoining premises. The location of front yard lines and side
street yard lines shall be checked and approved by the Manager of Engineering
and Construction in the Office of Capital Projects before any permit is issued.
   (f)   Whenever the Director of Building and Housing determines that a use
regulated under this Zoning Code is in violation of this Zoning Code, he or she
shall notify in writing the person in control of the use. The notice shall
order the person in control to cease the use and to take all action necessary
to bring the property into compliance with this Zoning Code. The Director shall
also notify the owner, if the owner is not the person in control of the use, to
take all reasonable action to cause the person in control of the use to cease
the use and take all action necessary to bring the property into compliance
with this Zoning Code. Reasonable action may include filing an action in an
appropriate court.
   (g)   Notices of Violation issued under this Zoning Code shall be served on
responsible parties or owners by one (1) or more of the following methods:
      (1)   Personal service. The City department issuing the notice may use
any method that causes the Notice of Violations to be actually delivered to the
responsible party. Actual delivery shall constitute legal service of the Notice
of Violations.
      (2)   Residence service at the owner’s address by leaving a copy of the
notice of violation with a person of suitable age and discretion then residing
therein;
      (3)   Certified mail to an address where it is reasonably calculated
under the circumstances to reach the owner. When determining such an address,
the City shall examine:
         A.   Information the responsible party provided to the City, such as
rental registration information or the address used on an appeal or an
application; or
         B.   Information that a City representative, such as an inspector, has
discovered during the performance of their duties; or
         C.   Information from common and readily available sources such as
printed or online directories, credit bureaus, county property records, board
of election records, motor vehicle records, court records or other state,
county, municipal or federal records.
      The City is not required to use all of these methods and is not required
to use any one of them; the City must use whatever combination of them is
reasonably expected to be successful. The address found can be the property or
premises which is the subject of the violation.
      (4)   Regular mail and posting as follows:
         A.   Regular mail to the owner at an address found under division (g)
(3) above, which may be the address of the property that is the subject of the
violation; and
         B.   Regular mail service to the property address that is the subject
of the violation notice, if that address is different from the address in
division (g)(4)A.; and
         C.   Posting of the notice of violation in a conspicuous location on
the building, premises or real estate or appurtenance thereto that is the
subject of the violation notice.
      (5)   Service by publication electronically or once in a newspaper of
general circulation in the City.
(Ord. No. 1039-2023. Passed 2-5-24, eff. 2-6-24)
§ 327.03 Legal Action by Director of Law
   The imposition of any penalty shall not preclude the Director of Law from
instituting an appropriate action or proceeding in a court of proper
jurisdiction to prevent an unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction,
relocation, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use, or to restrain,
correct or abate a violation, or to prevent the occupancy of a building,
structure or premises, or to prevent an illegal act, conduct, business or use,
in or about any premises, or to require compliance with the provisions of this
Zoning Code, or the orders or determinations of the Commissioner of Building
and the Commissioner of Housing or the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(Ord. No. 1551-50. Passed 6-25-51, eff. 6-28-51)
§ 327.04 Cases of Emergency: Immediate Vacation of Premises
   Whenever, in the opinion of the Director of Building and Housing, the use or
condition of structures or premises constitutes an immediate hazard to human
life or health, he or she shall declare a case of emergency and shall make an
order to cease use or vacate.
   He or she may request the Director of Public Safety to enforce the orders he
or she gives that are necessary to cause the use of the structure or premises
to be ceased or the structure or premises to be vacated in accordance with the
terms of the notice. The Director of Public Safety has the authority to enforce
such orders.
(Ord. No. 1039-2023. Passed 2-5-24, eff. 2-6-24)
§ 327.99 Penalty
   (a)   Except as provided in divisions (c) and (d) below, whoever fails to
comply with a lawful order issued under this Zoning Code is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day of noncompliance constitutes a
separate offense.
   (b)   The imposition of any penalty under this division shall not be
construed as excusing or permitting the continuance of any violation, and when
the violation constitutes a nuisance, any owner of the premises, whether the
owner at the time the violation was committed or his or her assignee, shall be
deemed guilty of a violation of this Zoning Code each day he or she permits
such nuisance to continue unabated after due notice from the Director of
Building and Housing of the existence of such nuisance.
   (c)   Whoever violates any provision of Section
337.16 of this Zoning Code shall, for each and every violation or failure, be
fined not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) which fine shall not be reduced, waived or suspended.
In addition, imprisonment for not less than ten (10) days nor more than ninety
(90) days may be imposed. Each day of violation constitutes a separate offense.
   (d)   Whoever violates Sections
337.23,
337.231,
347.02,
347.10,
347.121,
349.02,
349.04,
349.13,
350.19,
357.13 or
357.14 or Section
347.08 is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. In addition to any other method of
enforcement provided for in this chapter, the above listed minor misdemeanors
may be enforced by the issuance of a citation in compliance with Rule 4.1 of
the Ohio Rules of Criminal Procedure.
   (e)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any provision of Chapter
351 is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed each day during or on which a violation or noncompliance
occurs or continues.
\(Ord. No. 1039-2023. Passed 2-5-24, eff. 2-6-24)
CHAPTER 329 – BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
329.01   Organization
329.02   Jurisdiction and Power
329.021   Appeals from Decisions of the City Planning Commission
329.03   Variance Powers
329.04   Variance Powers Restricted
329.05   Fees
329.06   Temporary Permits in Undeveloped Sections
329.07   Permits for Festivals and Open-air Carnivals
Charter reference:
   Establishment; terms; jurisdiction, Charter §
76-6
Cross-reference:
   Compensation, CO
173.16
   Nonconforming uses; existing, abandoning, repairing, CO
Ch. 359
   Variance defined, CO
325.74
§ 329.01 Organization
   (a)   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall be composed of five (5) members
appointed by the Mayor who shall exercise the powers given to the Board by the
Charter.
   (b)   The members of the Board as fixed by Council shall receive a salary.
Meeting attendance shall be in person. At the beginning of each calendar year
the Mayor shall designate which member of the Board shall be Chairman of the
Board for the ensuing year.
   (c)   Except as otherwise stated in this division, meetings of the Board
shall be held in the City Hall at 9:30 a.m. on each Monday, except that when
that morning is a holiday the meeting shall be held on the following Tuesday.
The Board in its discretion and in accordance with this section, may hold
meetings on days and times other than as set forth above, as may be necessary
to carry out its duties.
   (d)   The Planning Director shall designate from the staff of the Planning
Commission an employee who shall be the Secretary of the Board, and the staff
of the Commission shall be available to the Board for the collection and
presentation of facts and the serving of notices. The Secretary shall keep a
permanent record of the attendance and the proceedings of the Board showing its
action and vote on each case. A brief summary of such proceedings shall be
published in the City Record. At the end of each calendar year the Secretary
shall make an annual report of the work of the Board.
   (e)   Any decision or determination of the Commissioner of Building or the
Commissioner of Housing or of any other administrative officer relating to the
provisions of this Zoning Code may be appealed to the Board by any person
deeming himself or herself aggrieved or adversely affected by such decision or
determination.
   (f)   No appeal shall be entertained unless it is filed in the office of the
Board on a form to be provided by the Board, with all data required in such
form.
   (g)   The presence of three (3) members of the Board shall constitute a
quorum and a concurring vote of three (3) members of the Board shall be
necessary to reverse or modify any order, requirement, decision or
determination of the Commissioner of Building or the Commissioner of Housing or
any other administrative officer, or to decide in favor of the appellant any
matter upon which the Board is required to pass, or to permit a variance or
special exception from a requirement of this Zoning Code.
   (h)   No action of the Board shall be taken on any case until after proper
notice has been given and public hearing has been held.
   (i)   Except as provided in Section
329.01(k), proper notice of a hearing before the Board shall be, besides public
notice, written notice mailed to the owner or his or her agent at the address
given on the appeal and, so far as it is practicable, written notice to
directly affected property owners or their agents given at least seven (7) days
prior to the date of such proposed hearing in such manner as the Board may, by
its rules, prescribe.
   (j)   A copy of all decisions or determinations of the Board shall be
transmitted to the appropriate administrative officer. Any permit issued by the
Commissioner of Building or the Commissioner of Housing in pursuance of any
decision or determination of the Board shall have incorporated thereon any
special conditions of such permit prescribed by the Board.
   (k)   In any urgent case requiring emergency action, the Board of Zoning
Appeals may, by a waiver signed by a majority of the Board, reduce the time
requirement of Sections
329.01(i) and
325.55 from seven (7) days to three (3) days.
(Ord. No. 1122-2023. Passed 10-23-23, eff. 10-25-23)
§ 329.02 Jurisdiction and Power
   (a)   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have such duties and powers as are
set forth and as limited in the Charter and in this Zoning Code.
   (b)   The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary
to carry into effect the provisions of this Zoning Code and to exercise the
powers and jurisdiction conferred upon it by the Charter and this Zoning Code.
   (c)   Any member of the Board shall have the power to subpoena and require
the attendance of witnesses, administer oaths, compel testimony, and the
production of books, papers and other evidence pertinent to any issue before
the Board.
   (d)   The Board shall hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement,
decision or determination of the Director of Building and Housing or other
administrative officer relating to zoning, including the refusal, granting or
revocation of permits by the Commissioners. The Board shall also hear and
decide all matters referred to the Board for decision, permit or other
authorization, by provisions of this Zoning Code. Within its powers the Board
may reverse or affirm wholly or in part or modify, the order, requirement,
decision or determination appealed from, and shall make such order,
requirement, decision or determination as in its opinion ought to be made under
the circumstances, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer
from whose decision the appeal is taken.
   (e)   Final orders, adjudications or decisions of the Board of Zoning
Appeals may be appealed by the City or any proper party, as provided in
appropriate provisions of RC Chapters 2505 and 2506.
(Ord. No. 1238-06. Passed 8-9-06, eff. 8-16-06)
§ 329.021 Appeals from Decisions of the City Planning Commission
   Appeals from final decisions of the City Planning Commission that are
appealable to the Board of Zoning Appeals, shall be made within thirty (30)
days of the decision.
(Ord. No. 1265-07. Passed 12-10-07, eff. 12-14-07)
§ 329.03 Variance Powers
   (a)   Conditions Requiring Variances. Where there is practical difficulty or
unnecessary hardship in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the
provisions of this Zoning Code, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the
power, in a specific case, to vary or modify the application of any such
provisions in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this Zoning Code
so that public health, safety, morals and general welfare may be safeguarded
and substantial justice done.
   (b)   Limitation of Variance Powers. Such variance shall be limited to
specific cases where:
      (1)   The practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship inheres in and is
peculiar to the premises sought to be built upon or used because of physical
size, shape or other characteristics of the premises or adjoining premises
which differentiate it from other premises in the same district and create a
difficulty or hardship caused by a strict application of the provisions of this
Zoning Code not generally shared by other land or buildings in the same
district;
      (2)   Refusal of the variance appealed for will deprive the owner of
substantial property rights; and
      (3)   Granting of the variance appealed for will not be contrary to the
purpose and intent of the provisions of this Zoning Code.
   (c)   Data on Which Variance is Based. When appealing for a variance, the
appellant shall state and substantiate his or her claim that the three (3)
conditions listed under division (b) of this section exist, and the Board shall
make a finding on each of the three (3) conditions as they apply in each
specific case as a prerequisite for the granting of the variance.
   (d)   Variance from Use Regulations.
      (1)   The Board may permit, in any use district, the extension of a
building or use existing on the effective date of the use regulations of the
area, into adjoining land in a more restricted district, which land was under
the same ownership on the effective date, under such conditions as will
safeguard the character of the more restricted district.
      (2)   The Board may permit the extension or enlargement of a building or
use, or the erection of an additional building, upon premises lawfully occupied
by such building or use on November 5, 1929, or lawfully occupied on the date
of any amendment or supplement to the Zoning Code approved by the electorate on
that date, or to this Zoning Code, creating a more restricted use district, and
in which more restricted use district the building or use thereby became a
nonconforming building or use, provided that such extension, enlargement or
additional building shall not tend to perpetuate a nonconformity which
otherwise might be discontinued at an earlier date.
      (3)   The Board may permit, in any use district, such modification of the
use regulations as may be necessary to secure an appropriate development of a
lot adjoining buildings or uses existing on the effective date of the use
regulations and not conforming to such regulations, or adjoining a less
restricted use district along a side lot line, provided that the use permitted
by such modification shall not extend across any street or alley from such
nonconforming uses or such less restricted use district, nor allow uses other
than those listed in this Zoning Code as permitted in the use district next
lower in order of restrictiveness to the district in which such lot is located.
   (e)   Variance from Area, Yard and Court Regulations.
      (1)   Notwithstanding the provisions of divisions (a), (b), and (c) of
this section, the Board may permit such modification of the area regulations or
of regulations affecting yard or court dimensions as may be necessary to secure
an appropriate improvement of an existing lot of record that is of such
restricted area that it cannot be improved without such modification and,
further, that such existing lot of record is located in an area characterized
by yards, courts or lot areas of similar size or dimensions.
      (2)   The Board may permit such modification of the regulations affecting
yard and court dimensions as may be necessary to permit the use of an existing
building for a purpose for which such regulations require greater yards or
courts than those existing on the premises, provided the Board determines that
such existing yards or courts will provide adequate light and ventilation for
the spaces lighted or ventilated thereby and will not tend to create an
unhealthful or unsanitary condition under the proposed conditions of
arrangement, use and occupancy.
   (f)   Variance from Height Regulations.
      (1)   The Board may permit the erection of an addition to an existing
building to the same height above the grade level as such existing building
where such addition is essential to the completion of such building as
originally planned.
      (2)   The Board may permit the extension upward of a building existing on
November 5, 1929, by the construction of additional stories above the height
limit prescribed in this Zoning Code if the original plans approved by the
Commissioner of Building and Housing provided for such additional stories and
such building was actually designed and constructed to carry such additional
stories.
   (g)   Variance from Distance Regulations. The Board may vary the required
distance from property in a residence district specified in Sections
335.02 and
337.01 to
337.23, where such variance will not adversely affect the neighborhood, or the
safety, health and general welfare of the occupants of the building, provided
proper notice of the proposed variance has been given to the owners of the
property on the same street and those in the same block within a distance of
two hundred (200) feet from the premises of the proposed use, and a public
hearing has been held.
(Ord. No. 2048-95. Passed 12-18-95, eff. 12-26-95)
§ 329.04 Variance Powers Restricted
   (a)   Nonconforming Uses That Did Not Previously Exist. Except as provided
under Sections
329.03 and
329.06, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall have no power to authorize as a
variance the establishment of a nonconforming use where none previously
existed.
   (b)   Parking Requirements. The Board shall have no power to authorize as a
variance the construction or use of any new building which does not fulfill the
parking requirements of this Zoning Code, nor the remodeling or changed use of
any existing building, whether previously conforming to the parking
requirements or not, which remodeling or changed use would increase or create a
nonconformity through an increase in number of dwelling units or in any other
way, unless the Board determines that lack of parking space upon the premises
of such building will not have a seriously adverse effect upon traffic
conditions, or upon the neighborhood.
   (c)   Encroachment Beyond Required Setback Building Line.
      (1)   The Board shall have no power to authorize as a variance the
location of any building or other structure nearer the street line than a
required setback building line unless the depth or width of the lot on which
such building or other structure is to be erected, as recorded on the effective
date of this Zoning Code, is sufficiently less than the depth or width of the
other lots in the same block as to create a hardship not shared by other lots
subject to the same setback building line, or unless there exists a building
extending beyond such required setback building line on the same side of the
same block within one hundred fifty (150) feet from either side lot line of the
lot in question. In the latter case, any encroachment, except projecting signs,
permitted by the Board, shall not extend beyond a diagonal line drawn from the
near corner of any building extending beyond the required setback building line
and located within such distance, to a point on the required setback building
line one hundred fifty (150) feet from such corner; or, where the width of the
lot in question is sixty (60) feet or less and there are adjoining buildings
extending beyond the required setback building line on both sides of the lot in
question, beyond the average encroachment of such adjoining buildings,
whichever the Board deems preferable. Where such encroachment is permitted
beyond a specific building line the Board shall require, as a condition of such
permit, that the encroachment be removed by the owner without cost to the City
when ordered to do so by the City. No encroachment permitted under the
provisions of this section shall exceed one (1) story in height except that
where buildings on adjoining premises on both sides and within one hundred
fifty (150) feet of the side lines of the lot in question extend beyond the
required setback building line, the height of such permitted encroachment may
be the height of the lower of the two (2) adjoining encroachments.
      (2)   In determining the permitted projection of a projecting sign beyond
the building line, the Board may establish that the limit of permissible
encroachment beyond a setback building line defined in subsection (c)(1) hereof
shall be the building line mentioned in Section 3113.18(a)(1).
   (d)   Special Exceptions Authorized by the Board. The Board may, after
public notice and hearing and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards,
determine and grant such special exceptions to the provisions of this Zoning
Code as are specifically mentioned in this Zoning Code as subject to
determination by the Board as a matter of original jurisdiction, provided such
special exceptions are in conformity with the purpose and intent of this Zoning
Code and in conformity with the standards for such exceptions established in
this Zoning Code.
(Ord. No. 1538-86. Passed 5-18-87, eff. 5-21-87)
§ 329.05 Fees
   Any applicant submitting an application to the Board of Zoning Appeals for
any hearing before the Board or for any action by the Board shall include
payment in full of the fee listed in the following schedule:
   (a)   Exceptions to or Variances from the Application of Ordinances
Governing Zoning:
Appeals relating to accessory buildings or structures on the premises  $25.00
wherein the main use is an owner-occupied dwelling house
Alterations or additions to a dwelling house                           $35.00
Change of use of or to a dwelling house                                $35.00
Alterations, additions, or changes of use relating to and/or resulting
in a multiple dwelling or building of institutional, educational or    $50.00
assembly (not primarily carried on for gain) occupancy or
classification
Alterations, additions, or change of use of and/or resulting in a      $75.00
Business or Industrial occupancy or classification
Signs                                                                  $50.00
New construction up to and including estimated cost of $50,000.00 (not $75.00
otherwise mentioned in this section)
New construction in excess of estimated cost of $50,000.00 (not        $150.00
otherwise mentioned in this section)
Administrative orders or decisions not otherwise mentioned in this     $50.00
section
Affirmations of prior decisions                                        $50.00
Requests for rehearing                                                 $25.00
 
   (b)   Other:
 
Decisions or orders of administrative officials not related to zoning $50.00
Decisions or orders not otherwise mentioned in this section           $50.00
 
   (c)   Miscellaneous:
 
Copies or records (per page or part of a page) $0.25
Certification of authenticity                  $1.00
Photographs (existing)                         $1.00
Photographs (to be developed)                  $2.00
 
   If an application listed in this section could be construed to fit in more
than one (1) fee classification, then the higher fee shall be paid.
(Ord. No. 2393-02. Passed 2-3-03, eff. 2-3-03)
§ 329.06 Temporary Permits in Undeveloped Sections
   The Board of Zoning Appeals may, after public notice and hearing and subject
to appropriate conditions and safeguards, permit in undeveloped sections of the
City for not more than a two (2) year period a building or other structure or
use which does not conform to the use regulations of the district in which it
is to be located. Such permit may be renewed for two (2) year periods when the
general conditions of the neighborhood have remained practically unchanged.
(Ord. No. 2204-A-48. Passed 12-19-49, eff. 1-29-50)
§ 329.07 Permits for Festivals and Open-air Carnivals
   (a)   Upon application, the Commissioner of Building and Housing may issue
temporary use permits in any use district to charitable organizations
sponsoring festivals and open-air carnivals. Notwithstanding any other
provision of this Zoning Code, issuance of such a permit shall constitute a
temporary waiver of use restrictions, yard requirements, heights regulations,
and accessory off- street parking requirements. No permit shall be issued to
the same charitable organization for a festival or open-air carnival at any
given premises more frequently than twice per year. No permit issued pursuant
to this section shall be for longer than five (5) consecutive days.
   (b)   As used in this section, “charitable organization” means any tax
exempt religious, educational, veteran’s, fraternal, service, nonprofit
medical, volunteer rescue service, volunteer firemen’s, senior citizen’s, youth
athletic, or youth athletic park organization. An organization is tax exempt if
the organization is, and has received from the internal revenue service a
determination letter that is currently in effect, stating that the organization
is, exempt from federal income taxation under subsection 501(a) and described
in subsection 501(c)(3), 501(c)(4), 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10), or 501(c)(19) of the
Internal Revenue Code.
(Ord. No. 877-77. Passed 5-18-87, eff. 5-28-87)
CHAPTER 331 – BUILDING ZONE MAPS
331.01   Adoption and Incorporation
331.02   Amendments
331.03   Boundary Lines; Compliance
331.04   Measurement
Cross-reference:
   Zoning map amendment, CO
333.02
§ 331.01 Adoption and Incorporation
   For the purposes of this Zoning Code, the City is hereby divided into use,
height and area districts. The boundaries of the use, height and area districts
are hereby established as shown on the Building Zone Maps of the City of
Cleveland, which are filed herewith with the Clerk of Council. These maps shall
be deemed to accompany and are hereby made part of this Zoning Code.
(Ord. No. 533-56. Passed 6-25-56, eff. 6-28-56)
§ 331.02 Amendments
   Within ten (10) days after the effective date of an ordinance to amend the
building zone maps, the Planning Commission shall deliver to the Clerk of
Council the sheets of the building zone maps affected by the amendment, showing
thereon the maps as they existed immediately prior to the passage of the
amendments and the maps as amended by the ordinance. These sheets of the
building zone maps, when received by the Clerk, shall be filed with Council.
(Ord. No. 533-56. Passed 6-25-56, eff. 6-28-56)
§ 331.03 Boundary Lines; Compliance
   (a)   The district boundary lines are intended to follow the center lines of
the streets or alleys or their extensions or lot lines or their extensions.
Where a boundary line obviously does not coincide with any of the aforesaid
lines, and where it is not located by dimensions shown on the map, it shall be
deemed to be one hundred twenty-five (125) feet from the nearest street line
parallel to which it is drawn.
   (b)   Any areas shown on the building zone maps as park, playground, school,
cemetery, water, street or right-of-way, shall be subject to the zoning
regulations of the district in which they are located. In case of doubt, the
zoning regulations of the most restricted adjoining district shall govern.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this Zoning Code, no building or
premises shall hereafter be used, and no building or part thereof shall
hereafter be erected, raised, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged or
altered, except in conformity with the regulations established for the district
in which it is located.
(Ord. No. 533-56. Passed 6-25-56, eff. 6-28-56)
§ 331.04 Measurement
   In all instances where this Zoning Code requires a separation of use
districts, lots, buildings or uses by a specified distance, such distance shall
be measured in a geometrically straight line using a scaled map, or a survey if
deemed necessary. Unless otherwise specified in this Zoning Code, such line
shall be measured to run from the nearest point on the nearest lot line of the
lot or lots upon which the regulated use and any accessory parking are located
to either the nearest point on the nearest lot line of the lot or lots upon
which a use and any accessory parking are located from which the regulated use
is required to be separated or the nearest point on the nearest boundary of the
district from which the regulated use is required to be separated, whichever
terminal point is applicable. Such measurement shall be made without regard to
intervening structures, objects, uses, the street grid, landforms, waterways,
or any other topographic feature. The calculation and application of distance
requirements for separation of uses shall consider uses across the City’s
boundary in the application of divisions (c)(3) and (4) of Section
347.07, division (b) and division (c) of Section
347.12, and division (d)(2) of Section
347.15. The calculation shall consider uses and districts across the City’s
boundary in all other circumstances only if the City and bordering jurisdiction
have entered into an agreement whereby each will consider uses and districts
across the common boundary. The Director of City Planning shall have authority
to enter into such an agreement upon notification of the councilpersons whose
ward is affected.
(Ord. No. 1462-97. Passed 12-15-97, eff. 12-24-97)
CHAPTER 333 – CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS
333.01   Referral to Planning Commission; Public Hearing by Council
333.02   Zoning Map Amendments; Building Permit Issuance
Statutory reference:
   Council may amend districting or zoning, RC 713.10
§ 333.01 Referral to Planning Commission; Public Hearing by Council
   Council may on motion of any member, or on petition, amend or change the
maps, districts, setback building lines or regulations of this Zoning Code,
provided that before such action is taken the matter shall first be submitted
to the Planning Commission for its opinion and recommendations. The Commission
shall be allowed a reasonable time, not less than thirty (30) days, for
consideration and report thereon, and a public hearing shall be held before the
appropriate committee of Council. Ten (10) days’ notice of such public hearing
and of the intention to amend or change the maps, districts, setback building
lines or regulations shall be given by publication in the City Record.
(Ord. No. 598-A-72. Passed 6-26-72, eff. 6-29-72)
§ 333.02 Zoning Map Amendments; Building Permit Issuance
   (a)   In the case of a proposed amendment to the zoning map, the developer
may be required to submit a site development plan showing the use of the land,
the location and size of each proposed building, the height and number of
stories of each proposed building, the number of square feet of lot area, the
ratio of floor area to site area, the location of driveways and open space, the
location and number of proposed parking spaces and the location and
identification of any screening or fencing. The Planning Commission and/or
Council may require that such plan be modified, and may qualify its approval of
the zoning map amendment in such case by labeling the plan “Approved Site
Development Plan.” A copy of the approved site development plan shall be filed
with the Division of Building and the Planning Commission.
   (b)   Within a period of six (6) months from the effective date of the
zoning map amendment conditioned on the site development plan, no building
permit or use permit shall be issued for any such property, except in
accordance with the site development plan as approved, which shall contain all
conditions and limitations placed thereon by Council or in accordance with the
zoning classification applicable prior to the zoning map amendment. Unless a
building permit for such development is issued within six (6) months from the
effective date of approval or within such extension of the period as may be
approved by the Planning Commission and/or Council, the zoning map amendment
approval shall be void and the zoning shall revert to the classification that
existed prior to the approval of the zoning map amendment. (Ordinance No. 598-
A-72. Passed June 26, 1972. Effective June 29, 1972.)
   (c)   If in the opinion of the Council, because of special characteristics
of a site for which a zoning map amendment has been conditioned on a site
development plan, future design and site planning controls are necessary, the
City Council may, as a condition of the zoning map amendment, require that any
future Building Permits for original exterior construction of buildings or
structures within the approved site development plan area be subject to
approval by the City Planning Commission. The City Planning Commission shall
review the factors listed in division (a) above as well as the architectural
design and exterior surface treatment of proposed structures. This review shall
endeavor to assure that any development on the conditionally rezoned site
enhances and protects the health, safety and welfare of the area.
(Ord. No. 1892-95. Passed 12-18-95, eff. 1-27-96)
CHAPTER 334 – PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT
334.01   Definitions
334.02   Purpose
334.03   Applicability
334.04   Approval Process
334.05   Optional Two-Stage Approval
334.06   Submission of Covenants and Sureties
334.07   Recording of Approved Site Plan
334.08   Expiration of Approval; Site Restoration
334.09   Amendments to Approved Site Plan
334.10   Amendment Approval Process
334.11   Approval of Minor Amendments
334.12   Issuance and Revocation of Permit
334.13   Permits for Developed Lots
334.14   Incentives
334.15   Quality of Planning
334.16   Specific Development Standards
334.17   Site Plan Approval Criteria
334.18   Architectural Design Review
334.19   Contents of Submissions
334.20   Contents of Site Plan
§ 334.01 Definitions
   (a)   “Planned Unit Development (PUD) Overlay District” means a special
zoning district established to permit a more flexible approach to land use
control where such an approach is necessary to achieve a higher quality of
development and to facilitate development that is sensitive to special site
constraints.
   (b)   “Planned Unit Development (PUD) project” means a development proposal
voluntarily submitted for Site Plan approval as provided in this chapter within
a PUD Overlay District.
   (c)   “Director” means the Director of the City Planning Commission.
(Ord. No. 2093-93. Passed 11-29-93, eff. 12-7-93)
§ 334.02 Purpose
   A Planned Unit Development Overlay District is intended for special
situations in which adequate space, light, air, and other objectives of City
land use regulations can be achieved without the literal application of such
regulations. Approval for such a district may be obtained if a PUD area is
planned as an integral unit and if its planning is subject to more detailed
review and approval by the City than is normally required. Provisions of this
chapter may be employed where:
   (a)   Special amenities and benefits to the physical environment of the
City, beyond those normally required by City regulations, can be achieved by
allowing more flexible planning than is permitted by such regulations; or
   (b)   Properties with special constraints, such as infill parcels, call for
a more flexible approach to land use control in order to facilitate development
that is sensitive to such constraints.
(Ord. No. 2093-93. Passed 11-29-93, eff. 12-7-93)
§ 334.03 Applicability
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to projects in which the
developer proposes to achieve a quality of integrated site planning not
possible under the constraints of normal zoning requirements. Such projects are
voluntarily submitted for Site Plan approval as an alternative to approval
under normal requirements. A developer may use provisions of this chapter only
for property under his or her ownership or control as evidenced through an
option or another written agreement with the property owner. Developments
approved as PUD’s shall be regulated by:
   (a)   The specific provisions of an approved Site Plan; and
   (b)   Any requirements of City land use regulations from which an exception
has not been provided on the approved Site Plan.
(Ord. No. 2093-93. Passed 11-29-93, eff. 12-7-93)
§ 334.04 Approval Process
   (a)   Application. An application for mapping of a Planned Unit Development
(PUD) Overlay District and for approval of the corresponding Planned Unit
Development (PUD) project shall be submitted to the Director of the City
Planning Commission. Application for approval of PUD project may be made
concurrently with application for designation of a PUD Overlay District; or,
alternately, a PUD Overlay District may be approved and designated prior to
submission of an application for approval of a PUD project. The application for
PUD project approval shall contain eight (8) copies of the narrative items
required in Section
334.19 and eight (8) copies of the Site Plan required in Sections
334.17 and
334.20. A more generalized application may be submitted if the applicant
selects the Optional Two-Stage Review as provided in Section
334.05.
   (b)   Acceptance of Application. The City Planning Director shall accept an
application as provided in division (a), if the Director determines that such
application includes all required items. The Director may waive any item, if he
or she determines the item is not necessary for a decision on the application
or would impose unreasonable expense or delay in relation to the nature of the
action proposed. The Director shall advise the City Planning Commission and the
City Planning Committee of Council of the items so waived prior to their action
on the application. Either of the bodies may rescind the waiver and require the
waived item to be submitted before taking action.
   (c)   Referral to City Council. Within three (3) working days after
acceptance of the application, the Director shall provide written notification
of the acceptance of the application to the member or members of Council in
whose ward(s) the project district or project area is located. Provided said
member or members of Council do not object, legislation shall be introduced to
amend the Zoning Map and to approve the proposed development.
   (d)   Interdepartmental Review. Within three (3) working days after
acceptance of the application for approval of a PUD project, the Director shall
also transmit the application for review and comment to the Departments of
Public Service, Public Safety, Public Utilities, and Community Development, in
addition to any other department of City government as the Director deems
appropriate. Each such department shall return written comments to the City
Planning Director within ten (10) working days of receipt of the application.
   (e)   City Planning Commission Meeting. City Council shall refer the Planned
Unit Development legislation to the City Planning Commission for review and
recommendation. The City Planning Commission shall make its determination in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter and shall also seek advice from
the applicable design review advisory committee. The Commission shall recommend
either approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval within thirty (30)
calendar days of receipt of the legislation from City Council, unless the
applicant has requested an extension of this time period.
   (f)   City Council Public Hearing. Within thirty (30) calendar days of
action by the City Planning Commission, the City Planning Committee of City
Council shall hold a Public Hearing to consider mapping of the PUD Overlay
District and/or approval of the proposed PUD project. The Public Hearing shall
be advertised and conducted in accordance with Chapter
333 of this Zoning Code. Within ten (10) working days of the conclusion of the
Public Hearing, City Council shall take action on the application. A vote of
three-fourths (3/4) of the membership of City Council shall be required to take
any action different from the advisory action of the City Planning Commission.
   (g)   Transmittal to Commissioner of Building and Housing. Within three (3)
working days after approval of legislation for a PUD project by City Council,
the City Planning Director shall transmit a copy of the approved Site Plan and
any applicable conditions to the Commissioner of Building and Housing for use
in reviewing permit applications for development within the Planned Unit
Development Overlay District.
   (h)   Rehearing. Except as otherwise provided herein, no application that
has been finally disapproved by City Council shall be resubmitted within one
(1) year of the date of disapproval or of the expiration of any applicable
negotiation period except on the grounds of new factual evidence or a change in
conditions found to be valid by the City Planning Commission Director. A tie
vote shall not be considered a disapproval for purposes of this paragraph.
Revision of an application that removes characteristics on which its
disapproval was based may be considered such a change in conditions.
(Ord. No. 2093-93. Passed 11-29-93, eff. 12-7-93)
§ 334.05 Optional Two-Stage Approval
   In lieu of following the approval process as provided in Section
334.04, an applicant for mapping of a PUD Overlay District and for approval of
the corresponding PUD project may request a Two-Stage Approval, which is
conducted in the following manner.
   (a)   Stage 1 Approval. The applicant may submit a more generalized
application than otherwise required under Section
334.04. The Director, however, may refuse to accept any Stage 1 application
that he or she deems to contain insufficient information for meaningful review.
Stage 1 approval shall constitute approval of only the level of detail and
completeness presented in the Stage 1 application. No permits shall be issued
until after Stage 2 approval.
   (b)   Stage 2 Approval. The City Planning Commission and City Council may
take final action to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove an
application, or any phase thereof, for which it has given Stage 1 approval. The
general terms, conditions, and requirements set forth in a Stage 1 approval
shall not be modified, revoked, or otherwise impaired by final Stage 2 action
of the City except on the basis of relevant new or changed information
submitted with the Stage 2 application. The City Council, however, may rescind
Stage 1 approval, and thereby revoke such terms and conditions, if the
applicant has failed to file, within three hundred sixty (360) days of the date
of initial Stage 1 approval or of approval of an amendment thereto, either an
application for Stage 2 approval or an application for an amendment to the
previous Stage 1 approval. City Council may grant an extension of this time
period upon showing of good cause by the applicant.
(Ord. No. 2093-93. Passed 11-29-93, eff. 12-7-93)
§ 334.06 Submission of Covenants and Sureties
   (a)   Covenants. Before issuance of any permit or certificate, the applicant
shall submit deed restrictions or covenants of a homeowners’ or condominium
association which shall provide for:
      (1)   The improvement, preservation, regular maintenance, and public
liability insurance required for any open spaces, thoroughfares, utilities,
water retention or detention areas, and other common elements not to be
dedicated to the City or to another public body; and
      (2)   Such control over the use and exterior design of individual
structures, if any, as is necessary for continuing conformance to a Site Plan
approved under Section
334.04, which provision shall be binding on all future ownerships.
   (b)   Sureties. Before issuance of any permit of certificate, any financial
sureties required by City regulations or by action hereunder of the City
Planning Commission or City Council shall be filed with the City.
(Ord. No. 2093-93. Passed 11-29-93, eff. 12-7-93)
§ 334.07 Recording of Approved Site Plan
   (a)   Filing with County Recorder. The applicant shall file with the County
Recorder any Site Plan or Site Plan Amendment, except in the case of a Stage 1
approval, as approved in final action under Section
334.04 or division (b) of Section
334.05 as a plat for the development under the provisions of Chapter
309, whether or not the Site Plan development involves any subdivision of land.
The applicant shall submit evidence of such filing to the Division of
Engineering and Construction. A Building Permit shall not be issued until the
Site Plan is recorded. The applicant shall pay all recording costs.
   (b)   Filing with City Engineer. One (1) reproducible mylar copy of an
approved Site Plan or Site Plan Amendment shall be filed with the Division of
Engineering and Construction.
(Ord. No. 2093-93. Passed 11-29-93, eff. 12-7-93)
§ 334.08 Expiration of Approval; Site Restoration
   (a)   Expiration of Site Plan Approval. Site Plan approval, as granted for
PUD projects under Section
334.04 or division (b) of Section
334.05, shall be automatically revoked if construction on the development has
not begun within two (2) years of the date of final approval or conditional
approval thereof, or if the project has not been completed within four (4)
years of the date of final approval or conditional approval. City Council may
approve one (1) or more extensions of either time period and may establish an
initial completion period exceeding four (4) years for projects deemed to be
large or complex.
   (b)   Site Restoration. If construction on a property is permanently
discontinued as a result of permit expiration, revocation, or for any other
reason, the permittee shall repair any excavation, rough grading, or other
earth work and restore the site to a safe condition and sightly appearance, as
approved by the Commissioner of Engineering and Construction and the
Commissioner of Building and Housing.
(Ord. No. 2093-93. Passed 11-29-93, eff. 12-7-93)
§ 334.09 Amendments to Approved Site Plan
   (a)   Requirement for Amendment. Approval of an amendment to a Site Plan is
required for any material change, deletion, or addition made to such Site Plan
after Stage 1, Stage 2, or any other approval, or for a Stage 2 Site Plan that
does not conform to the Stage 1 Site Plan approved by City Council. The
decision for such approval shall be made, pursuant to Section
334.10, by the City Planning Commission and the City Council upon submission of
the amendment pursuant to division (b) of this section.
   (b)   Submission of Amendment. An applicant seeking approval of an amendment
shall file an application therefor with the Commissioner of Building and
Housing. The application shall describe the amendment sought and provide such
other information as the City Planning Commission or City Council may require.
It shall be accompanied by the number of copies of the proposed amendment
required by the Commissioner of Building and Housing and a filing fee
determined by the City Council.
(Ord. No. 2093-93. Passed 11-29-93, eff. 12-7-93)
§ 334.10 Amendment Approval Process
   (a)   Minor Amendments. The Commissioner of Building and Housing shall refer
any request for amendment of an approved Site Plan to the Director of the City
Planning Commission. The Director shall determine whether the amendment sought
is a Minor Amendment as defined in Section
334.11. No public hearing shall be required for a Minor Amendment. An applicant
may appeal a decision of the Planning Commission on a Minor Amendment to the
Board of Zoning Appeals. The City Planning Commission shall approve Minor
Amendments in accordance with the criteria and standards established in this
chapter for approval of PUD projects.
   (b)   Other Amendments. For amendments other than Minor Amendments, the full
Approval Process set forth in Section
334.04 shall be followed.
   (c)   Approval and Recording. The Planning Commission or City Council shall
approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove an amendment. An amended Site
Plan shall be recorded in accordance with Section
334.07.
(Ord. No. 2093-93. Passed 11-29-93, eff. 12-7-93)
§ 334.11 Approval of Minor Amendments
   A Minor Amendment to a Site Plan shall be any change from the previously
approved Site Plan, other than changes required by the City, that does not
involve any of the items listed in divisions (a)-(e) below.
   (a)   Land Use Change. Any change in land use type or housing type resulting
in the addition or removal of a land use or housing type from that shown on the
approved plan.
   (b)   Location Change. Any change in the location of a structure, parking or
loading area, common or public open space, or any area or right-of-way to be
conveyed to or reserved for a public body, by more than twenty (20) feet in any
direction, nor a reduction in the spacing between any structures by more than
twenty percent (20%).
   (c)   Standards Change. Any change of more than twenty percent (20%) in any
nonlocational quantitative specification of the previously approved Site Plan,
having the effect of increasing density or reducing open space or landscaping,
including:
      (1)   The number or any dimension of lots, yards, structures, pedestrian
ways, or vehicular thoroughfares;
      (2)   Any single or two (2) family residential density;
      (3)   Coverage of the site by structures;
      (4)   Amount of common open space acreage;
      (5)   Utility line capacity reduction;
      (6)   Amount of floor area of development other than single and two (2)
family residential dwellings;
      (7)   Amount of land to be conveyed to or reserved for a public body;
      (8)   Size or capacity of any parking or loading area;
      (9)   Amount or dimensions of proposed tree or ground cover, landscaping,
or screening.
   (d)   Greater Variation Change. Any other change that causes the development
to fall short of meeting the requirements of any normally applicable regulation
to any greater degree than provided on the previously approved Site Plan.
   (e)   Multiple Amendments. Any change which, when considered together with
Minor Amendments previously approved for the same development, fails to meet
the foregoing criteria.
(Ord. No. 2093-93. Passed 11-29-93, eff. 12-7-93)
§ 334.12 Issuance and Revocation of Permit
   (a)   Issuance. Subsequent to approval of all necessary plans and
submissions, the Commissioner of Building and Housing shall issue any required
permit or certificate, specifying any conditions or restrictions upon which
City Council subjected its approval.
   (b)   Revocation. The Commissioner of Building and Housing may at any time
revoke any permit or certificate issued pursuant to division (a) if:
      (1)   The action taken after issuance is not consistent with plans and
information submitted as part of the approved application; or
      (2)   The resulting development fails to comply with any applicable
provisions of City regulations or any conditions of the approved application;
or
      (3)   Compliance with such conditions is not maintained at any time; or
      (4)   Approval has expired, as provided in Section
334.08.
   (c)   Notice of Revocation. The Commissioner of Building and Housing shall
give the permittee or Certificate holder fifteen (15) business days notice of
any intended revocation and the reasons therefor and an opportunity within that
period to answer any charges of noncompliance or to propose measures to bring
the permitted action into compliance within a reasonable time.
(Ord. No. 2093-93. Passed 11-29-93, eff. 12-7-93)
§ 334.13 Permits for Developed Lots
   After completion of initial construction, no Building Permit or Certificate
of Occupancy shall be issued for any lot within a development or any phase
thereof for which a Site Plan has been approved under Section
334.04 or division (b) of Section
334.05 unless one (1) of the following applies:
   (a)   The application for a Building Permit or Certificate of Occupancy
conforms to the approved Final Site Plan; or
   (b)   The application conforms to all regulations applicable to properties
for which a Site Plan has not been approved and is also generally consistent,
in the judgment of the Director, with the approved Site Plan; or
   (c)   An amendment to the approved Site Plan is approved under Section
334.10 to allow the action for which the Permit or Certificate is sought; or
   (d)   For Permits or Certificates affecting a single lot of less than one-
fourth (1/4) acre containing less than five thousand (5,000) square feet of
gross floor area, a Variance from the Site Plan or the regulations of this Code
has been approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(Ord. No. 2093-93. Passed 11-29-93, eff. 12-7-93)
§ 334.14 Incentives
   The following incentives, in the form of relief from normal regulatory
requirements, are offered for developments which meet the standards and
criteria established in this chapter for approval of PUD projects. Such
incentives shall not be considered Variances and shall not be required to
conform to the approval criteria for Variances.
   (a)   Variable Zoning Standards. Except as provided by Section
334.16, standards for lot area, lot width, building height, yard dimensions,
off-street parking and loading, landscaping and screening, and signs, may vary
from those established in applicable sections of the Zoning Code.
   (b)   Buildings Per Lot. In an approved Site Plan, more than one (1)
principal building may be located on a lot.
   (c)   Variable Subdivision Standards. Dimensional and design standards for
subdivisions and subdivision improvements, such as for streets, blocks, and
sidewalks, may vary from standards established in Chapter
309 and any other relevant City ordinances. Specifications for such
construction elements as materials, thicknesses and tolerances, however, may
not be varied.
   (d)   Mixed Land Uses. In residential zoning districts, a maximum of thirty
percent (30%) of the gross floor area of all residential uses in the PUD
project may be devoted to residential uses which are not otherwise permitted;
whereas a maximum of ten percent (10%) of the project’s gross floor may be
devoted to non-residential uses. In non-residential zoning districts, a maximum
of twenty percent (20%) of the PUD project’s gross floor area may be devoted to
uses which are not otherwise permitted.
(Ord. No. 1011-94. Passed 6-13-94, eff. 6-22-94)
§ 334.15 Quality of Planning
   In order to be granted the flexibility permitted under the provisions of
this chapter, a Site Plan submitted hereunder shall evidence a level of
integrated planning and amenity exceeding the level that may be achieved under
otherwise applicable regulations. Features contributing to this higher level of
planning and amenity include, but are not limited to, the following:
   (a)   Siting of buildings and other facilities in greater harmony with the
existing man-made and natural environments on the site and in its surroundings;
   (b)   Buffering of uses from incompatible nearby uses that is superior to
that routinely required by City regulations;
   (c)   An amount or quality of landscaping superior to that normally required
by City regulations;
   (d)   The amount, quality, and interconnectedness of public or common open
space or of areas of public access to the lakefront, riverfront, and other
areas of special amenity;
   (e)   Special accommodations for bus or rapid transit, such as weather-
protected access from buildings to rapid transit or bus stations or stops:
   (f)   Unusually sensitive adaption of a by-passed infill parcel to the
character of its environs;
   (g)   Enclosed, underground, depressed, or outstandingly landscaped parking
areas;
   (h)   Varied building setbacks or other measures to reduce monotony in
external appearance in multi- building developments;
   (i)   Superior provision in the planning of the site for public security and
crime prevention;
   (j)   Architectural design meeting exceptionally high standards of quality
and character; and
   (k)   Other features relating to the physical development planning of the
property as determined by the City Planning Commission or City Council.
(Ord. No. 2093-93. Passed 11-29-93, eff. 12-7-93)
§ 334.16 Specific Development Standards
   A PUD development project granted relief from normal regulatory requirements
through this chapter shall meet the following specific standards regarding
density, yards, and zero lot line development.
   (a)   Maximum Density. Neither the aggregate number of single and two (2)
family dwellings, the total floor area, nor the total land coverage by
buildings in the development as a whole, or any phase thereof, shall exceed the
maximums allowed in the applicable sections of the Zoning Code (i.e.,
underlying zoning district) by an amount greater than ten percent (10%).
      (1)   For residential uses, land area devoted to new permanent common or
public open space provided as part of a development within its residential
areas may be included as part of lot or site area for purposes of these
calculations.
      (2)   For purposes of division (a)(1), there shall not be counted as open
space any land covered by buildings or devoted to streets, parking, loading,
service, refuse disposal, storage, vehicular maneuvering or circulation, or
fifty percent (50%) of wet and twenty five percent (25%) of dry stormwater
retention or detention basins.
   (b)   Yard Obstructions. Where the normal definitions of yards do not apply,
the Site Plan shall either:
      (1)   Designate which open spaces on the property are to be treated as
front, corner side, interior side, or rear yards for purposes of conformance to
Chapter
357; or
      (2)   Be accompanied by homeowners’ or condominium association covenants
or other legal instruments governing such obstructions.
   (c)   Zero Lot Line Development. Subject to the restrictions of this
division, the otherwise required width or depth of certain yards may be reduced
to zero (0) in subdivisions of detached principal residential or non-
residential buildings on individual lots. This provision is intended to allow
more usable and more easily maintained open spaces on smaller lots, while also
protecting privacy and assuring light, air, and safety. Zero (0) lot line
developments shall be approved only under the provisions of this chapter except
where reduction of a yard to zero qualifies as a variance.
      (1)   Minimum Size. No zero (0) lot line development shall include fewer
than six (6) existing or newly subdivided lots. Zero lot line plans shall not
apply to isolated individual lots in areas of conventionally sited buildings.
      (2)   Yards.
         A.   The following yards shall not be reduced to zero (0):
            1.   Front and corner side yards;
            2.   Yards that abut an alley;
            3.   Yards that abut a lot not included in a zero lot line
development;
            4.   Yards that, if reduced to zero, would result in principal
buildings on adjoining lots being separated by less than five (5) feet at any
point, except for residential units designed as townhouse or attached single-
family units.
         B.   If an interior side yard is reduced to zero (0), the remaining
interior or corner side yard shall have a minimum width equal to the sum of the
normally required widths of both side yards, except in the case of attached
residential units.
      (3)   Required Easement.
         A.   A perpetual easement shall be provided in every yard that abuts a
yard reduced to zero (0) on an abutting lot. The easement shall be in favor of
the owner of the abutting building wall.
         B.   The easement shall be no less than four (4) feet in width
extending along that portion of the lot line that abuts a building on the other
lot and including a point of access to the easement from either a building exit
or yard or other open space on the adjoining lot.
         C.   The easement shall be shown on the recorded plat and incorporated
into each deed transferring title to the property. Proof of recording of such
easement shall be submitted to the Commissioner of Building and Housing prior
to issuance of a Building Permit.
         D.   Within the easement, there shall be no obstruction otherwise
permitted in the applicable yard if it impedes access to the wall on the
adjacent lot for painting, cleaning, maintenance, and repair.
         E.   Roof overhangs shall not project more than two (2) feet into the
easement on the abutting lot. The roof shall be so designed that water runoff
onto the lot is confined to the easement area.
      (4)   Wall Openings. No window, door, air conditioning unit, or other
opening shall be located on a building wall that abuts a yard reduced to zero.
(Ord. No. 1011-94. Passed 6-13-94, eff. 6-22-94)
§ 334.17 Site Plan Approval Criteria
   A Site Plan submitted for approval as a PUD project shall be reviewed in
accordance with the following approval criteria, in addition to other standards
established in this chapter.
   (a)   Site Plan Requirements. The Site Plan shall meet all requirements for
PUD projects set forth in this chapter. No modifications to any applicable Code
regulations are allowed, other than those permitted herein.
   (b)   Consistency with City Plan. The Site Plan shall be generally
consistent with Cleveland’s Comprehensive Plan as adopted by the City Planning
Commission.
   (c)   Public Welfare. The Site Plan shall not jeopardize the public health,
safety, or welfare.
   (d)   Compatibility with Surroundings. Neither the Site Plan nor any portion
thereof shall be unduly injurious to the use and enjoyment of properties within
the Plan or in its vicinity; nor shall the Site Plan, or any portion of it,
seriously impair property values or environmental quality or significantly
impede the development, redevelopment, or conservation of properties within the
surrounding area.
   (e)   Circulation and Parking. The Site Plan shall provide for safe and
efficient circulation of motor vehicles, pedestrians, and, where applicable,
marine or bicycle traffic into, within, and out of the property. The Site Plan
shall also provide for adequate access by service and emergency vehicles. It
shall provide off- street parking and loading areas appropriate in size and
location to planned land uses and to the location of the site. Circulation,
parking, and loading facilities shall be adequate in location, size, capacity,
and design to ensure safe and efficient circulation of automobiles, trucks,
buses, bicycles, pedestrians, fire trucks, garbage trucks, boats, and snow
plows, as appropriate, without creating unnecessary traffic hazards, blocking
traffic, attracting congestion, creating excessive pedestrian- vehicular
conflict, generating unnecessary through- traffic within the site, or unduly
interfering with the safety or capacity of adjacent streets, sidewalks, or
waterways.
   (f)   Open Spaces and Buffering. Open space between all buildings shall be
adequate to allow for light and air, access by fire-fighting equipment, and
privacy where walls have windows, terraces, or adjoining patios. Open space or
buffering through landscaping or screening along the perimeter of the Site Plan
shall be sufficient to reasonably protect existing and permitted future uses of
adjacent property from adverse effects. The size, shape, and location of a
substantial portion of any public or common open space provided in residential
areas shall be useable for recreation purposes.
   (g)   Public Services. The land uses, intensities, and phasing of the Site
Plan shall be consistent with the anticipated ability of the City, the school
system, and other public bodies to provide and economically support police and
fire protection, water supply, sewage disposal, schools, and other public
facilities and services required by the development, without placing undue
burden on existing residents and businesses. The Site Plan shall not
unnecessarily require excessive public investment in installation or
maintenance of facilities or services to serve the property but shall be
reasonably efficient in its use of public services.
   (h)   Environment. The Site Plan shall not create, or fail to adequately
mitigate, adverse environmental effects, such as harmful blockage of light and
air, excessive street-level wind currents, glare, noise, or vibration. The Site
Plan shall provide for effective storm drainage with minimum ponding, erosion,
sedimentation, and discharge of runoff onto abutting lots.
   (i)   Security. The Site Plan shall minimize physical features that provide
opportunities for anti- social or criminal behavior or that unduly threaten
personal safety either on the site or on adjacent streets or abutting lots.
   (j)   Phasing. Each development phase shown in the Site Plan may, together
with any phases that preceded it, exist as an independent unit that meets all
of the foregoing criteria and all other applicable regulations herein, even if
no subsequent phase is ever completed.
(Ord. No. 2093-93. Passed 11-29-93, eff. 12-7-93)
§ 334.18 Architectural Design Review
   (a)   Applicability. Within a PUD Overlay District which includes within its
boundaries an approved PUD project site plan, no Building Permit shall be
issued for any exterior construction or exterior alteration, except as provided
in division (b) of this section, without issuance of a Certificate of
Appropriateness by the City Planning Commission. In reviewing an application
for a Certificate of Appropriateness, the Commission shall be guided by the
general architectural standards presented in Section
341.05 of the Zoning Code and by any design guidelines approved by the City
Planning Commission for the subject site. The applicant may seek approval of
the Certificate of Appropriateness concurrently with or subsequent to approval
of the Site Plan for the PUD project.
   (b)   Exemptions. No Certificate of Appropriateness shall be required for
the following:
      (1)   Routine maintenance and repair activities resulting in no change in
external appearance;
      (2)   Alterations to buildings and properties which are exclusively
residential in use; and
      (3)   Alterations or demolition mandated by the Commissioner of Building
and Housing to address an immediate danger to human life or health and,
therefore, requiring prompt repair or removal, in accordance with the
provisions of division (i) of Section
3103.09 of the Cleveland Building Code.
(Ord. No. 2093-93. Passed 11-29-93, eff. 12-7-93)
§ 334.19 Contents of Submissions
   The following information shall be submitted for all PUD project
applications, except for those submissions made for Stage 1 Approvals pursuant
to division (a) of Section
334.05.
   (a)   Names and Addresses. The name, address, and weekday daytime phone
number of:
      (1)   The applicant;
      (2)   His or her attorney or agent, if any; and
      (3)   Any developer, site planner, architect, or engineer involved in
project plans.
   (b)   Name of Project. The name of the development project, if any.
   (c)   Legal Description. Legal descriptions, using metes and bounds or
subdivision block and lot number, of the subject property as a whole and of
each phase of the proposed development thereof.
   (d)   Location. The street address of the subject property.
   (e)   Filing Fee. The applicable fees for the Division of Building and
Housing and the City Planning Commission.
   (f)   Authorization. Written authorization for the filing by the ownership
or management of the property, if different from the applicant. Authorization
by a manager shall be accompanied by evidence satisfactory to the Commissioner
of Building and Housing of his or her authority to act on behalf of the owner.
   (g)   Use. Descriptions of present and proposed uses of the subject
property.
   (h)   Criteria Statement. Statement of reasons why applicant believes action
requested conforms to applicable Approval Criteria.
   (i)   Common Area Maintenance. Deeds of easement agreements conveying
ownership interests in any parcel required or proposed to be conveyed to any
public body. In projects with common areas not to be dedicated to a public
body, organizational details of all proposed property owners or condominium
associations to be responsible for maintenance of common areas. Proposed
protective covenants or deed restrictions to govern common open space or other
areas. Other documents, if any, governing maintenance of common open space and
other common areas. (If the required documents are not available at the time of
submission, approval may be made conditional upon satisfactory submission prior
to issuance of permits.)
   (j)   Deed Location. Volume and page number of location of recorded deed to
subject property in county map records.
   (k)   Zoning. The zoning district classifications of the subject property
and all other properties within two hundred (200) feet thereof.
   (l)   Structure Heights. Building heights or fence heights, as applicable,
of proposed structures and existing structures to be retained.
   (m)   Dwelling Units. Numbers of dwelling units in proposed buildings and
existing buildings proposed to be retained, by number of bedrooms and by any
special populations to which occupancy is to be restricted (e.g., elderly,
students, or low-income households).
   (n)   Floor Area. Gross and net floor area, as defined herein, of proposed
buildings and existing buildings proposed to be retained, by type of use.
   (o)   Number of Employees. Proposed number of permanent employees to be
accommodated on the property, including existing employment proposed to be
retained, by shift and by full- or part-time status; hours of shifts or other
working hours.
   (p)   Lot Coverage. Square footage of the lot to be covered by principal
buildings, accessory structures, and paved surfaces.
   (q)   Plat of Survey. A current plat of survey.
   (r)   Site Plan. A Site Plan, in a number of copies specified by the
Commissioner of Building and Housing, meeting the requirements of Section
334.19. No site plan shall be required for rezonings initiated by the City.
   (s)   Renderings. Architectural renderings showing substantial design intent
for proposed structures, but not necessarily final design detail, unless the
applicant seeks final design approval, in which case detailed, colored
elevations drawings shall be submitted.
   (t)   Phasing. Chronological schedule of expected beginning and ending dates
for proposed stages of construction and improvement of all structures; common
or public areas; circulation ways; parking, loading, and service areas; and
utilities, showing the interim use and maintenance of areas not under
construction in each phase.
   (u)   Open Space. A written statement of the advantages any proposed common
or public open space offers at each location for such use and ways such spaces
might be used.
   (v)   Traffic Analysis. If deemed necessary by the Director, professional
analysis of estimated vehicular trip generated by each phase of the completed
development per day and during AM and PM peak hours – including the number of
pass-by trips and for mixed use developments, internal trips; the hours of
expected AM and PM peak volumes; the assignment of traffic volumes to each
driveway or access road into the site; the impact on existing traffic loads in
the area; and road construction or traffic control measures needed to
accommodate the new traffic.
   (w)   Utility Capacity. If deemed necessary by the Director, evidence
concerning the ability of available treatment and distribution capacities of
sewer and water supply systems to handle the loads likely to be generated by
the development.
   (x)   Final Plat. A Plat of Subdivision and final engineering plans and
specifications as required by Chapter
309 of the Codified Ordinances.
   (y)   Hazardous Materials. Descriptions of any known hazardous materials
contamination of the site, including buried storage tanks. Description of any
hazardous wastes to be generated by the proposed project and of plans for
disposal thereof.
   (z)   Other Information. Any other information required by applicable Code
regulations, and any information that is deemed necessary by the Director to
determine conformance with all applicable Code regulations.
(Ord. No. 2093-93. Passed 11-29-93, eff. 12-7-93)
§ 334.20 Contents of Site Plan
   The following information shall be included on site plans for all PUD
project applications, except for those submitted for Stage 1 Approval pursuant
to division (a) of Section
334.05.
   (a)   Scale. Number and graphic scales, north arrow, and date of
preparation. Scale used shall be such as the City Planning Commission Director
may require.
   (b)   Boundaries. Boundaries of the development and of each phase thereof.
   (c)   Dimensions. Lot lines and dimensions and areas of lots.
   (d)   Easements. Easements and encroachments on the subject property and
easements on abutting property in favor of the subject property.
   (e)   Project Data. Data indicating for each development phase:
      (1)   The number of dwelling units broken down by number of bedrooms;
      (2)   The gross floor area, as defined herein, by use type;
      (3)   The number of lots;
      (4)   The gross and net site area, as defined herein; and
      (5)   The land area devoted to streets, off- street parking, off-street
loading, recreation space, and each housing and land use type.
   (f)   Drainage. Existing and proposed drainage patterns and appurtenances
for collecting storm water.
   (g)   Landscaping.
      (1)   Existing: Existing wooded areas and isolated trees four (4) inches
or more in diameter at one (1) foot above natural grade at the base of the
tree.
      (2)   Proposed:
         A.   Location, quantity, diameter, installation height, maturity
height, caliper at one (1) foot above proposed grade, botanic name, and common
name, of all proposed living and non-living landscaping materials and existing
materials to be preserved;
         B.   Types and boundaries of proposed ground cover and identification
of grass areas to be sodded, plugged or sprigged, and seeded;
         C.   Location and contours at one (1) foot intervals of all proposed
berming;
         D.   Dimensions and descriptions, renderings, elevations, or
photographs indicating the external appearance, including materials and colors,
of all sides of proposed fences, walls, ornamental lighting, and screening
treatments; and
         E.   Measures to be taken to protect new and preserved existing trees
during construction.
   (h)   Structures. Location, type, shape, dimensions, gross and net floor
areas as defined herein, orientation, height in feet, finished grade elevations
at all entrances and corners, and number of stories of all existing and
proposed structures, including buildings, sign structures, fences, walls,
retaining walls, screening, street furniture, bridges, culverts, exterior
lighting fixtures, and entrance features. Also, roof lines and roof overhangs
in relation to all lot lines and easements.
   (i)   Parking. Location, type, shape, dimensions, surface type, area in
square feet, and capacity in number of vehicles of off-street parking and
loading spaces and areas, including aisles, curbing, wheel stops, islands,
guard rails, driveways, and curb cuts. Number and locations of spaces open to
the public, restricted to tenants or customers, and reserved spaces. Number and
locations of spaces that are free, available for hourly or daily rental, or
leased long-term.
   (j)   Open Uses. Location, dimensions, area in square feet, and surface type
for open storage, refuse disposal and service areas.
   (k)   Topography. Map showing existing contours at two (2) foot intervals
and proposed grading and contours. Description of amounts and methods of any
excavation, dredging or filling proposed, including use of blasting and pile
driving and of potential for ground movement and settlement during excavation
and impact on adjacent buildings and utility lines.
   (l)   Boundaries. Current school district and municipal boundary lines on or
adjacent to site.
   (m)   Circulation. Existing and proposed number, location, alignment,
dimensions, design, and construction standards of all public and private
thoroughfares, sidewalks, pedestrian and bicycle paths, fire lanes, railroad
rights-of-way, curb cuts, and driveways. Existing and proposed streets,
intersections, and curb cuts adjacent to the site.
   Information for all curb cuts shall include:
      (1)   Anticipated users (i.e., employees, patrons, delivery trucks, or
other uses);
      (2)   Curb cut width, number of lanes, radii of curb returns or angles of
flares, dimensions of medians or islands, if any, and all other geometrics; and
      (3)   Distance to property lines, to other curb cuts, existing or
proposed, on the subject or adjacent lots, and to street intersections.
   (n)   Common Areas. The number, location, acreage, dimensions, proposed
ownership, and provisions for maintenance of any proposed recreational and non-
recreational public or common open spaces.
   (o)   Water Areas. Dimensions and locations of existing and proposed natural
or artificial bodies of water, flood plains, marsh areas, drainage ditches, wet
or dry stormwater detention or retention areas, and any proposed modifications
to existing water courses or water bodies, including impact on ground water
levels.
   (p)   Subsurface Data. If deemed necessary by the Director, data on
subsurface soil, rock, and groundwater conditions.
   (q)   Utilities. Size, purpose, and location of existing and proposed public
and private utilities, utility easements, and drainage facilities and proposed
connections thereto on or within one hundred (100) feet of the property.
Locations of existing and proposed hydrants, catch basins, manholes, and
valves.
   (r)   Other Information. Any other information required by applicable Code
regulations, or that is deemed necessary by the Director to determine
conformance to the regulations of this chapter and all other applicable Code
regulations.
(Ord. No. 2093-93. Passed 11-29-93, eff. 12-7-93)
CHAPTER 335 – USE DISTRICTS
335.01   Designation of Use Districts
335.02   Residence and Dwelling House Districts Defined
Cross-reference:
   Area districts established, CO
355.01
   Business Districts: prohibited and permitted uses, regulations, CO
Ch. 343
   Design review, CO
Ch. 341
   Height districts established, CO
353.01
   Industrial Districts: permitted and prohibited uses, regulations, CO
Ch. 345
   Location of amusement parks, CO
687.05
   Location of Karting parks, CO
691.13
   Residential Districts; prohibited and permitted uses, regulations, CO
Ch. 337
   Residential parking districts, CO
Ch. 339
   Zoning definitions, CO
Ch. 325
Statutory reference:
   Division into districts, RC 713.06, 713.10
§ 335.01 Designation of Use Districts
   The City is hereby divided into the Public Land Protective District and into
seventeen (17) use districts which shall be known, in order of restrictiveness,
beginning with the most restrictive as:
   Limited One-Family Districts;
   One-Family Districts;
   Two-Family Districts;
   Townhouse (RA) Districts;
   Limited Multi-Family Districts;
   Multi-Family Districts;
   Downtown Residential (DR) Districts;
   Residence-Office Districts;
   Parking Districts;
   Local Retail Business Districts;
   Shopping Center Districts;
   University (College) Retail Districts;
   General Retail Business Districts;
   Residence-Industry Districts;
   Semi-Industry Districts;
   General Industry Districts;
   Unrestricted Industry Districts.
(Ord. No. 338-97. Passed 3-26-01, eff. 4-2-01)
§ 335.02 Residence and Dwelling House Districts Defined
   (a)   As used in this Zoning Code, “Residence Districts” mean any one (1) or
all of the first eight (8) use districts enumerated in Section
335.01.
   (b)   As used in this Zoning Code. “Dwelling House District” mean any or all
Residence Districts other than Multi-Family Districts.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this Zoning Code, no building or other
structure or premises in a Dwelling House District shall hereafter be erected,
altered, used, arranged or designed to be used, in whole or in part for other
than a dwelling house.
(Ord. No. 338-97. Passed 3-26-01, eff. 4-2-01)
CHAPTER 336 – URBAN GARDEN DISTRICT
336.01   Urban Garden District
336.02   Definitions
336.03   Permitted Main Uses
336.04   Permitted Accessory Uses
336.05   Supplemental Regulations
§ 336.01 Urban Garden District
   The “Urban Garden District” is hereby established as part of the Zoning Code
to ensure that urban garden areas are appropriately located and protected to
meet needs for local food production, community health, community education,
garden-related job training, environmental enhancement, preservation of green
space, and community enjoyment on sites for which urban gardens represent the
highest and best use for the community.
(Ord. No. 208-07. Passed 3-5-07, eff. 3-9-07)
§ 336.02 Definitions
   (a)   “Community garden” means an area of land managed and maintained by a
group of individuals to grow and harvest food crops and/or non-food, ornamental
crops, such as flowers, for personal or group use, consumption or donation.
Community gardens may be divided into separate plots for cultivation by one (1)
or more individuals or may be farmed collectively by members of the group and
may include common areas maintained and used by group members.
   (b)   “Market garden” means an area of land managed and maintained by an
individual or group of individuals to grow and harvest food crops and/or non-
food, ornamental crops, such as flowers, to be sold for profit.
   (c)   “Greenhouse” means a building made of glass, plastic, or fiberglass in
which plants are cultivated.
   (d)   “Hoophouse” means a structure made of PVC piping or other material
covered with translucent plastic, constructed in a “half-round” or “hoop”
shape.
   (e)   “Coldframe” means an unheated outdoor structure consisting of a wooden
or concrete frame and a top of glass or clear plastic, used for protecting
seedlings and plants from the cold.
(Ord. No. 208-07. Passed 3-5-07, eff. 3-9-07)
§ 336.03 Permitted Main Uses
   Only the following main uses shall be permitted in an Urban Garden District:
   (a)   Community gardens which may have occasional sales of items grown at
the site;
   (b)   Market gardens, including the sale of crops produced on the site.
(Ord. No. 208-07. Passed 3-5-07, eff. 3-9-07)
§ 336.04 Permitted Accessory Uses
   Only the following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted in an
Urban Garden District:
   (a)   Greenhouses, hoophouses, cold-frames, and similar structures used to
extend the growing season;
   (b)   Open space associated with and intended for use as garden areas;
   (c)   Signs limited to identification, information and directional signs,
including sponsorship information where the sponsorship information is clearly
secondary to other permitted information on any particular sign, in conformance
with the regulations of Section
336.05;
   (d)   Benches, bike racks, raised/accessible planting beds, compost bins,
picnic tables, seasonal farm stands, fences, garden art, rain barrel systems,
chicken coops, beehives, and children’s play areas;
   (e)   Buildings, limited to tool sheds, shade pavilions, barns, rest-room
facilities with composting toilets, and planting preparation houses, in
conformance with the regulations of Section
336.05;
   (f)   Off-street parking and walkways, in conformance with the regulations
of Section
336.05.
(Ord. No. 208-07. Passed 3-5-07, eff. 3-9-07)
§ 336.05 Supplemental Regulations
   Uses and structures in an Urban Garden District shall be developed and
maintained in accordance with the following regulations.
   (a)   Location. Buildings shall be set back from property lines of a
Residential District a minimum distance of five (5) feet.
   (b)   Height. No building or other structure shall be greater than twenty-
five (25) feet in height.
   (c)   Building Coverage. The combined area of all buildings, excluding
greenhouses and hoophouses, shall not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the
garden site lot area.
   (d)   Parking and Walkways. Off-street parking shall be permitted only for
those garden sites exceeding fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet in lot area.
Such parking shall be limited in size to ten percent (10%) of the garden site
lot area and shall be either unpaved or surfaced with gravel or similar loose
material or shall be paved with pervious paving material. Walkways shall be
unpaved except as necessary to meet the needs of individuals with disabilities.
   (e)   Signs. Signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet in area per side
and shall not exceed six (6) feet in height.
   (f)   Seasonal Farm Stands. Seasonal farm stands shall be removed from the
premises or stored inside a building on the premises during that time of the
year when the garden is not open for public use.
   (g)   Fences. Fences shall not exceed six (6) feet in height, shall be at
least fifty percent (50%) open if they are taller than four (4) feet, and shall
be constructed of wood, chain link, or ornamental metal. For any garden that is
fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet in area or greater and is in a location
that is subject to design review and approval by the City Planning Commission
or Landmarks Commission, no fence shall be installed without review by the City
Planning Director, on behalf of the Commission, who may confer with a
neighborhood design review committee, if one exists, so that best efforts are
taken to ensure that the fence is compatible in appearance and placement with
the character of nearby properties.
(Ord. No. 208-07. Passed 3-5-07, eff. 3-9-07)
CHAPTER 337 – RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
337.01   Limited One-Family Districts
337.02   One-Family Districts
337.03   Two-Family District
337.031   Townhouse (RA) Districts
337.04   Purpose and Development of Limited Multi-Family Districts
337.05   Permitted Buildings and Uses in Limited Multi-Family District
337.06   Area, Yard and Height Requirements for Apartment Houses
337.07   Reserved
337.08   Multi-Family District
337.081   Downtown Residential (DR) District
337.09   Purpose of Residence-Office Districts
337.10   Permitted Buildings and Uses in Residence-Office Districts
337.11   Residence-Office District Off-Street Parking
337.12   Parking Plan to Accompany Building Permit Application
337.13   Required Parking Spaces
337.14   Location of Required Off-Street Parking Space
337.15   Joint Off-Street Parking Facilities
337.16   Sale of Fuel and Repairs
337.17   Size of Off-Street Parking Space
337.18   Access and Maintenance to Off-Street Parking Spaces
337.19   Parking Recreational Vehicles in a Residential District
337.20   Lighting for Off-Street Parking Spaces
337.21   Height, Area, Yard and Court Requirements for Residence-Office
Districts
337.22   Performance Bond and Enforcement; Residence-Office Districts
337.23   Accessory Uses in Residence Districts
337.231   Portable Storage Containers
337.24   Nursing Homes, Convalescent Homes, Old Folks Homes, Homes for the Aged
and Rest Homes
337.25   Agricultural Uses in Residential Districts
337.251   Limited Lodging in Residence Districts
Cross-reference:
   Area regulations for Residence Districts, CO
355.04
   Front yard regulations, CO
357.04
   Landscaping, screening, and parking lot and public garage lighting, CO
Ch. 352
   Lighting for off-street parking spaces, CO
349.09
   Maximum height of accessory buildings in Residence Districts, CO
353.05
   Off-street parking and loading requirements, CO
Ch. 349
   Residence District defined, CO
335.02
   Residence-Industry District defined; uses, CO
345.01,
345.02
   Residential Parking District; purpose, permitted uses, maintenance, CO
Ch. 339
   Screening of off-street parking spaces adjacent to Residence Districts, CO
349.08
   Variance from use regulations, CO
329.03
   Yard requirements for large-scale housing developments, CO
357.10
   Yards for mixed occupancy buildings used in part for Residential or
Institutional H, CO
357.03
Statutory reference:
   Off-street parking facilities, RC 717.05 et seq.
§ 337.01 Limited One-Family Districts
   (a)   Permitted Buildings and Uses. In a Limited One-Family District the
following buildings and uses are permitted:
      (1)   One-family dwelling houses and their accessory buildings and uses.
Except as otherwise provided in this Zoning Code, no main building or premises
in a Limited One-Family District shall hereafter be erected, altered, used,
arranged or designed to be used, in whole or in part for other than a dwelling
house occupied by not more than one (1) family;
      (2)   Schools, dormitories constructed or operated by an existing
permitted school, libraries or museums and police protective facilities
therefor, providing they are not conducted as a gainful business, places of
worship, if permitted by the Board of Zoning Appeals after public notice and
public hearing under appropriate safeguards and such special conditions as the
Board deems necessary, and if in the judgment of the Board such uses and
buildings are appropriately located and designed and will meet a community need
without adversely affecting the neighborhood.
   (b)   Proximity to Other Buildings. Every dwelling house hereafter erected
in a Limited One-Family District shall be not less than twenty (20) feet from
any other main building in the District.
(Ord. No. 918-59. Passed 6-1-59, eff. 7-12-59)
§ 337.02 One-Family Districts
   In a One-Family District, the following buildings and uses and their
accessory buildings and uses are permitted:
   (a)   Dwelling houses, each occupied by not more than one (1) family and not
more than two (2) roomers or boarders;
   (b)   Playgrounds, parks;
   (c)   The extension of existing cemeteries;
   (d)   Railroad rights-of-way, not including switching, storage or freight
yards or industrial sidings;
   (e)   Agricultural uses, subject to the regulations of Section
337.25 and Section
347.02;
   (f)   The following buildings and uses, if located not less than fifteen
(15) feet from any adjoining premises in a Residence District not used for a
similar purpose:
      (1)   Churches and other places of worship, but not including funeral
chapels or mortuary chapels;
      (2)   Telephone exchanges and static transformer stations, provided there
is no public business office or any storage yard or storage building operated
in connection therewith;
      (3)   Bus turn-around and layover areas operated by a public transit
agency provided that no buildings other than a passenger shelter and restroom
are located at each site, and provided, further, that any layover space
accommodates no more than two (2) buses.
   (g)   The following buildings and uses, if approved by the Board of Zoning
Appeals after public notice and public hearing, and if adequate yard spaces and
other safeguards to preserve the character of the neighborhood are provided,
and if in the judgment of the Board such buildings and uses are appropriately
located and designed and will meet a community need without adversely affecting
the neighborhood:
      (1)   A temporary or permanent use of a building by a nonprofit
organization for a dormitory, fraternity or sorority house, for the
accommodation of those enrolled in or employed by an educational institution
permitted in the District;
      (2)   Fire stations, police stations;
      (3)   The following buildings and uses, if located not less than thirty
(30) feet from any adjoining premises in a Residence District not used for a
similar purpose, and subject to the review and approval of the Board of Zoning
Appeals as stated above:
         A.   Public libraries or museums, and public or private schools or
colleges including accessory laboratories, provided such private schools or
colleges are not conducted as a gainful business;
         B.   Recreation or community center buildings, parish houses and
grounds for games and sports, except those of which a chief activity is one
customarily carried on primarily for gain;
         C.   Day nurseries, kindergartens;
         D.   Hospitals, sanitariums, nursing, rest or convalescent homes, not
primarily for contagious diseases nor for the care of drug or liquor patients,
nor for the care of the insane or developmentally disabled;
         E.   Orphanages;
         F.   Homes for the aged or similar homes;
         G.   Charitable institutions not for correctional purposes.
      (4)   The following buildings and uses, if located not less than fifty
(50) feet from adjoining premises in a Residence District not used for a
similar purpose, and subject to the review and approval of the Board of Zoning
Appeals as stated above.
         A.   Municipal recreation buildings;
         B.   Municipal swimming pools;
      (5)   Crematories in existing cemeteries, provided they are not less than
three hundred (300) feet from any boundary that abuts a Residence District, and
subject to the review and approval of the Board of Zoning Appeals as stated
above.
   (h)   A residential facility, as defined in
Chapter 325 of this Zoning Code, for one (1) to five (5) unrelated persons,
provided it is located not less than one thousand (1,000) feet from another
residential facility. Residential facilities shall comply with area, height,
yard and architectural compatibility requirements of this Zoning Code
applicable to residences in One-Family Districts.
(Ord. No. 586-16. Passed 7-13-16, eff. 7-17-16)
§ 337.03 Two-Family District
   In a Two-Family District the following buildings and uses are permitted:
   (a)   Dwelling houses, each occupied by not more than two (2) families and
not more than two (2) roomers or boarders.
   (b)   All other uses permitted and as regulated in a One-Family District.
   (c)   The Board of Zoning Appeals, after public notice and public hearing,
and upon prescribing proper safeguards to preserve the character of the
neighborhood, may grant special permits for the remodeling of existing dwelling
houses or the erection of row houses to provide for more than two (2) dwelling
units but not more than six dwelling units in each building, provided that:
      (1)   The square feet of lot area to be allotted to each dwelling unit is
in accordance with the area regulations included in Chapter
355;
      (2)   The dwelling units to be created will be not smaller than two (2)
rooms and a bathroom;
      (3)   There will be no exterior evidence that a remodeled dwelling house
is occupied by more than two (2) families, except such as may be permitted by
the Board;
      (4)   The building when altered or erected and when occupied will conform
to all the applicable provisions of the Building and Housing Codes and as the
Commissioner of Building and the Commissioner of Housing so certify;
      (5)   Garage space or hard surfaced and drained parking space will be
provided upon the premises for the cars of the families to be accommodated on
the premises at the rate of not less than one (1) car per family.
(Ord. No. 740-67. Passed 5-22-67, eff. 5-23-67)
§ 337.031 Townhouse (RA) Districts
   (a)   Purpose. Townhouse Districts (i.e., Residential Attached Districts)
are established to set the requirements for the form, site plan and building
features of Townhouse Projects, as defined below.
   Safe sidewalks, inviting streets and compelling urban form are essential
elements of vibrant, walkable urban neighborhoods. The inherent density of
townhouses is a key component of this vision, but without thoughtful site
planning and architectural design, this goal will not be fully realized. The
provisions and standards of this section are intended to accommodate a variety
of innovative housing typologies for infill development and to ensure
compatibility of such units in Cleveland’s neighborhoods.
   The following regulations provide clear guidance for the development and
design of high quality Townhouse Projects in Cleveland that protect the health,
safety, and general welfare of all citizens. The standards set forth in
division (f) of this section are applied uniformly and are the minimum
standards for any Townhouse Project.
   (b)   Definitions.
      (1)   “Townhouse Unit” is a one (1) or two (2) family dwelling unit on
its own lot, which is attached to one (1) or more other Townhouse Units by fire
walls or fire separation walls.
      (2)   “Townhouse Building” is a building composed of two (2) or more
Townhouse Units.
      (3)   “Townhouse Project” is any combination of one (1) family or two (2)
family detached dwelling units, Townhouse Units, and/or Townhouse Buildings
submitted to the City as a unified development proposal. When one (1) family or
two (2) family detached dwelling units are part of a Townhouse Project
application, they must be contiguous with Townhouse Units and must comply with
all requirements for Townhouse Units for the purposes of this section. One (1)
family or two (2) family detached dwelling units may not exceed one-third (1/3)
of the total unit count for a Townhouse Project in order to be reviewed under
Section
337.031.
      (4)   “Principal Pedestrian Entrance” is the exterior door exclusive to
the dwelling unit that offers a pedestrian the most visible and direct means of
ingress and egress to a public right of way or private walkway.
      (5)   “ Primary Street Frontage” is the street line where a Townhouse
Unit’s Principal Pedestrian Entrance is located. Where a Townhouse Unit has a
lot line abutting a Public Space, that frontage shall be regulated as a Primary
Street Frontage.
      (6)   “Secondary Street Frontage” is, for corner lots, any street line
that is not the Primary Street Frontage, and is sometimes also known as the
“side street frontage”.
      (7)   “Interior Frontage” is, for lots fronting an alley or without a
street line, the frontage of a Townhouse Unit where the Principal Pedestrian
Entrance is located.
      (8)   “Frontage Build-Out” is the portion of the Primary and Secondary
Street Frontage containing a building.
      (9)   “Active Uses” are those habitable spaces of a dwelling most often
used for living, eating or cooking. These spaces encourage “eyes on the street”
and include such spaces as living rooms, offices, kitchens, and the like. Non-
habitable spaces, garages, hallways, corridors, bathrooms, closets, storage,
mechanical rooms, utility spaces, and the like are not considered Active Uses.
      (10)   “Human-Scaled Materials” are materials which have a maximum width
of twelve inches (12") in either the vertical or the horizontal dimension. The
other dimension is unlimited. Examples include brick, stone, wood, fiber-cement
lap siding, terra cotta, and the like.
      (11)   “Motor Court” is an internal “private road” for a Townhouse
Project allowing access from a public right-of-way to private garages or
parking spaces. Court regulations in Section
357.16 of these Codified Ordinances do not apply to Townhouse Units and/or
Townhouse Projects.
      (12)   “Mews Unit” is any Townhouse Unit with an Interior Frontage facing
a Motor Court fronting a private walkway.
      (13)   “Private Road” is a privately owned, controlled and maintained
drive, street, road or lane that provides the primary means of vehicular
ingress or egress to a common access drive for two (2) or more lots, even if
such lots have Primary Street Frontage.
      (14)   “Private Walkway” is any sidewalk or passageway located on
privately-owned property.
      (15)   “Transition” is an additional setback for each story that begins
above twenty-four feet (24') or for each story over the second story, whichever
is less. It is a buffer requirement measured from the setback building line
that is adjacent to a common property line and abuts a district with a lower
height intensity.
   (c)   District Establishment. The following Townhouse Districts are hereby
established: RA-1, RA-2, and RA-3 (with the abbreviation “RA” indicating
“Residential, Attached” and the numeral indicating that the districts are
listed in order of “density,” from lowest to highest).
   (d)   Permitted Uses in All RA Districts.
 
A. Townhouses     Permitted
B. Accessory uses As permitted in the Two- Family District
 
   (e)   Site Planning and Design. No Building Permit shall be issued for the
original construction of a Townhouse Unit or Townhouse Building without design
approval by the City Planning Commission, or the Director of City Planning, who
shall seek to ensure that the development meets the spirit and intent of
division (a) by applying the design and form standards set forth below, except
that such approval shall not apply to Townhouse Projects that are designated as
Landmarks, or are located in Landmark Districts, for which design approval
shall be the responsibility of the Landmarks Commission.
      (1)   Compatibility. The development shall be visually compatible with
nearby properties with respect to such residential design elements as scale,
height, setbacks, orientation to existing streets, roof lines, architectural
character, materials, colors, and proportions of architectural features.
      (2)   Site Layout. Buildings, structures and landscape features shall be
arranged so as to create visual interest, promote security and personal safety,
promote safe, efficient, and comfortable pedestrian circulation, facilitate
safe and efficient vehicular circulation, conserve natural features and provide
usable common and private open space.
      (3)   Building Features. Townhouse units shall contribute to the
character of the public realm by drawing from the best examples of architecture
and urbanism. Townhouse units shall be designed to create active, attractive,
street frontages that promote safety and walkability using the essential
elements of traditional urban architecture as regulated in division (g) of this
section.
      (4)   Circulation and Parking. Circulation and parking shall be designed
to achieve the following:
         A.   Provide proper access for service and safety vehicles;
         B.   Minimize conflicts between pedestrians and vehicles;
         C.   Minimize the number of curb cuts;
         D.   Maximize opportunities for on-street parking, transit waiting
environments, bike lanes, drop-off zones, street furniture, public amenities,
and preserving and street trees by prohibiting front loaded garages and
unenclosed parking in front yards; and
         E.   Prohibits placement of garage doors so close to sidewalks as to
impair pedestrian safety.
   (f)   Area, Yard, Siting and Design Standards. The following yard and area
standards shall apply in RA-1, RA-2, and RA-3 Districts.
  RA-1 District RA-2 District RA-3 District
                                RA-1 District    RA-2 District RA-3 District
(1) Lot Dimensions              No min
(2) Setbacks    Where           Requirements
                applicable
                                Min: 20' or, if
                                greater, the
                                average setback  Min: 10'      Min: 0'
                Primary         of the buildings Max: 20'      Max: 12'
A. Front Yard                   within 100' on
Depth 1                         both sides.
                                Max: none
                Secondary       Min: 7'          Min: 5'       Min: none
                Interior        Min: 10'         Min: 8'       Min: 7'
                Mews Unit       Min: 10'         Min: 10'      Min: 10'
                Adjoining 1 or
B. Interior     2-Family        Min: 10'         Min: 5'       Min: 3'
Side Yard Depth District
2               Adjoining Other Min: 7'          Min: 5'       Min: 3'
                District
                Rear lot line
                adjoining 1 or  Min: 15'         Min: 10'      Min: 7'
C. Rear Yard    2-Family
Depth 3         District
                Rear lot line
                adjoining Other Min: 10'         Min: 10'      Min: 3'
                District
(3) Building Design Features
                                Min: 35%
A. First-story                  Where the finished first floor is 48" or more
glazing         Primary         above grade: Min. 20% glazing between grade and
% of facade                     the finished first floor, less Frontage Feature
required to be                  areas.
transparent                     Min: 25%
windows and                     Where the finished first floor is 48" or more
doors between   Secondary       above grade: Min. 20% glazing between grade and
3' and 7' above                 the finished first floor, less Frontage Feature
finished floor.                 areas.
                Interior        Min: 20%
                Mews Unit       Min: 20%
                Primary         Required on 60 % of total Frontage Buildout.
                                Min depth: 9'
B. Active uses  Secondary       No requirement
on first story  Interior        No requirement
                Mews Unit       Required
                                Min depth: 6'
C. Floor Area   No requirement
Ratio
                Each Townhouse Unit with shall provide a Principal Pedestrian
                Entrance directly to the street line on the Interior Frontage,
                as applicable. Corner lots are required only one (1) Principal
                Pedestrian Entrance.
                                Any Mews Unit more than 150' from a street line
D. Entrances                    shall provide a Principal Pedestrian Entrance
                                facing the Motor Court.
                Mews Units      Each Mews Unit in a Townhouse Building with
                                more than three (3) shared walls shall provide
                                at least two (2) ground floor Principal
                                Pedestrian Entrances.
                                A or B Required  B, C or E     B, C, D or E
E. Frontage feature (See Figure Min. porch       Required      Required
(g)(1) of this section)         depth: 6'        Min. area: 16 Min. area: 16
                                                 sq. ft.       sq. ft.
                Primary         Min: 18"         Min: 24"      Min: 28"
                                Max: 4'          Max: 4'       Max: 5'6"
F. Height of    Secondary       Min: 18"         Min: 24"      Min: 28"
finished first                  Max: 4'          Max: 4'       Max: 5'6"
floor above     Interior        Min: 12"         Min: 12"      Min: 18"
grade 4                         Max: 5'6"        Max: 5'6"     Max: 5'6"
                Mews Unit       Min: 12"         Min: 12"      Min: 18"
                                Max: 5'6"        Max: 5'6"     Max: 5'6"
G. Private Open
Space           All             150'             100'          0'
(sq. ft. per
unit) 5
                Human scaled; ex. brick, stone, lap siding, wood, terra cotta
H. First floor  or similar.
materials;      Above first-story: Materials in any dimension are permitted.
Primary,        Prohibited Materials on Primary and Secondary Street Frontage:
Secondary       plain and split-face concrete masonry units and synthetic
                stucco.
                For each story that begins above 24' or for each story over the
I. Transitions  second story, whichever is less, the additional minimum setback
                shall be:
Additional
setback above
24'/2nd story
(min) -
measured from   All             Min: 10'         Min: 5'       Min: 3'
setback
building line
most adjacent
to common
property line
(4) Garages, Car Openings and Driveways and Motor Courts
A. Garage or
Car Openings
fronting a      Not Permitted
Primary and
Secondary
Street Frontage
B. Garage or
Car Openings    Streetscreen or fence required at actual Primary and Secondary
perpendicular   Street setback, minus permitted driveways.
to a Primary    Streetscreens or fence shall be a min. 3.5' in height, max.
and Secondary   height as allowed by the Zoning Code.
Street Frontage
C. Garage or
Car Openings
within an       Streetscreen or fence is required along the shared rear/side
established     yard property line.
front yard      Streetscreen or fence shall be a min. 3.5' in height, max.
setback on a    height as allowed by the Zoning Code.
Secondary
Street
D. Alley access Where an alley abuts the development, no curb cuts shall be
6               permitted on Primary or Secondary Street Frontage.
E. One-way
vehicular       Max: 11'
driveway width
F. Two-way
vehicular
driveway        Max: 20'
serving
multiple units
width
                25 sq. ft. of dedicated landscape area in the Motor Court for
G. Motor Court  every 32 linear feet of garage door or garage entry that is
landscaping     visible from a public street immediately adjacent to the
                property, not including alleys.
                Any whole or portion of a Motor Court with garage doors or
                garage entry visible from a public street immediately adjacent
H. Motor Court  to the property, not including alleys, shall have at least 60%
paving material of its surface area paved with human-scaled materials or
                distinctive characteristics to give visual cues to delineate
                space between pedestrians and vehicles.
I. Continuous
at-grade        Required
sidewalk and
apron
   1   Except that any mapped or established setback shall prevail over the
setbacks of this section.
   2   Does not apply to lot lines separating attached dwellings as a non-
condominium townhouse development
   3   Rear yard and Interior Frontages may be 0' if building is abutting a
driveway or Motor Court and an access easement is provided.
   4   For infill townhouses: Height of Finished Floor above grade shall match
the typical height found in the adjacent context. Where the Height of Finished
Floor above grade in the adjacent context is outside the range set forth in
division (f)(3)F., the Height of Finished Floor above grade shall be set at the
min or max permitted by division (f)(3)F.
   5   Garden, deck, patio, balcony, solarium or other similar open space
adjacent to the residence, for the private use of the resident household.
   6   Garages must be placed entirely to the rear of each unit and be rear-
accessed and cannot front a public street. Garage may be attached or detached.
Garage doors should face the rear or side alley or Private Road.
 
   (g)   Diagrams & Modifications.
      (1)   Required Frontage Features.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4cc937dcc99cd9ae45e5f9bfbf6bc5ab64112b8f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13522.jpg]
      (2)   Administrative Modifications. The Director of City Planning may
require a numerical standard that is different from the standard under division
(f) of up to twenty (20) percent in any direction if it is determined that such
relief will result in a townhouse or townhouse building that is more
appropriately situated and/or more consistent with its context. This provision
shall not apply to division (f)(3)F.
Example application of Director discretion: In the RA-3 District the Director
may administratively reduce the required Interior Front Yard Depth from the
numerical standard of 10' to 8' (10' x 0.8 = 8').
   (h)   Procedures and Appeals.
      (1)   Submission of an Application. An application to construct a
Townhouse Project, subject to the regulations of this chapter, shall be
submitted to the Department of Building & Housing as part of a Building Permit
application. The application shall include a scaled site plan with street
elevations and photographs showing the proposed construction, along with
existing structures within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the site on all
sides as the relevant area of context.
      (2)   Determination of Compliance. The Department of Building and Housing
shall determine if the application conforms to the requirements of this chapter
and other applicable regulations of the City of Cleveland, except for those
provisions that require a determination by the City Planning Commission or its
Director.
      (3)   Referral to City Planning Commission. For proposals subject to
approval by the City Planning Commission or Landmarks Commission for design
review, under
Chapter 341 of these Codified Ordinances, or for permitted uses, under division
(d) of Section
337.031, the Department of Building and Housing shall refer the application to
the Department of City Planning and the City Planning Commission for review and
approval.
      (4)   City Planning Director Action. The Director of City Planning, or
his/her zoning designee, shall determine which RA District regulations are
applicable to a project application. In all zoning districts other than a
mapped Townhouse District, proposed Townhouse Projects shall be reviewed under
the RA District whose Front Yard Depth in division (f)(2)A. most closely
matches or compliments the zoning district of the proposed development. To
determine which RA District is applicable, the Department of City Planning
shall:
         A.   Determine the existing typical front yard setback of the zoning
district of the proposed development.
         B.   For proposals to be constructed at mid-block, the RA District
whose front yard setback range most closely aligns with the setback of the
existing buildings on the block shall be applied.
         C.   For proposals to be constructed on corners, context from the
buildings on the adjacent corners of the intersection as well as those
buildings on the specific block should be considered, and the RA District whose
front yard setback range most closely aligns with the front yard setback of the
existing buildings at the intersection shall be applied.
      (5)   City Planning Commission Action. For Townhouse Projects located in
any zoning district where a townhouse use is not permitted by right (ie.: One-
Family or Two-Family District), the City Planning Commission shall review any
application subject to conditional approval and shall determine whether the
proposal meets all applicable standards established in division (e), Site
Planning & Design, hereof to ensure proper design and compatibility with
surrounding uses. The Commission shall take action on the application at a
public meeting, subsequent to providing public notice. The Commission may
require modifications to the proposal as a condition of approval. The
Commission may disapprove an application if it determines that the proposed
site plan and application does not meet the standards set forth in this
chapter. No Building Permit shall be issued without the approval of the City
Planning Commission for an application subject to conditional approval.
(Ord. No. 800-2023. Passed 11-27-23, eff. 12-27-23)
§ 337.04 Purpose and Development of Limited Multi-Family Districts
   A limited Multi-Family District is established in order to provide a zoning
use district within which one (1), two (2) and multi-family buildings may
locate as compatible land uses. This is a district of low population density
equivalent to the population densities of a Two-Family District. The yard and
lot area requirements are such as will afford maximum protection to the various
permitted uses. To secure these ends, a building permit for the construction of
an apartment house or group of apartment houses shall not be issued until the
Planning Commission has approved the plans for the proposed development. Such
plans shall include a site plan showing the location and size of the buildings
and their relationship to other buildings on adjoining lots. The plan shall
also show the design of that area to be devoted to off-street parking, the
number of off-street parking spaces, a system of vehicular traffic circulation
and points of access from adjoining streets. The plan shall also show landscape
treatment at the boundaries of the proposed development indicating the type,
size and location of trees, shrubs and other landscaping. In making its
determination the Planning Commission shall require conformance to the
provisions of this section, and shall be satisfied that the proposed
development plans will provide the maximum residential amenities as applied to
the adjoining lots as well as the proposed development itself.
(Ord. No. 2222-58. Passed 2-16-59, eff. 3-29-59)
§ 337.05 Permitted Buildings and Uses in Limited Multi-Family District
   The following are permitted buildings and uses in a Limited Multi-Family
District:
   (a)   All uses permitted and as regulated in a One- Family District;
   (b)   Row Houses;
   (c)   Apartment houses provided that they conform to the requirements of
Section
337.06.
(Ord. No. 2222-58. Passed 2-16-59, eff. 3-29-59)
§ 337.06 Area, Yard and Height Requirements for Apartment Houses
   (a)   Maximum Gross Floor Area. The maximum gross floor area for all
buildings shall not exceed one-half (1/2) the lot area.
   (b)   Minimum Lot Area. The minimum lot area for each dwelling unit shall be
two thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet.
   (c)   Required Side Yards. Two (2) side yards shall be required with a
minimum width for each side yard of twenty (20) feet, notwithstanding the
provisions of Section
357.09.
   (d)   Required Rear Yard. A rear yard shall be provided with a minimum depth
of fifty (50) feet except that where the rear lot line adjoins the boundary of
a less restricted area district, the provisions of Section
357.08 shall apply.
(Ord. No. 3077-A-89. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 7-27-91)
§ 337.07 Reserved
§ 337.08 Multi-Family District
   Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Zoning Code, no building
or premises in a Multi- Family District shall hereafter be erected, altered,
used, arranged or designed to be used, in whole or in part for other than one
(1) or more of the following specified uses:
   (a)   All uses permitted and as regulated in a Two-Family District;
   (b)   Row houses, apartment houses;
   (c)   Rooming houses, boarding houses, tourist homes;
   (d)   The following buildings or uses, if located not less than ten (10)
feet from any adjoining premises in a Residence District not used for a similar
purpose:
      (1)   Dormitories;
      (2)   Reserved;
      (3)   Lodges or social buildings and their grounds, except those a chief
activity of which is one customarily carried on primarily for gain;
      (4)   Police stations, fire stations;
      (5)   Other public buildings or properties of a character not customarily
conducted as a gainful business.
   (e)   The following buildings and uses if located not less than fifteen (15)
feet from any adjoining premises in a Residence District not used for a similar
purpose:
      (1)   Public libraries, public museums;
      (2)   Public or private schools or colleges, including accessory
laboratories, not conducted as a gainful business;
      (3)   Kindergartens, day nurseries, children’s boarding homes;
      (4)   Fraternity houses, sorority houses;
      (5)   Hospitals, sanitariums, nursing, rest or convalescent homes, not
primarily for contagious diseases nor for the care of epileptics or drug or
liquor patients, nor for the care of the insane or feeble- minded;
      (6)   Orphanages;
      (7)   Homes for the aged and similar homes;
      (8)   Charitable institutions not for correctional purposes.
   (f)   Accessory uses permitted in a Multi-Family District.
   (g)   A residential facility, as defined in
Chapter 325 of this Zoning Code, for six (6) to sixteen (16) persons may be
permitted as a conditional use. The City Planning Commission shall approve a
residential facility as a conditional use in a Multi-Family District only when
the residential facility is located not less than one thousand (1,000) feet
from another residential facility and only if the City Planning Commission
determines that the conditional use meets the following zoning and
architectural criteria:
      (1)   the architectural design and site layout of the home and the
location, nature and height of any walls, screens, and fences are compatible
with adjoining land uses and the residential character of the neighborhood, as
may be specified in applicable Zoning Code regulations for Multi-Family
Districts; and
      (2)   the use complies with all applicable yard, parking and sign
regulations in this Zoning Code for Multi-Family Districts.
(Ord. No. 586-16. Passed 7-13-16, eff. 7-17-16)
§ 337.081 Downtown Residential (DR) District
   (a)   Purpose. A Downtown Residential (DR) District is established to
reserve suitably-located sites for development or retention of residential
uses, supplemented by compatible retail or office uses, within the downtown
area of the City of Cleveland. Reservation of such sites for residential use is
intended to strengthen the economy of the City’s central business district by
supplementing the demand for retail and entertainment uses, particularly during
evening and weekend hours. Establishment of a downtown residential zoning
district is also intended to protect residential uses in the downtown area from
detrimental effects of incompatible uses.
   (b)   Definition of Residential Use. For purposes of this section, the term
“residential use” shall refer to dwelling units, hotel rooms, dormitory rooms,
live/work space, and all hallways and other common areas serving such units or
rooms.
   (c)   Permitted Uses. In a Downtown Residential (DR) District, permitted
uses shall be limited to the following, provided that at least fifty-one
percent (51%) of all floor area devoted to main uses in each main building or
complex of main and accessory buildings shall be in residential use, as defined
in division (b) of this section:
      (1)   Residential uses: including “Class A” multiple dwellings, townhouse
buildings and dormitories;
      (2)   Professional, business, governmental, institutional and medical
offices;
      (3)   Restaurants, taverns and other eating establishments;
      (4)   Retail stores and retail services, except as prohibited in division
(d) of this section;
      (5)   Theaters, nightclubs, dance halls, bowling alleys, skating rinks
and other places of entertainment and recreation, except as prohibited in
division (d) of this section;
      (6)   Banks and other financial service establishments, copying and
printing services, employment agencies, and other business service
establishments, except as prohibited in division (d) of this section;
      (7)   Museums, libraries, galleries, schools, places of worship, daycare
centers, and other cultural and institutional uses, not for correctional
purposes;
      (8)   Parking and other accessory uses permitted in Multi-Family and
General Retail Districts, and rooftop antennae and associated equipment for
transmission or reception;
      (9)   Uses similar to those permitted with respect to the type of goods
sold, the type of services offered, hours of operation, and effects on nearby
residential uses.
   (d)   Prohibited Uses. All uses not listed as permitted nor determined to be
a similar use are prohibited. In addition, the following uses are specifically
prohibited in Downtown Residential (DR) Districts:
      (1)   Uses permitted only in an Industrial District;
      (2)   Service stations, service garages, and car washes (“automobile
laundries”), except as an accessory use to a multiple dwelling, where such
services are available exclusively to residents to the multiple dwelling and
for which no exterior signs are displayed;
      (3)   Adult entertainment uses, as defined in Section
347.07 of this Code;
      (4)   Animal kennels and establishments in which animal slaughtering is
conducted.
   (e)   Limitation on Parking. In Downtown Residential (DR) Districts, parking
shall be permitted as an accessory use but shall be limited to a maximum of two
(2) parking spaces per dwelling unit plus the minimum number of parking spaces
that would be required for any non-residential floor area, if such property
were subject to the parking requirements of this zoning code.
   (f)   Limitation on Location of Non-Residential Main Uses. In Downtown
Residential (DR) Districts, no building shall be devoted exclusively to retail,
office, or other permitted non-residential main uses. Such uses shall be
located only in buildings which are devoted principally to residential use or
to garages providing parking for the residential uses.
   (g)   Exceptions to Yard Regulations. Requirements for interior side yards
and rear yards may be waived by the Board of Zoning Appeals in Downtown
Residential (DR) Districts if the Board determines that one (1) of the
following factors applies:
      (1)   The subject property owner has obtained a legal interest from an
adjoining property owner to provide yard areas which are equivalent to those
required – such legal interest to be properly recorded, to be of appropriate
duration and to be filed with the Division of Building and Housing prior to
issuance of a Building Permit;
      (2)   No windows for residential uses are located in any side of the
building where the required yard area is not provided; or
      (3)   Development of a structure on an adjoining property, so as to block
adequate light and air to windows for residential uses, is made infeasible by
topography, natural features or other factors identified by the Board.
   (h)   Area Regulations. Regulations of Section
355.04 regarding “minimum lot area per dwelling unit” and the ratio of “maximum
gross floor area to lot area” shall not apply in Downtown Residential (DR)
Districts.
   (i)   Nonconforming Uses and Buildings. Legally established nonconforming
uses located in a Downtown Residential (DR) District may be continued in
accordance with the regulations of Chapter
359 of the Zoning Code. In addition, within a DR District, any building which
does not meet the minimum requirement for proportion of floor area in
residential use shall be governed by the following regulations with regard to
changes in use:
      (1)   Any existing non-residential use may be replaced by any use
permitted in the DR District, without action by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
      (2)   Any vacant space in which the immediate prior use was non-
residential may be occupied by any use permitted in the DR District, without
action by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
   (j)   Signs. In a Downtown Residential District, signs shall be permitted as
in a General Retail District.
(Ord. No. 338-97. Passed 3-26-01, eff. 4-2-01)
§ 337.09 Purpose of Residence-Office Districts
   A Residence-Office District is established in order to provide a zoning use
district where apartment houses and administrative and professional office
buildings and similar uses may be located as compatible land uses. The height,
area, yard and court regulations of this Zoning Code are the same for
residential and nonresidential uses. Off-street parking is required of all uses
permitted in the district. Thus, a district is provided within which the
related uses can function effectively and at the same time protecting the
residential amenities of adjoining Residence Districts.
(Ord. No. 1903-59. Passed 12-14-59, eff. 12-16-59)
§ 337.10 Permitted Buildings and Uses in Residence-Office Districts
   In a Residence-Office District the following buildings and uses are
permitted, provided that no sales, display or warehousing of merchandise shall
be permitted on the premises:
   (a)   Apartment houses;
   (b)   Apartment hotels;
   (c)   The following, if located at least fifteen (15) feet from the lot
lines where the adjoining premises are not used for similar purposes:
      (1)   Administrative and professional office buildings;
      (2)   Hospitals, sanitariums, nursing, rest or convalescent homes, homes
for the aged and clinics provided that none of these uses are operated
primarily for abortions, the care of contagious diseases, the insane or feeble-
minded, epileptics, drug or liquor patients;
      (3)   Junior or senior high schools, colleges and universities that are
nonprofit;
      (4)   Dormitories, fraternity or sorority houses when related to an
existing nonprofit public or private school, college or university located
within the same Residence-Office District;
      (5)   Police and fire stations and other administrative governmental
buildings;
      (6)   Nonprofit libraries and museums;
      (7)   Kindergartens, day nurseries, children’s boarding homes, orphanages
and other child care centers;
      (8)   Public utility buildings, provided that no storage yard or building
shall be operated in connection therewith;
      (9)   Research laboratories not involving the manufacture, fabrication,
processing or sale of products on or off the premises, provided that such does
not create or emit offensive or noxious odors, fumes, dust, smoke, gas, noise
or other similar air pollutants;
      (10)   An accessory ethical pharmacy used in connection with and for the
exclusive use of the patients in a medical office building or any other
permitted use devoted to medical care, provided that there shall be no display
or advertising sign visible from the exterior of the building, and further that
access to such pharmacy shall be had from within the main building only;
      (11)   Nonprofit lodges;
      (12)   Charitable institutions not for correctional purposes;
   (d)   Accessory uses as permitted and as regulated by divisions (a)(8), (a)
(9) and (11) of Section
337.23.
(Ord. No. 2215-96. Passed 4-7-97, eff. 4-7-97; Reprinted 7-2-97 CR)
§ 337.11 Residence-Office District Off-Street Parking
   In a Residence-Office District, every building or structure erected, altered
or remodeled and every use of land occupied on or after December 16, 1959,
shall provide the total number of accessory off-street parking spaces as
required by this Zoning Code.
(Ord. No. 1903-59. Passed 12-14-59, eff. 12-16-59)
§ 337.12 Parking Plan to Accompany Building Permit Application
   An application for a building permit shall not be approved unless a parking
plan is submitted with it that shows the location, dimensions and grades of all
required parking spaces and approaches thereto in accordance with the
provisions of Sections
337.11 to
337.21.
(Ord. No. 1903-59. Passed 12-14-59, eff. 12-16-59)
§ 337.13 Required Parking Spaces
   Accessory off-street parking spaces shall be provided and maintained in
accordance with the requirements set forth in the following table:
Uses Required Accessory Off-Street Parking Spaces
                                                                              Required
                                                                              Accessory
Uses                                                                          Off-Street
                                                                              Parking
                                                                              Spaces
                                                                              1 for each
Apartment houses                                                              dwelling
                                                                              unit.
                                                                              1 for each
                                                                              dwelling
                                                                              unit, plus 1
                                                                              for each 2
                                                                              rented
                                                                              sleeping
                                                                              rooms, plus
Apartment hotels                                                              1 for each 2
                                                                              employees
                                                                              expected on
                                                                              the premises
                                                                              during the
                                                                              largest work
                                                                              shift
                                                                              period.
                                                                              5 for each
                                                                              doctor or
                                                                              dentist,
                                                                              plus 1 for
                                                                              each 2
                                                                              employees
                                                                              expected on
                                                                              the premises
Medical or dental offices                                                     during the
                                                                              largest work
                                                                              shift
                                                                              period; or 1
                                                                              for each 150
                                                                              square feet
                                                                              of gross
                                                                              floor area,
                                                                              whichever is
                                                                              greater.
                                                                              1 for each
                                                                              300 square
Other professional and administrative offices                                 feet of
                                                                              gross floor
                                                                              area.
                                                                              1 for each
                                                                              bed, plus 1
                                                                              for each
                                                                              staff
                                                                              doctor, plus
                                                                              1 for each 3
Hospitals and sanitariums                                                     other
                                                                              employees
                                                                              expected on
                                                                              the premises
                                                                              during the
                                                                              largest work
                                                                              shift
                                                                              period.
                                                                              1 for each
                                                                              employee or
                                                                              operator
                                                                              expected on
Accessory ethical pharmacy                                                    the premises
                                                                              during the
                                                                              largest work
                                                                              shift
                                                                              period.
                                                                              1 for each
                                                                              200 square
Clinics                                                                       feet of
                                                                              gross floor
                                                                              area.
                                                                              1 for each
                                                                              staff
                                                                              member,
                                                                              including
                                                                              doctors and
                                                                              nurses, plus
                                                                              1 for each 3
                                                                              other
Homes for the aged, convalescent, rest and nursing homes and orphanages       employees
                                                                              expected on
                                                                              the premises
                                                                              during the
                                                                              largest work
                                                                              shift
                                                                              period, plus
                                                                              1 for each 6
                                                                              beds.
                                                                              (See also
                                                                              requirements
                                                                              for
Schools:                                                                      auditoriums,
                                                                              gymnasiums
                                                                              and
                                                                              stadiums.)
                                                                              1 for each 2
                                                                              staff
                                                                              members and
                                                                              other
                                                                              employees
   Junior High                                                             expected on
                                                                              the premises
                                                                              during the
                                                                              largest work
                                                                              shift
                                                                              period.
                                                                              1 for each 2
                                                                              staff
                                                                              members and
                                                                              other
                                                                              employees
                                                                              expected on
                                                                              the premises
                                                                              during the
   Senior High                                                             largest work
                                                                              shift
                                                                              period, plus
                                                                              1 for each
                                                                              12 seats in
                                                                              a classroom,
                                                                              based on
                                                                              planned
                                                                              classroom
                                                                              activity.
                                                                              1 for each 2
                                                                              staff
                                                                              members and
                                                                              other
                                                                              employees
                                                                              expected on
                                                                              the premises
                                                                              during the
   Colleges and Universities                                               largest work
                                                                              shift
                                                                              period, plus
                                                                              1 for each
                                                                              10 seats in
                                                                              a classroom
                                                                              based on
                                                                              planned
                                                                              classroom
                                                                              activity.
                                                                              1 for each 4
                                                                              beds, plus 1
                                                                              for the
                                                                              operator or
                                                                              manager
                                                                              living on
                                                                              the
                                                                              premises,
   Dormitories, fraternity and sorority houses                             plus 1 for
                                                                              each other
                                                                              employee
                                                                              expected on
                                                                              the premises
                                                                              during the
                                                                              largest work
                                                                              shift
                                                                              period.
                                                                              2 for each 3
                                                                              employees
                                                                              expected on
Police and fire stations and other governmental administrative buildings and  the premises
public utility buildings                                                      during the
                                                                              largest work
                                                                              shift
                                                                              period.
                                                                              1 for each
                                                                              employee
                                                                              expected on
                                                                              the premises
                                                                              during the
                                                                              largest work
Libraries and museums                                                         shift
                                                                              period, plus
                                                                              1 for each
                                                                              200 square
                                                                              feet of
                                                                              gross floor
                                                                              area.
                                                                              1 for each 2
                                                                              staff
                                                                              members and
                                                                              other
Kindergartens, day nurseries, children’s boarding homes and otherchild care employees
centers                                                                       expected on
                                                                              the premises
                                                                              during the
                                                                              largest work
                                                                              shift
                                                                              period.
                                                                              1 for each 6
                                                                              seats or
                                                                              total
                                                                              parking area
                                                                              equal to 3
                                                                              times the
                                                                              gross floor
                                                                              area,
                                                                              whichever is
                                                                              greater.
                                                                              Where there
                                                                              are no fixed
                                                                              seats, each
                                                                              24 inches of
Auditoriums, gymnasiums and stadiums                                          bench space
                                                                              shall be
                                                                              considered 1
                                                                              seat.
                                                                              Where there
                                                                              are no seats
                                                                              or benches,
                                                                              each 20
                                                                              square feet
                                                                              of floor
                                                                              area usable
                                                                              for seating
                                                                              shall be
                                                                              considered 1
                                                                              seat.
                                                                              1 for each
                                                                              employee
                                                                              expected on
                                                                              the premises
                                                                              during the
                                                                              largest work
                                                                              shift
Research laboratories                                                         period, or
                                                                              total
                                                                              parking
                                                                              space equal
                                                                              to 25% of
                                                                              the gross
                                                                              floor area,
                                                                              whichever is
                                                                              greater.
                                                                              Total
                                                                              parking
Lodges                                                                        space equal
                                                                              to 1/2 of
                                                                              gross floor
                                                                              area.
 
   For the purpose of determining the amount of accessory off-street spaces
required, “gross floor area” means the total area of all the floors in a
building or structure, excluding basement space used for storage or utilities,
measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls.
(Ord. No. 1903-59. Passed 12-14-59, eff. 12-16-59)
§ 337.14 Location of Required Off-Street Parking Space
   Except as provided by this section, the required accessory off-street
parking space shall be located on the same lot as the use for which it is
provided. All such parking spaces shall be located behind the setback building
line. No such parking space shall be located within ten (10) feet of any wall
of a building or structure if such wall contains ground floor openings designed
to provide light or ventilation for such building structure.
   The Board of Zoning Appeals may permit as a special exception the location
of required accessory off-street parking spaces on a separate lot if the Board
finds all of the following:
   (a)   That there is no way to provide such parking spaces on the same lot as
the use;
   (b)   That for a permitted apartment house, such parking spaces are within
two hundred (200) feet of or for any other permitted use, within four hundred
(400) feet of the nearest boundary of the lot upon which the use is located
measured by a straight line between the two (2) points;
   (c)   That the separate lot upon which such parking spaces are provided is
in the same ownership as the permitted use, and is subject to deed restrictions
recorded in the office of the County Recorder binding the owner, his or her
heirs and assigns to maintain and provide for the required number of such
parking spaces throughout the life of such use in accordance with the
provisions of this Zoning Code; and
   (d)   That the Commissioner of Traffic Engineering and Parking has caused a
study to be made of the proposed location and finds that safe and adequate
access can be provided and that the potential traffic will not be injurious or
detrimental to the adjoining streets.
(Ord. No. 1903-59. Passed 12-14-59, eff. 12-16-59)
§ 337.15 Joint Off-Street Parking Facilities
   Accessory off-street parking spaces required of two (2) or more uses located
on the same lot or parcel may be combined and used jointly by such uses,
provided that the parking spaces provided shall be equal to the total number of
accessory off-street parking spaces required by all such uses.
(Ord. No. 1903-59. Passed 12-14-59, eff. 12-16-59)
§ 337.16 Sale of Fuel and Repairs
   The sale of automotive fuels and accessories and the furnishing of repairs
or service of any kind for motor vehicles shall not be permitted.
(Ord. No. 1903-59. Passed 12-14-59, eff. 12-16-59)
§ 337.17 Size of Off-Street Parking Space
   Each accessory off-street parking space shall have a minimum unobstructed
area of three hundred (300) square feet. Where driveways are required to
provide accessibility to the parking spaces, they shall have an unobstructed
width of at least twenty (20) feet.
(Ord. No. 1903-59. Passed 12-14-59, eff. 12-16-59)
§ 337.18 Access and Maintenance to Off-Street Parking Spaces
   (a)   Accessory off-street parking spaces, driveways and maneuvering areas
shall be properly graded for drainage so that all water is drained within the
lot providing such parking spaces, surfaced with concrete, asphaltic concrete,
asphalt or similar surfacing material, maintained in good condition and free of
debris and trash.
   (b)   Accessory off-street parking spaces shall be provided with wheel or
bumper guards that are so located that no part of a parked vehicle will extend
beyond such parking space.
   (c)   The driveway used to provide accessibility to accessory off-street
parking spaces shall be so located and arranged to minimize traffic congestion.
   Therefore:
      (1)   Only one (1) such driveway shall be permitted for each one hundred
(100) feet of frontage of the use providing such parking spaces.
      (2)   The center line of such driveway shall be at least thirty (30) feet
from the right-of-way line of any intersecting street where the driveways and
intersecting street are on the same side of a street.
      (3)   The maximum width of such driveway shall be thirty (30) feet
measured at right angles to the angle of the driveway entrance. Such driveway
shall have an apron of six (6) feet radius at the curb, and provide a means for
motor vehicles to enter and leave the parking facilities without obstructing
traffic.
(Ord. No. 1903-59. Passed 12-14-59, eff. 12-16-59)
§ 337.19 Parking Recreational Vehicles in a Residential District
   (a)   "Recreational vehicle" means a vehicular portable structure designed
solely for the purpose of recreational travel, that is not used for engaging in
business for profit or for intrastate commerce, and includes but is not limited
to: a boat, boat on a trailer, boat trailer, jet ski and raft and associated
equipment for transport on a public roadway, travel trailer, motor home, pick-
up camper, folding tent trailer, and a licensed private trailer intended to
haul personal property.
   (b)   Recreational vehicles shall not be parked in a residential district,
including on a public roadway, except:
      (1)   when the recreational vehicle owned or used by the occupants of the
premises is stored on the premises in a closed garage; storage of a
recreational vehicle shall not be in the open air, except as provided in
division (b)(2) below.
      (2)   No more than one (1) recreational vehicle owned or used by the
occupants of the premises may occupy no more than one (1) improved open air
parking surface located in a rear yard of the premises provided that:
         A.   the parking space is surfaced with concrete, asphaltic concrete,
asphalt or other surfacing materials approved by the Director of Building and
Housing, and maintained in good condition and free of debris and trash;
         B.   the recreational vehicle shall not have fixed connections to
electricity, water, gas or sanitary sewer facilities and at no time shall the
recreational vehicle be used for living or housekeeping purposes on the
premises;
         C.   the recreational vehicle must be kept in good repair and workable
condition and, where applicable, must carry a current year's license plate and
registration;
         D.   the recreational vehicle shall be limited to thirty (30) feet in
length from end to end, not including any hitch or attachment; and
         E.   the recreational vehicle shall be adequately screened in
accordance with the Table Containing Uses Requiring Other Screening or
Landscaping in Section
352.10 of this Zoning Code, note a. of said Table notwithstanding, except that
no screening shall exceed six (6) feet in height.
      (3)   A recreational vehicle may be parked in a parking or driveway area
anywhere on the premises for loading or unloading purposes for a period of not
more than forty-eight (48) hours in any consecutive twenty-one (21) day period.
(Ord. No. 98-2022. Passed 9-26-22, eff. 10-26-22)
§ 337.20 Lighting for Off-Street Parking Spaces
   Where lighting is provided for accessory off-street parking spaces, it shall
be constructed and arranged so as to prevent the direct emission of light upon
adjoining lots or the public streets.
(Ord. No. 1903-59. Passed 12-14-59, eff. 12-16-59)
§ 337.21 Height, Area, Yard and Court Requirements for Residence-Office
Districts
   Except as provided in Section
337.10, every building or structure hereafter erected or altered in any way, in
a Residence-Office District, shall comply with the height, area, yard and court
regulations applicable to Class A Multiple Dwellings and Multi-Family District.
(Ord. No. 1903-59. Passed 12-14-59, eff. 12-16-59)
§ 337.22 Performance Bond and Enforcement; Residence-Office Districts
   (a)   When application for a building permit is made to erect or alter a
building or structure within a Residence-Office District, the applicant shall
deposit with the Commissioner of Building a performance bond or a sum of money
sufficient to cover the cost of providing the required off-street parking in
accordance with the provisions of Sections
337.11 to
337.21. The performance bond shall be approved as to form and sufficiency by
the Director of Law and shall be in effect until a certificate of compliance is
issued by the Commissioner.
   (b)   If construction is not carried out in accordance with the provisions
of Sections
337.11 to
337.21, the applicant shall within thirty (30) days after notice by the
Commissioner comply with the sections. If the applicant does not comply, the
Commissioner shall proceed to have the work done and charge all cost and
expense for the work against the performance bond or the deposit filed by the
applicant as herein set forth.
(Ord. No. 1903-59. Passed 12-14-59, eff. 12-16-59)
§ 337.23 Accessory Uses in Residence Districts
   (a)   Permitted Accessory Uses. The following accessory uses and buildings
are permitted in a Residence District. Attached and detached garages shall be
regulated as described in division (a)(6) of this section. All other permitted
accessory buildings shall be located on the rear half of the lot, a minimum of
eighteen (18) inches from all property lines and at least ten (10) feet from
any main building on an adjoining lot in a Residence District. Accessory
buildings shall not occupy more than forty percent (40%) of the area of the
required rear yard and, in the case of a corner lot, shall be located back of
any required setback or specific building line. For side street yard
regulations consult Sections
357.05 to
357.07.
      (1)   Within a main building, the office of a surgeon, physician,
clergyman, architect, engineer, attorney or similar professional person
residing in such main building and employing in the office not more than one
(1) nonresident office or laboratory assistant.
      (2)   Customary home occupation for gain carried on in the main building
or in a rear building accessory thereto and requiring only customary home
equipment; provided that no nonresident help is employed for that purpose, no
trading in merchandise is carried on and no personal physical service is
performed and, in a Limited One-Family District or in a One-Family District, no
sign or other outward evidence of the occupation is displayed on the premises.
      (3)   Agricultural uses, subject to the regulations of Section
337.25 and Section
347.02 regarding the keeping of farm animals.
      (4)   Private incinerators for the burning of refuse and garbage produced
on the same premises, provided that the construction is such as to assure
immediate and complete combustion and freedom from offensive smoke, ash,
unburned particles and odors, and a permit therefor is granted by the
Commissioner of Environment.
      (5)   Fences and walls, as regulated in Chapter
358.
      (6)   Parking spaces for the occupants of the premises and, when the
premises are used for other than residence purposes, for their employees,
patrons and guests provided they are located in the rear half of the lot.
         A.   Interior Lots.
            1.   Detached Garages. Permitted provided they are located in the
rear half of the lot.
            2.   Attached Garages. Permitted provided they are located in the
rear half of the lot, or provided that they have their entire width and height
screened from a required or actual Front Yard Setback Building Line by an
Active Use of at least 9 (nine) feet in depth..
         B.   Corner Lots.
            1.   Lot width: more than 40'.
               a.   Attached and Detached Garages. Permitted provided they are
located in the rear half of the lot. Garage doors fronting a Side Lot Line
shall be set back a minimum of eighteen (18) feet from the Side Lot Line, or a
minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the established Side Street Setback,
whichever is greater.
            2.   Lot width: 40' or less.
               a.   Detached Garages. Permitted provided they are located in
the rear half of the lot. Garage doors fronting a Side Lot Line shall be
setback a minimum of 18 (eighteen) feet from the Side Lot Line.
               b.   Attached Garages. Permitted provided they are located in
the rear half of the lot. Garage doors fronting a Side Lot Line shall be
setback a maximum of twenty-four (24) feet from the Interior Side Lot Line. Any
garage door fronting a Side Lot Line and within eighteen (18) feet of a Side
Lot Line shall be limited to a maximum of nine (9) feet in width.
         C.   In a Dwelling House District the floor area of a private garage
erected as an accessory building shall not exceed eight hundred (800) square
feet unless the lot area exceeds four thousand eight hundred (4,800) square
feet in which event the floor area may be increased in the ratio of one (1)
square foot for each twelve (12) square feet of additional lot area.
         D.   In Multi-Family Districts, garages and parking spaces erected or
established as accessory uses shall be subject to the restrictions specified in
Sections
343.19 to
343.21 and Chapter
349.
      (7)   Garage Sale or Other Residential Property Sales, as defined in
Section
676B.01(a), as long as they conform to the provisions in Chapter
676B.
      (8)   Signs permitted in accordance with the requirements of Chapter
350.
      (9)   Any other accessory use customarily incident to a use authorized in
a Residence District except that no use prohibited in a Local Retail Business
District shall be permitted as an accessory use.
   (b)   Accessory Building Erected Prior to Erection of Main Building. An
accessory building may be erected prior to the construction of the main
building only if:
      (1)   The accessory building is erected on the rear half of the lot;
      (2)   The accessory building is so placed as not to prevent the
practicable and conforming location of the main building;
      (3)   The main building is completed within two (2) years from the date
of issuance of the permit for the accessory building.
(Ord. No. 887-18. Passed 6-3-19, eff. 7-3-19)
§ 337.231 Portable Storage Containers
   (a)   For purposes of this section, a "portable storage container" means a
container, unit, shed-like structure, or other receptacle that is capable of
being moved and is, or can be, used for the temporary storage of personal
property or building materials of any kind, and is located on residential
property.
   (b)   No person shall place a portable storage container on residential
property without first obtaining a permit issued by the Director of Building
and Housing, and displaying the permit on the front of the container most
visible from the street. The Board of Control shall determine the permit fee
and the Director of Building and Housing shall determine the permit application
contents.
   (c)   All portable storage containers and their use on residential premises
shall meet the following requirements:
      (1)   A portable storage container may not be located at a residential
property for more than thirty (30) consecutive days of any calendar year; and
      (2)   No more than one (1) portable storage container shall be placed on
a residential property at any given time without the express permission of the
Director of Building and Housing; and
      (3)   All portable storage containers during the term of shall be in good
condition free from rust, peeling paint and other visible forms of
deterioration; and
      (4)    No portable storage container shall be placed where it obstructs
traffic vision or on any public sidewalk or street, nor placed within any
required front yard set-back; and a portable storage container shall be placed
at least ten (10) feet away from any side-street property line and from any
main building on an adjoining lot; and
      (5)   Portable storage containers may be kept on a property during the
term of a valid building permit issued by the Director of Building and Housing
for construction work on the property, and must be removed within fifteen (15)
days of final cessation of construction or any thirty (30) day stop of
construction; and
      (6)   No portable storage container shall exceed twenty (20) feet in
length, ten (10) feet in width, or ten (10) feet in height.
(Ord. No. 440-16. Passed 8-10-16, eff. 8-11-16)
§ 337.24 Nursing Homes, Convalescent Homes, Old Folks Homes, Homes for the Aged
and Rest Homes
   (a)   Except as provided in Sections
329.01 and
329.04, no nursing home, convalescent home, old folks home, home for the aged,
rest home or similar use shall hereafter be erected nor shall any such existing
structure, building or use be hereafter altered or remodeled to provide for any
increase in occupancy, or to affect a change in occupancy classification, in a
one (1) and two (2) family use district without complying with the following
requirements:
      (1)   Each such use shall have a minimum lot size of twenty thousand
(20,000) square feet, and no less than eight hundred (800) square feet of lot
area per patient.
      (2)   Each such use shall have a minimum frontage of two hundred (200)
feet in single-family and two (2) family residential districts.
      (3)   Each such use shall have a side yard of no less than thirty (30)
feet on each side.
      (4)   Each such use shall have a landscaped front yard of no less than
thirty-five (35) feet, and where no off-street parking may be maintained.
      (5)   Each such structure or building shall be no more than a maximum of
two (2) stories in height.
      (6)   Each such use shall provide space on the premises to the rear of
the structure or building for the parking or garaging of motor vehicles so that
there shall be one (1) such space for each professional staff member, including
doctors and nurses, one (1) space for each three (3) other employees and one
(1) space for each six (6) beds.
      (7)   Each such use shall provide permitted compact evergreen planting or
a permitted masonry wall or fence to a height of five (5) feet above grade
level along both side lot lines and the rear lot line.
   (b)   The provisions herein shall apply, notwithstanding any other
provisions of this Zoning Code.
(Ord. No. 1242-65. Passed 7-12-65, eff. 7-15-65)
§ 337.25 Agricultural Uses in Residential Districts
   Agricultural uses in Residential Districts shall be subject to the following
regulations and the regulations of Sections
347.02 and
205.02 regarding the keeping of farm animals.
   (a)   Permitted Accessory Structures. In addition to fences, as regulated in
division (b) of this section, a permitted agricultural use may be served by the
following accessory structures: sheds, greenhouses, coops, cages, beehives,
hoophouses, cold frames, barns, rain barrels, composting, farm stands as
regulated in division (d) of this section, and similar structures not exceeding
fifteen (15) feet in height.
   (b)   Fences. Fences for agricultural uses shall be permitted in accordance
with the regulations applicable to fences in Residential Districts, except that
the following regulations shall apply where an agricultural use is the
principal use in a Residential District.
      (1)   Front Yard and Other Street Yard. A fence located in a required
front yard, side street yard or other street yard, shall not exceed four (4)
feet in height and shall be either ornamental or black or dark green, vinyl-
coated chain link.
      (2)   Other Locations. A fence located at or behind the setback line of a
required front yard or other street yard shall not exceed six (6) feet in
height and shall be either ornamental or chain link. Any open lot area between
a fence and a street line shall be planted with grass or other vegetation.
   (c)   Setbacks for Structures. No permitted accessory structures to an
agricultural use, other than fences and farm stands, shall be located in a
required front yard or side street yard area line or within eighteen (18)
inches of an interior side or rear lot line.
   (d)   Farm Stands and Sale of Produce. The sale of produce and the placement
of farm stands shall be permitted only in accordance with the following
regulations.
      (1)   Sale of Produce. Where such sales have been permitted by the Board
of Zoning Appeals, agricultural products, plants, eggs and honey grown or
produced on a property or within one thousand (1,000) feet of the subject
property may be sold on the premises of an agricultural use in a Residential
District if the agricultural use is the only use of the subject property or
occupies at least seventy-five percent (75%) of the property or at least four
thousand (4,000) square feet. In addition, foods prepared on site or off site
may be sold if the principal ingredients are grown or produced on the subject
property or within one thousand (1,000) feet of the subject property. No sales
shall be made before 8:00 a.m. or after dusk. Food sales shall be licensed by
the Cleveland Department of Public Health if such licensing is required in the
City’s Codified Ordinances.
      (2)   Farm Stands. Where a farm stand has been permitted by the Board of
Zoning Appeals, any such farm stand located in a required front yard area in a
One-Family or Two-Family District shall be removed from the front yard or
stored inside a building on the premises during that time of the year when the
garden or farm is not open for public use. Farm stands shall not occupy more
than two percent (2%) of the subject property’s land area and, in One-Family
and Two- Family Districts, farm stands also shall not exceed two hundred (200)
square feet in area on the subject property. A farm stand shall be set back at
least eighteen (18) inches from any lot line.
      (3)   Board of Zoning Appeals Approval. No agricultural produce or
related products may be sold from the property of an agricultural use and no
farm stand for the sale of such products may be located on the property unless
the Board of Zoning Appeals determines, after public notice and pubic hearing,
that the farm stand and sales will meet a community need without adversely
affecting the neighborhood. In making this determination, the Board shall
consider, among others, the following factors:
         A.   The nature of nearby uses of land with respect to their
sensitivity to the activity associated with farm stand sales;
         B.   The proximity of the farm stand to one (1) family and two (2)
family houses;
         C.   Traffic volumes on the street on which the subject property is
located;
         D.   The availability of off-street or on- street parking to serve the
farm stand use;
         E.   The proximity of other farm stands serving the immediate area;
and
         F.   The maintenance of a substantially unobstructed view in the set
back area which shall include a clear view through the farm stand above a
height of three (3) feet.
   (e)   Signs. Where an agricultural use is the principal use in a Residential
District or occupies at least seventy-five percent (75%) of the property or at
least four thousand (4,000) square feet, one (1) sign shall be permitted on
each street frontage identifying the agricultural use and listing hours of
operations for market sales and contact information. Such sign shall not exceed
four (4) square feet in area and, if freestanding, shall not exceed three (3)
feet in height and shall be set back at least five (5) feet from all property
lines unless the sign is placed on a permitted farm stand. No signs shall be
permitted for an agricultural use that is an accessory use in a Residential
District.
   (f)   Composting. Composting may be conducted on the premises of an
agricultural use if limited to use on the subject property and if stored in a
manner that controls odor, prevents infestation and minimizes runoff into
waterways and onto adjacent properties.
   (g)   Maintenance. Any land devoted to agricultural use shall be well-
maintained and shall be free of excessively tall weeds or grass. All accessory
structures to an agricultural use shall also be well maintained.
   (h)   Building Permits. No Building Permit or Certificate of Occupancy shall
be required for establishment of an agricultural use. A Building Permit shall
be required for installation of a fence or for construction of a barn or other
structure routinely requiring such permit, except that no Building Permit shall
be required for cages, coops, beehives or similar structures that are not
permanently attached to the ground or to another structure and do not exceed
thirty- two (32) square feet in area nor eight (8) feet in height. No farm
stand shall be installed without issuance of a Building Permit. The application
for such Permit shall include the name, address and phone number of the
operator of the farm stand; the length, width and height of the farm stand; a
description of the type of produce to be sold from the farm stand; and the name
of the property owner. If the applicant is not the property owner, the
applicant shall include with the Permit application a written statement from
the property owner authorizing the applicant to install and operate the farm
stand.
   (i)   Definitions. As used in this section:
      (1)   “Farm stand” means a temporary structure used for display or sale
of produce as described in division (d)(1) of this section and that meets the
requirements of this section.
      (2)   “Subject property” refers to a parcel of land or two (2) or more
adjacent parcels of land in agricultural use.
(Ord. No. 814-10. Passed 10-4-10, eff. 11-3-10)
§ 337.251 Limited Lodging in Residence Districts
   (a)   Definitions. As used in this section:
      (1)   "Accessory use" shall have the same meaning as defined in Section
325.02.
      (2)   "Booking agent" means any person or entity that facilitates
reservations or collects payment for limited lodging accommodations on behalf
of or for an owner or primary resident. Merely publishing an advertisement for
accommodation in a dwelling unit for limited lodging does not make the
publisher a booking agent.
      (3)   "Dwelling unit" shall have the same meaning as defined in Section
325.20.
      (4)    "Limited lodging" means the accessory use of all or part of a
dwelling unit by rental for temporary occupancy for dwelling, sleeping, or
lodging. Limited lodging includes the arrangement of such rental by the owner
through a booking agent.
      (5)   "Lodgers" means a person who is a renter of all or part a dwelling
unit and has mere use without actual or exclusive possession of the dwelling
unit.
      (6)   "Owner" means a titled-owner or a tenant/renter of a property who
is in possession and control of the dwelling unit and who lives in the dwelling
unit more than fifty-one percent (51%) of the calendar year. Any tenant or
renter of the property must be authorized by the titled-owner of the property
to provide limited lodging.
      (7)   "Primary residence" means the use of a dwelling unit for
residential household living purposes of more than fifty-one percent (51%) of
the calendar year by the owner, tenant/renter, or person in possession and
control of the dwelling unit.
      (8)   "Temporary occupancy" means the accommodation of lodgers conducted
in a dwelling unit, the primary use of which is for household living, and where
the total accommodations of lodgers provided is for fewer than ninety-one (91)
days per calendar year but where the provision of lodging to any particular
lodger is for no more than thirty (30) consecutive days.
   (b)   General Provisions.
      (1)   Limited lodging is permitted in a Residence District, provided that
limited lodging in a particular dwelling unit may be provided for no more than
ninety-one (91) days per calendar year.
      (2)   Notwithstanding
Chapter 365, limited lodging is not required to have a certificate of rental
registration provided the dwelling unit remains owner-occupied as a primary
residence.
      (3)   The standards set forth in division (c) of this section are
intended to ensure that limited lodging will not be a detriment to the
character and livability of the surrounding residential neighborhood.
   (c)   Standards. A dwelling unit may be used for limited lodging subject to
compliance with all of the following minimum requirements:
      (1)   The dwelling unit shall remain as a household living unit with
housekeeping facilities in common.
      (2)   Limited lodging must be accessory and incidental to the use of a
dwelling unit for residential household living purposes as a primary residence.
      (3)   Smoke detectors shall be provided and maintained adjacent to each
sleeping area in each dwelling unit as required in
Chapter 392.
      (4)   One or more carbon monoxide detection devices shall be installed
and maintained as close to the center of the dwelling unit and within close
proximity to the living and sleeping areas of the dwelling unit.
      (5)   Lodgers shall be notified of the trash and recycle collection days
for the property and any applicable rules and regulations pertaining to leaving
or storing trash on the exterior of the property. The owner shall provide
proper trash and recycling containers for the lodgers.
      (6)   The owner or primary resident offering the dwelling unit for
limited lodging shall provide to any lodger the contact information, including
a telephone phone number, of a person with responsibility to take action to
resolve any complaints regarding the condition, operation or maintenance of the
dwelling unit.
      (7)   Compliance with all other applicable provisions of the Cleveland
Codified Ordinances related to residential dwelling units.
(Ord. No. 1444-16. Passed 1-23-17, eff. 1-26-17)
CHAPTER 338 – MANUFACTURED HOUSING PARK (MHP) DISTRICT
338.01   Purpose
338.02   Definitions
338.03   Permitted Uses
338.04   Area and Height
338.05   Licensing
§ 338.01 Purpose
   The Manufactured Housing Park (“MHP”) District is established to accomplish
the following:
   (a)   Promote the provision of affordable housing;
   (b)   Facilitate the retention of existing appropriately located
manufactured housing parks;
   (c)   Permit the development of manufactured housing parks in locations
which are suited to residential use but where such development will not detract
from the character of nearby residential areas; and
   (d)   Ensure that manufactured housing parks are designed and maintained in
a manner which promotes the welfare of the park’s residents and the welfare of
residents of nearby properties.
(Ord. No. 818-95. Passed 5-6-96, eff. 5-14-96)
§ 338.02 Definitions
   (a)   “Manufactured House” has the same meaning as “manufactured home,” as
defined in RC 4501.01.
   (b)   “Manufactured Housing Park” has the same meaning as “manufactured home
park,” as defined in RC 3733.01.
(Ord. No. 818-95. Passed 5-6-96, eff. 5-14-96)
§ 338.03 Permitted Uses
   (a)   Main Uses. The following uses shall be permitted as main or principal
uses in a MHP District:
      (1)   Manufactured houses placed within a manufactured housing park;
      (2)   Single-family, two (2) family and row houses, as regulated in this
Code, not located within a manufactured housing park.
   (b)   Accessory Uses. The following uses shall be permitted as accessory
uses in a MHP District:
      (1)   Storage structures for individual manufactured houses;
      (2)   Parking pads or carports for individual manufactured houses;
      (3)   Common parking areas for residents or guests of a manufactured
housing park;
      (4)   Buildings or structures used exclusively to provide accessory
services to residents of a manufactured housing park, including such facilities
as laundry rooms, recreation equipment, emergency shelters, and administrative
offices; and
      (5)   Accessory uses permitted for Residence Districts in Section
337.23 of the Zoning Code.
(Ord. No. 818-95. Passed 5-6-96, eff. 5-14-96)
§ 338.04 Area and Height
   (a)   Manufactured Housing Park Area. Each manufactured housing park shall
have a land area of not less than five (5) acres.
   (b)   Height. All MHP Districts shall be included within the thirty-five
(35) foot Height District, as established in the Zoning Code.
   (c)   Perimeter Yards. A landscaped yard area at least twenty-five (25) feet
in depth shall be provided along all lot lines and street right-of-way lines
bordering a manufactured housing park. Along all lot lines which separate the
MHP District from any other residential zoning district, this yard area shall
include a Heavy Intensity Transition Strip conforming to the regulations of
Chapter
352 of the Zoning Code. Along all street right-of-way lines, this yard area
shall include a Medium Intensity Transition Strip. All portions of a yard area
not occupied by shrubbery or trees shall be planted with grass or other
vegetative ground cover.
(Ord. No. 818-95. Passed 5-6-96, eff. 5-14-96)
§ 338.05 Licensing
   No manufactured housing park shall be operated without a license issued in
accordance with Chapter
217 of the Codified Ordinances of Cleveland, Ohio, 1976. For purposes of such
licensing, the term “manufactured housing park” shall be synonymous with the
term “house trailer or travel trailer park.”
(Ord. No. 818-95. Passed 5-6-96, eff. 5-14-96)
CHAPTER 339 – PARKING DISTRICTS
339.01   Purpose of Establishment
339.02   Permitted Buildings and Uses in a Parking District
339.03   Access and Maintenance
339.04   Reserved
339.05   Lighting
339.06   Reserved
339.07   Location of Parking Facilities for Nonresidential Uses
Cross-reference:
   Lighting for off-street parking spaces in Residence-Office Districts, CO
337.20
   Off-street parking and loading requirements, CO
Ch. 349
   Off-Street Parking Committee, CO
349.12
   Variance from use regulations, CO
329.03
Statutory reference:
   Off-street parking facilities, RC 717.05 et seq.
§ 339.01 Purpose of Establishment
   A Parking District is established in order to provide a zoning district
where accessory off-street parking may be located within residential districts
as compatible land uses, can function effectively and at the same time protect
the residential amenities of any adjoining residential districts.
(Ord. No. 762-68. Passed 12-16-68, eff. 12-17-68)
§ 339.02 Permitted Buildings and Uses in a Parking District
   No land shall be used or occupied and no structure shall be designed,
erected, altered, used or occupied except for the following uses:
   (a)   Accessory off-street parking garages located no closer than ten (10)
feet to any adjacent residential building and providing entrances and exits so
located as to minimize traffic congestion and the effect of headlights at
night.
   (b)   Accessory off-street parking lots operated and maintained in
accordance with the regulations set forth in this Zoning Code.
(Ord. No. 762-68. Passed 12-16-68, eff. 12-17-68)
§ 339.03 Access and Maintenance
   (a)   Accessory off-street parking spaces, driveways and maneuvering areas
shall be properly graded for drainage so that all water is drained within the
lot providing such parking spaces, surfaced with concrete, asphaltic concrete,
asphalt or similar surfacing material and maintained in good condition and free
of debris and trash.
   (b)   Accessory off-street parking spaces shall be provided with wheel or
bumper guards that are so located that no part of a parked vehicle will extend
beyond such parking space.
   Therefore:
      (1)   Only one (1) such driveway shall be permitted for each one hundred
(100) feet of frontage of the lot providing such parking spaces.
      (2)   No driveway shall be so located that there would be less than
fifteen (15) feet between the point of tangency of the driveway apron radius
and the outside crosswalk line at the intersection when such driveway is on the
approach side of an intersection. In such cases as the driveway is on the
leaving side of the intersection, the requirement shall be five (5) feet
between the outside crosswalk line and the point of tangency of the driveway
apron radius.
      (3)   The maximum width of such driveway shall be thirty (30) feet
measured at right angles to the angle of the driveway entrance. Such driveway
shall have an apron radius at the curb of not less than six (6) feet or a curb
cut of not more than sixty (60) feet, and shall provide a means for motor
vehicles to enter and leave the parking facilities without obstructing traffic.
(Ord. No. 762-68. Passed 12-16-68, eff. 12-17-68)
§ 339.04 Reserved
§ 339.05 Lighting
   Where lighting is provided for accessory off-street parking spaces, it shall
be constructed and arranged so as to prevent the direct emission of light upon
adjoining lots or the public streets.
(Ord. No. 762-68. Passed 12-16-68, eff. 12-17-68)
§ 339.06 Reserved
§ 339.07 Location of Parking Facilities for Nonresidential Uses
   Parking districts providing accessory off-street parking facilities for
nonresidential uses shall be located adjacent to areas zoned nonresidential.
(Ord. No. 762-68. Passed 12-16-68, eff. 12-17-68)
CHAPTER 340 – INSTITUTIONAL-RESEARCH (I-R) DISTRICTS
340.01   Purpose
340.02   Permitted Main Uses
340.03   Permitted Accessory Uses
340.04   Permitted Conditional Uses
340.05   Approval of Conditional Uses
340.06   Site Plan and Design Review
340.07   Off-Street Parking Requirements
§ 340.01 Purpose
   The Institutional-Research (I-R) District is established to provide
appropriate locations and design standards for large-scale developments of
educational and medical institutions, other institutions, research facilities
and professional offices, as well as residential and retail uses supportive of
the principal institutional and research-related uses. An ordinance of Council
is required to zone properties as I-R.
(Ord. No. 656-05. Passed 6-6-05, eff. 6-15-05)
§ 340.02 Permitted Main Uses
   In an Institutional-Research District, the following uses are permitted as
main uses:
   (a)   Hospitals, medical clinics, medical office buildings, and similar
medical institutions;
   (b)   Nursing homes, assisted living residences, and mental health centers;
   (c)   Primary and secondary schools, colleges, universities, trade schools,
and similar educational institutions;
   (d)   Museums and libraries;
   (e)   Places of worship and associated office and classroom space;
   (f)   Parks, playgrounds and playfields;
   (g)   Arenas, stadiums and indoor recreation facilities if public or if
associated with a permitted institutional use;
   (h)   Professional offices and offices of community and civic organizations;
   (i)   Research laboratories including research laboratories with light
assembly;
   (j)   Hotels and motels;
   (k)   Multi-family residential buildings, live-work units, and correctional
halfway houses.
(Ord. No. 656-05. Passed 6-6-05, eff. 6-15-05)
§ 340.03 Permitted Accessory Uses
   In an Institutional-Research District, the following uses are permitted as
accessory uses to permitted main uses.
   (a)   Pharmacies, optical stores, medical supply stores and similar uses
located in a hospital, medical clinic or medical office building as an
accessory use;
   (b)   Restaurants, coffee shops and other eating establishments, grocery
stores, gift shops, newsstands, book stores, barber shops, beauty parlors, and
similar uses accessory to a permitted main use and located within the building
occupied by the main use;
   (c)   Dormitories and other student housing accessory to a permitted
educational institution;
   (d)   Child day care centers and adult day care centers accessory to
permitted main uses;
   (e)   Theaters and performing arts centers accessory to an educational
institution;
   (f)   Parking lots and parking garages accessory to permitted main uses;
   (g)   All uses permitted as main uses.
(Ord. No. 656-05. Passed 6-6-05, eff. 6-15-05)
§ 340.04 Permitted Conditional Uses
   In an Institutional-Research District, the following uses are permitted as
conditional uses, subject to approval by the City Planning Commission in
accordance for the provisions of Section
340.05.
   (a)   Book stores, stationary stores and gift shops;
   (b)   Office supply stores and computer stores;
   (c)   Art shops and galleries;
   (d)   Coffee houses and restaurants without drive-through facilities;
   (e)   Grocery stores;
   (f)   Banks;
   (g)   Dry cleaners and tailors;
   (h)   Barber shops and beauty parlors;
   (i)   Pharmacies.
(Ord. No. 656-05. Passed 6-6-05, eff. 6-15-05)
§ 340.05 Approval of Conditional Uses
   The City Planning Commission shall approve a conditional use in an I-
R District only if it determines that the proposed use, by virtue of its
location, size, layout and design, will function principally to support the
institutional and research uses in the district, and will contribute to the
creation or maintenance of a vibrant, pedestrian-oriented, mixed-use district.
(Ord. No. 656-05. Passed 6-6-05, eff. 6-15-05)
§ 340.06 Site Plan and Design Review
   No Building Permit shall be issued for the construction of a new building in
an Institutional- Research District without the approval of the site plan and
building design by the City Planning Commission or its Director, in accordance
with rules promulgated by the Commission and in accordance with the following
standards.
   (a)   Master Plan. In reviewing development proposals in an Institutional-
Research District, the City Planning Commission shall assess the development’s
consistency with any applicable master plan that has been adopted or accepted
by the Commission. If no current master plan for the district is available to
the Commission, the Commission may request submission of a master plan from an
organization deemed responsible for preparation of a plan for the district.
   (b)   Urban Form. Except where such design would be clearly inconsistent
with the character of an area, new development should take an “urban form,”
characterized by multi-story buildings, streetside building placement, and
parking located in garages or in lots behind buildings.
   (c)   Architectural Design. In addition to meeting high standards of
architectural design, buildings should be compatible with nearby properties
with respect to scale, height, setback, spacing, orientation to existing
streets, architectural style, materials, and colors. Variations and innovations
in design are, however, encouraged in order to achieve visual interest and to
create distinct identities for individual buildings and districts. The goal is
compatibility in design, not uniformity.
   (d)   Pedestrian, Bicyclist and Transit Access. Developments should be
designed to facilitate safe and convenient access by pedestrians and bicyclists
and to facilitate use of public transit.
   (e)   Parking and Circulation. Developments should be designed to provide
adequate and convenient off-street and on-street parking and to utilize
opportunities for parking that is shared by buildings and uses. Streets,
driveways, sidewalks and paths should be designed in a manner that facilitates
safe and convenient circulation for motorists, pedestrians, bicyclists and
transit users.
   (f)   Landscaping and Open Space. Developments should include landscaped
areas and open spaces that enhance the appearance of a property and provide
areas for recreation and scenic enjoyment, while meeting the environmental
design standards of this section.
   (g)   Environmental Design. Developments should incorporate “sustainable”
building techniques and other measures, as feasible, in order to conserve
energy, minimize water usage, recycle wastes, re-use building materials, and to
achieve other goals that promote environmental sustainability.
(Ord. No. 656-05. Passed 6-6-05, eff. 6-15-05)
§ 340.07 Off-Street Parking Requirements
   Off-street parking for individual uses in an Institutional-Research District
shall be provided in accordance with the regulations of Section
349.04. Proposals for shared parking shall be submitted and reviewed in
accordance with the provisions of Section
349.10,
349.11 and
349.12.
(Ord. No. 656-05. Passed 6-6-05, eff. 6-15-05)
CHAPTER 341 – DESIGN REVIEW
341.01   Purpose
341.02   Applicability
341.021   Lakefront Public Land Protective Districts – Repealed
341.023   University Circle Design District (UCDD)
341.03   Definitions
341.04   Design Review Districts
341.05   Administrative Procedures
341.051   Tree Preservation Plan Required
341.052   Tree Preservation General Requirements
341.053   Civil Penalties for Damaged Trees or Trees Removed Without Approval
341.06   Local Design Review Advisory Committees
341.07   Design Guidelines
341.08   Demolition and Moving
Cross-reference:
   Building zone maps, CO
Ch. 331
   University (College) Retail Districts: permitted uses, location, CO
343.06 et seq.
§ 341.01 Purpose
   Design Review requirements and districts are established to ensure
appropriate design of buildings and properties in furtherance of the following
objectives:
   (a)   To protect property values and to preserve and enhance the character
of existing neighborhoods and development;
   (b)   To promote economic activity and increase municipal revenues;
   (c)   To enhance the visual image of Cleveland and its neighborhoods and
downtown;
   (d)   To preserve the community’s architectural assets; and
   (e)   To protect the environment and facilitate healthy living.
(Ord. No. 1827-08. Passed 2-9-09, eff. 2-11-09)
§ 341.02 Applicability (effective until 3-15-24)
   No Building Permit shall be issued by the City without design approval by
the City Planning Commission, or its Director, for development projects that
meet the following criteria for applicability, except that such approval shall
not apply to structures that are designated as Landmarks or are located in
Landmark Districts, for which design approval shall be the responsibility of
the Landmarks Commission.
   (a)   Design Review Districts. New construction of and applicable exterior
alterations to buildings and structures located in designated Design Review
Districts.
   (b)   New Residential Development. New construction of residential
buildings, including any new building for which residential use and associated
accessory garage parking occupy at least fifty percent (50%) of the building.
   (c)   New Retail, Office and Institutional Development. New construction of
buildings for “retail business, office and institutional uses,” as defined in
this chapter, including any new building for which such uses and associated
accessory garage parking occupy at least fifty percent (50%) of the building.
   (d)   Public Properties. New construction of and applicable exterior
alterations to buildings and structures owned by local, county, state or
federal government or by any other governmental agency, including regulated
public utilities.
   (e)   Planned Unit Development (PUD) Districts. New construction of
buildings and structures located in designated Planned Unit Development (PUD)
Districts.
(Ord. No. 1827-08. Passed 2-9-09, eff. 2-11-09)
§ 341.02 Applicability (effective 3-15-24)
   No Building Permit shall be issued by the City without design approval by
the City Planning Commission, or its Director, for development projects that
meet the following criteria for applicability, except that such approval shall
not apply to structures that are designated as Landmarks or are located in
Landmark Districts, for which design approval shall be the responsibility of
the Landmarks Commission.
   (a)   Design Review Districts. New construction of and applicable exterior
alterations to buildings and structures located in designated Design Review
Districts.
   (b)   New Residential Development. New construction of residential
buildings, including any new building for which residential use and associated
accessory garage parking occupy at least fifty percent (50%) of the building.
   (c)   New Retail, Office and Institutional Development. New construction of
buildings for "retail business, office and institutional uses," as defined in
this chapter, including any new building for which such uses and associated
accessory garage parking occupy at least fifty percent (50%) of the building.
   (d)   Public Properties. New construction of and applicable exterior
alterations to buildings and structures owned by local, county, state or
federal government or by any other governmental agency, including regulated
public utilities.
   (e)   Planned Unit Development (PUD) Districts. New construction of
buildings and structures located in designated Planned Unit Development (PUD)
Districts.
   (f)   Transit Oriented Development Projects. Any land use development,
including new construction, that changes or expands the use(s) on a parcel of
land entirely or partially within the Transit Oriented Development Zone, as
defined in Section
301.02 of these Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 801-2023. Passed 8-16-23, eff. 3-15-24)
§ 341.021 Lakefront Public Land Protective Districts – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1827-08. Passed 2-9-09, eff. 2-11-09)
§ 341.023 University Circle Design District (UCDD)
   (a)   Purpose and Establishment. The University Circle Design District
(UCDD) is established as a Public Land Protective District to safeguard public
and community investments in the institutions and parks of the University
Circle area, while promoting development of well-designed commercial,
residential, and institutional uses in the district. Review and oversight of
the character, design, and placement of buildings, structures, roadways, and
open spaces, as required for properties located within the district, is
fundamental to fostering positive growth and social welfare of the community
and is critical to ensuring development of a premiere urban district in
University Circle.
   (b)   Boundaries and Mapping. The boundaries of the UCDD shall be
established and amended by ordinance of City Council and shall be shown on the
Zoning Map of the City of Cleveland as an overlay district, supplementing the
underlying zoning districts.
   (c)   Administration. Building Permit applications for properties located
within the UCDD shall be reviewed and approved in accordance with the
regulations of this chapter pertaining to Public Land Protective Districts. The
University Circle Design Review Advisory Committee shall review building permit
applications in meetings that are open to the pubic and shall make
recommendations to the Commission. In making its recommendations to the
Commission, the Advisory Committee shall consider any recommendations provided
by the University Circle Architectural Review Board and other organizations and
individuals offering comment.
   (d)   Advisory Committee. The University Circle Design Review Advisory
Committee shall be composed of at least seven (7) and no more than nine (9)
voting members appointed by the City Planning Commission. A majority of the
members shall be design professionals with expertise in architecture, landscape
architecture, historic preservation, urban planning, public art, or graphic
design. Members who are not design professionals shall be representatives of
organizations or businesses in the District or residents of the District. The
City Planning Commission shall appoint those members who are not design
professionals from nominations made to the Commission by the City Council
members representing wards that are located in whole or in part within the
boundaries of the District. The Advisory Committee shall hold at least two (2)
regularly scheduled meetings each month, unless there is no business to
conduct. A majority of the Advisory Committee’s membership shall constitute a
quorum, without which no votes may be taken. Any recommendation regarding an
application shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of the members
present.
   (e)   Approvals. Applications subject to the provisions of the UCDD shall be
approved by the City Planning Commission or by its Director acting on behalf of
the Commission, pursuant to rules established by the Commission. Within thirty
(30) days of receipt of a complete application by the City Planning Commission
office, the University Circle Design Review Advisory Committee shall recommend
approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval of the application, unless
the applicant agrees to an extension. Within thirty (30) days of action by the
Advisory Committee, or expiration of its action period, the City Planning
Commission or its Director shall approve, approve with conditions, or
disapprove the application, unless the applicant agrees to an extension.
(Ord. No. 1766-06. Passed 12-11-06, eff. 12-15-06)
§ 341.03 Definitions
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning
given in the succeeding sections:
   (a)   Retail Business, Office and Institutional Uses. Any non-residential
use permitted in a General Retail Business District.
   (b)   Applicable Exterior Alterations. Alterations to the exterior of a
building or structure that result in a change in appearance that is visible
from public streets or adjoining properties, including demolition, but
excluding repair or replacement of worn or damaged materials with materials of
the same design and color.
   (c)   Director. The Director of a specified City Department or his or her
designee.
(Ord. No. 1827-08. Passed 2-9-09, eff. 2-11-09)
§ 341.04 Design Review Districts
   Design Review Districts shall be established in accordance with the
following provisions:
   (a)   Designation Criteria. A geographic area designated as a Design Review
District shall be at least three (3) acres in size and shall be characterized
by development or development opportunity for which improved design can be
expected to significantly contribute to achieving one (1) or more of the
objectives of this chapter. The district may be composed of one (1) or more
noncontiguous geographic areas, each of which must be at least three (3) acres
in size.
   (b)   Designation Process. Design Review Districts shall be designated and
amended in accordance with the procedures for amending the Zoning Map as set
forth in Chapter
333 of the Zoning Code.
   (c)   Mapping and Applicability. Design Review Districts shall be shown on
the Zoning Map of the City of Cleveland as “overlay districts” to be applied in
conjunction with the “underlying” zoning district. Provisions of the underlying
district shall remain in effect except where inconsistent with the provisions
of the Design Review District.
   (d)   District Name. The City Planning Commission shall assign each Design
Review District a name reflective of the neighborhood or other geographic area
in which the District is located.
   (e)   Previously Designated Districts. All Public Land Protective Districts,
Business Revitalization Districts, and the University Circle Design District,
to the extent that such districts existed on the effective date of this
ordinance, shall become Design Review Districts subject to the regulations of
this chapter on the effective date of this ordinance. Those districts shall be
shown on the City’s Zoning Map as “Design Review Districts” on the effective
date of this ordinance.
(Ord. No. 1827-08. Passed 2-9-09, eff. 2-11-09)
§ 341.05 Administrative Procedures
   The following procedures are established to govern the processing of
applications for Building Permits subject to the regulations of this chapter.
   (a)   Contents of Application. In addition to meeting application
requirements established in the Building Code and Zoning Code for Building
Permit applications, applications governed by the provisions of this chapter
shall include the following elements.
      (1)   Color photographs showing the subject property in the context of
adjoining properties within two hundred fifty (250) lineal feet on either side
of the subject property.
      (2)   Architectural drawings including elevation drawings and site plans
for the construction or exterior alterations proposed, indicating design
materials, colors, illumination, sign placement, and landscaping.
      (3)   In the case of a proposed demolition, a plan showing the proposed
re-use of the property, including both interim and long-term reuse plans, if
appropriate.
      (4)   Information indicating project elements that contribute to an
environmentally sustainable development.
      (5)   A Tree Preservation Plan, if required, pursuant to this chapter.
      (6)   Other materials listed in guides that may be prepared by the staff
of the City Planning Commission and provided to applicants.
   (b)   Determination of Applicability and Transmittal to City Planning
Director. Upon receipt of an application for a Building Permit, the Director of
Building and Housing shall use the standards of Section
341.02 to determine whether the proposed action is governed by the provisions
of this chapter. If it is determined that the action is governed by these
provisions, the Director of Building and Housing shall promptly transmit the
application to the Director of the City Planning Commission.
   (c)   Transmittal to Local Design Review Advisory Committee. Upon receipt of
a complete application, the City Planning Director shall promptly transmit the
application for review and recommendation by the Local Design Review Advisory
Committee, as established in Section
341.06. Other required City reviews may be conducted concurrently, as
appropriate. In the case of an application for an action that the City Planning
Director deems to have no significant impact on the design or appearance of the
property, the Director may approve the application administratively without
referral to the Local Design Review Advisory Committee.
   (d)   Standards for Review. An application received pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter shall be reviewed in accordance with the design
guidelines of Section
341.07 and any supplemental guidelines adopted by the City Planning Commission
for a particular district. A Tree Preservation Plan received pursuant to this
chapter shall be reviewed by the Commissioner of Urban Forestry in accordance
with Section
341.051.
   (e)   Local Design Review Committee Meeting and Action.
      (1)   Meeting. The City Planning Director shall inform the applicant of
the time and location of the Local Design Review Advisory Committee meeting at
which the application will be considered. That consideration shall take place
at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee occurring at least
five (5) days after acceptance of a complete application by the City Planning
Director.
      (2)   Action. The Local Design Review Advisory Committee shall recommend
either approval, approval with modifications or conditions, or disapproval of
the application. The Committee may choose to postpone action in order to permit
the applicant to prepare revisions if the applicant agrees to such
postponement. If the applicant does not agree to a postponement, the Committee
shall take action on the application at the meeting. The Committee shall
provide a written record of its recommendation to the City Planning Commission.
   (f)   City Planning Commission Meeting and Action. After action by the Local
Design Review Advisory Committee, or a failure to act at a meeting in
accordance with the requirements of this section, the City Planning Director
shall inform the applicant of the time and location of the City Planning
Commission meeting at which the application will be considered. The City
Planning Commission shall either approve or disapprove the application or
approve the application with modifications or conditions. The Commission may
choose to postpone action in order to permit the applicant to prepare revisions
if the applicant agrees to such postponement. The Commission shall take action
no later than forty-five (45) days after acceptance of a complete application
by the City Planning Director unless the applicant has agreed to one (1) or
more postponements, including agreed postponements in the Local Design Review
Committee process.
   (g)   Administrative Approval. Pursuant to the “Rules of the City Planning
Commission” regarding administrative approvals, the City Planning Director is
authorized to act on behalf of the Commission in approving applications
recommended for approval by the Local Design Review Advisory Committee and for
applications that meet the standard stated in division (c) of this section. Use
of the administrative approval procedure is not authorized in the case of
applications for demolition or moving of buildings, other than for buildings
that are deemed to be minor accessory structures. Generally, applications for
development of new commercial or institutional buildings and for residential
developments involving six (6) or more units shall not be approved without
referral to the Local Design Review Advisory Committee and the City Planning
Commission.
   (h)   Exemptions. No referral to the City Planning Commission or a Local
Design Review Advisory Committee shall be required for projects approved under
the City’s Storefront Renovation Program. Such projects may be approved by the
action of the City Planning Director subsequent to approval under the
Storefront Renovation Program.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. 377-24. Adopted 8-
7-24)
§ 341.051 Tree Preservation Plan Required
   (a)   For any development project that meets the criteria of Section
341.02 (“development project”) and is situated on one (1) or more acres of
land, and for apartment, townhome or condominium projects of four (4) or more
units situated on any size parcel of land, a Tree Preservation Plan shall be
submitted as part of the Building Permit application. The Tree Preservation
Plan shall be approved by the Commissioner of Urban Forestry (“Commissioner”)
or a designee before a Building Permit is issued. A Tree Preservation Plan is
not required for single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, and three-
family dwellings or for any person, firm, or corporation demolishing a building
or structure pursuant to a valid demolition permit issued under
Chapter 3115 of this Code.
   (b)   The Tree Preservation Plan shall include: (1) the location, botanical
name, dimension at breast height (DBH), and vertical height of all existing
trees on the property; (2) the intent to preserve, relocate, or replace each
tree; (3) measures to be taken to protect new and mature trees during
construction, and to protect roots and soil during construction, following Best
Management Standards and ANSI Standards for Arboriculture, as may be amended
from time to time; and (4) any other information the Commissioner or a designee
requires to determine compliance with this chapter. The Tree Preservation Plan
shall be adhered to during all phases of construction on any development
project for which a Tree Preservation Plan is required.
   (c)   The Commissioner or designee shall review all Tree Preservation Plans
and notify the City Planning Director of approval or disapproval within thirty
(30) business days of submittal of the Tree Preservation Plan. When a plan is
determined to be inadequate, written notice of disapproval stating the specific
reasons for disapproval shall be communicated to the applicant. The notice
shall specify the modifications, terms and conditions that are necessary for
approval of the plan. The Commissioner or designee may make periodic
inspections of trees within the development site to ensure compliance with this
chapter. If the Commissioner does not approve or disapprove the Tree
Preservation Plan within thirty (30) business days of its submittal, the Tree
Preservation Plan is deemed approved.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 341.052 Tree Preservation General Requirements
   The following are basic provisions for the preservation of private and
public trees during construction of development projects on one (1) or more
acres of land, for apartment, townhome or condominium projects of four (4) or
more units situated on any size parcel of land, and for protecting public trees
under Section
509.14.
   (a)   All trees with a DBH of over six (6) inches shall be preserved,
maintained and protected during construction, a tree's roots shall be
protected, and the size of the Tree Protection Zone shall be, in accordance
with Best Management Standards and ANSI Standards for Arboriculture, as may be
amended from time to time.
   (b)   Trees on the property shall not be removed without prior written
approval from the Commissioner of Urban Forestry (“Commissioner”) or a designee
and only if one (1) or more of the following situations apply:
      (1)   The tree poses a risk. To verify that a risk exists, the City may
require a tree risk assessment be performed by the Commissioner or designee or
an International Society of Arboriculture (ISA) Certified Arborist with the ISA
qualification.
      (2)   The tree is planted too close to an existing structure, such that
it is either damaging or has the clear potential to damage the structure.
      (3)   The tree inhibits an infrastructure repair due to its proximity to
the needed infrastructure repair. Trees should not be removed simply because a
sidewalk is raised or cracked, unless it is determined that removal of the tree
is necessary for the sidewalk repair.
      (4)   The tree has structural defects (e.g., split trunk, poor branch
attachments), is damaged to the point that it cannot recover and grow properly,
or that it will grow in a misshapen or unsightly manner that could result in
failure.
      (5)   The tree is infested with an epidemic insect or disease where the
recommended control is not applicable and removal is necessary to prevent
transmission of the insect or disease to other trees. The City may require this
condition to be verified by the Commissioner or designee or an ISA-Certified
Arborist.
      (6)   The Commissioner or a designee determines that the removal of the
tree is necessary to carry out construction in compliance with approved plans.
   (c)   A person, firm or corporation may appeal the decision whether to
remove a tree under division (b) to the Commissioner within ten (10) business
days of the date of the notice of the decision. The Commissioner shall have
jurisdiction to affirm, reverse or modify the decision and shall do so within
ten (10) days of the date of the appeal. A person aggrieved by a final decision
of the Commissioner may further appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals within
thirty (30) days after the Commissioner’s decision.
   (d)   A tree that is removed shall be replaced with a tree of appropriate
species as selected by the Commissioner or designee and in a location where it
will grow to replace the removed tree without posing the risks for which the
tree was removed. Instead of replacing a tree removed pursuant to this section,
a developer may pay the City the value of the tree as established using the
Trunk Formula Method outlined in The Guide for Plant Appraisal by the Council
of Tree and Landscape Appraisers, as may be amended from time to time, or other
tree replacement analysis provided by similar publication. All funds collected
pursuant to this division shall be deposited in the Tree Preservation Fund
established under
Chapter 509 of the Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 341.053 Civil Penalties for Damaged Trees or Trees Removed Without Approval
   (a)   Any person, firm, or corporation required to submit a Tree
Preservation Plan that damages a tree located in the development site, due to
the failure to properly protect or maintain the tree during construction
pursuant to Section
341.052, whether by negligence or otherwise, shall be charged one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) per area of damage to the above ground portion of the tree.
If the damage can be repaired or reduced following Best Management Standards
and ANSI Standards for Arboriculture, as may be amended from time to time, the
party responsible for the damage shall hire an ISA-Certified Arborist to repair
or reduce the damage at the cost of the responsible party. If the damage to the
tree is adequately repaired by the ISA-Certified Arborist, in the discretion of
the Commissioner of Urban Forestry (“Commissioner”) or designee, the
Commissioner may waive the civil fine.
   (b)   Any person, firm, or corporation required to submit a Tree
Preservation Plan that harms a tree within the development site by failing to
properly protect the roots in violation of Section
341.052 or division (e) of Section
352.05, such that an ISA-Certified Arborist believes the tree will fall or
decline and die within two (2) calendar years of the date of completion of
construction, shall be charged the full value of the tree as established using
the Trunk Formula Method outlined in The Guide for Plant Appraisal by the
Council of Tree and Landscape Appraisers, as may be amended from time to time,
or other tree replacement analysis provided by similar publication.
   (c)   Any person, firm or corporation required to submit a Tree Preservation
Plan that removes any tree located in the development site in violation of
Section
341.052, shall be charged a civil fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for
each tree removed in addition to the full cost of any removed tree based on the
replacement cost of the tree as established using the Trunk Formula Method
outlined in The Guide for Plant Appraisal by the Council of Tree and Landscape
Appraisers, as may be amended from time to time, or other tree replacement
analysis provided by similar publication.
   (d)   The Commissioner or a designee shall have the authority to charge the
civil fines set forth in this section. All civil fines and costs collected
pursuant to this section shall be deposited in the Tree Preservation Fund
established under
Chapter 509 of the Codified Ordinances.
   (e)   A person, firm or corporation required to submit a Tree Preservation
Plan that receives a civil fine under this section may appeal to the
Commissioner within ten (10) business days of the date of the notice of the
civil fine. The Commissioner shall have jurisdiction to affirm, reverse, or
modify the decision and shall do so within ten (10) days of the date of the
appeal. A person aggrieved by a final decision of the Commissioner may further
appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals within thirty (30) days after the
Commissioner’s decision.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 341.06 Local Design Review Advisory Committees
   The City Planning Commission shall establish Local Design Review Advisory
Committees to advise the Commission on applications received pursuant to the
regulations of this chapter. The following provisions shall govern the
establishment and operation of each such committee:
   (a)   Appointment of Members. The City Planning Commission shall appoint the
members of each Local Design Review Advisory Committee. In making these
appointments, the City Planning Commission shall solicit nominations from
Community Development Corporations operating within each committee’s geographic
area of jurisdiction and the Council members representing each such area. Each
Advisory Committee shall be composed of not less than five (5) and not more
than eleven (11) members, except that the City Planning Commission may increase
membership on a particular committee if necessary to incorporate relevant
perspectives and areas of expertise. A maximum of three (3) alternate members
may be appointed to each committee. The alternate members may vote in place of
members not in attendance at a particular meeting, as determined by the
Committee’s chairperson.
   (b)   Committee Composition. A majority of the members appointed to each
Advisory Committee shall be architects or other recognized design
professionals, with the remaining members representing businesses or other
organizations with operations in the local area or being residents of the local
area. The term “recognized design professionals” shall refer to individuals
with documented expertise in such fields as architecture, landscape
architecture, urban design, graphic design, or historic preservation.
   (c)   Committee Jurisdiction and Name. Each Local Design Review Advisory
Committee shall review applications received pursuant to this chapter for
properties located within the boundaries of its area of jurisdiction, as
established by the City Planning Commission. All areas of the City shall be
included in the jurisdiction of an Advisory Committee. The City Planning
Director shall assign each Local Design Review Advisory Committee a name
identified with the area of the City served by the Committee.
   (d)   Term of Appointment. Each Advisory Committee member shall be appointed
for an initial term of one (1) year and thereafter for a term of two (2) years.
After expiration of the initial one (1) year term, an individual’s membership
shall continue until the City Planning Commission takes action to replace the
member with a new appointment or until the member resigns. The City Planning
Commission shall replace members whose attendance is poor or who fail to act in
accordance with the regulations of this chapter.
   (e)   Quorum and Voting. A majority of the Advisory Committee’s membership
shall constitute a quorum, without which no votes may be taken. Approval of an
application shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of the members
present at a meeting.
   (f)   Meetings and Records. The Advisory Committee shall meet at least twice
monthly unless there is no business to conduct. The staff representative of the
City Planning Commission shall be designated as the Advisory Committee’s
Secretary and shall be responsible for prompt preparation of minutes, which
shall be retained by the City Planning Commission.
(Ord. No. 1827-08. Passed 2-9-09, eff. 2-11-09)
§ 341.07 Design Guidelines
   In reviewing applications subject to provisions of this chapter, the Local
Design Review Advisory Committee and the City Planning Commission shall follow
the design guidelines set forth in the succeeding sections as well as any
supplemental design guidelines adopted by Commission for a particular district.
   (a)   Design Compatibility. Alterations, additions and new development shall
be compatible in scale, material, color, placement and character with the
design of the subject property as well as the design of properties that are
representative of the area’s most valued architectural and environmental
qualities. In evaluating compatibility, consideration shall also be given to
the value of diversity and individuality in design.
   (b)   Contemporary Design. All buildings are recognized as products of their
own time. Alterations, additions and new developments which have no historical
basis and which seek to create an appearance characteristic of an earlier time
are not required. Conversely, compatible contemporary design is encouraged
except where such design would clearly detract from the architectural unity of
a grouping of architecturally significant structures.
   (c)   Preservation of Features. The distinguishing original qualities of a
property should not be diminished through alteration or removal of distinctive
architectural features.
   (d)   Replacement of Features. In the event that replacement of significant
architectural features is necessary, the new material should closely match the
original material in composition, design, color, texture and all other visual
qualities.
   (e)   Cleaning. The cleaning of exterior wall surfaces should be undertaken
by the gentlest means possible. Sandblasting and other cleaning methods that
will damage facing materials and architectural features shall not be
undertaken.
   (f)   Fences and Other Accessory Structures. Fences, walkways, lighting,
benches, landscaping and other accessory structures should be compatible in
design with adjoining buildings and with the most valued aspects of an area’s
character. Use of chain-link fences along street frontages is discouraged
unless otherwise specified in guidelines for a district.
   (g)   Parking Lots. Use of evergreen shrubbery and trees in combination with
low ornamental fences is encouraged in screening parking lots from streets. Use
of curbed, planted islands is encouraged to provide visual relief in large
parking areas and to control traffic circulation. For districts characterized
by buildings set along the street line, parking lots shall be located behind
buildings whenever possible, with entrances located off of adjoining side
streets.
   (h)   Sustainability. Buildings and properties should be designed and
constructed to minimize energy consumption and to promote conservation of
materials and natural resources.
   (i)   Signs. In addition to meeting Zoning Code and Building Code
requirements for signs in applicable zoning districts, signs subject to
approval under the provisions of this chapter shall also meet the following
design guidelines. In the case of a conflict between these regulations and the
Zoning Code regulations, these regulations prevail.
      (1)   Placement. Wall signs should be designed to fit within the
architectural space intended for signage and should not cover distinctive
architectural features.
      (2)   Compatibility. Signs to be seen as a series should be designed with
compatibility in terms of location, size, shape, style, material, illumination
and color. As a general rule, uniformity should be maintained in certain
characteristics while other characteristics are varied to permit individual
expression and identification.
      (3)   Color. The colors of a sign should complement the color of the
building facade to which the sign relates. If a raceway or similar device is
used for attachment of a sign’s letters or characters, the color of the raceway
should match the color of the wall surface.
      (4)   Lettering and Symbols. The lettering and symbols on a sign should
be large enough to be easily read but not overly large or out of scale with the
building on which the sign is displayed. An excessive amount of information on
signs, creating an image of visual clutter, should be avoided. Use of
distinctive symbols or logos on signs is encouraged.
      (5)   Projecting Signs. Where permitted, projecting signs should be no
larger than necessary for readability by nearby pedestrians and should contain
no internal illumination other than in use of exposed neon and similar
treatments. Spacing between projecting signs should be sufficient to prevent an
image of clutter.
      (6)   Wall Signs. For signs mounted flat against the wall of a building,
use of individual letters or characters is preferable to use of panel or
cabinet signs in instances where individual letters or characters are less
likely to detract from a building’s architectural character. Such letters or
characters should be attached in a manner that will minimize damage to the wall
surface after removal. For buildings lacking appropriately designed wall space
for placement of a sign, consideration should be given to use of a projecting
sign, window sign or canopy sign as an alternative to a wall sign.
      (7)   Billboards. Billboards or “advertising signs”, as defined in
Section
325.64(b) of the Zoning Code, shall not be permitted in any Design Review
District.
      (8)   Design Exceptions. In accordance with standards of Section
350.16 of the Zoning Code, the City Planning Commission, may vary the sign
regulations of Chapter
350 as necessary to permit signs that are better suited to the design of the
subject property or nearby properties of architectural or historic
significance.
(Ord. No. 1827-08. Passed 2-9-09, eff. 2-11-09)
§ 341.08 Demolition and Moving
   For applications proposing the demolition or moving of a building in a
Design Review District, other than for emergency demolition activities ordered
by the Director of the Building and Housing to remedy conditions that pose
immediate danger to human life or health, the following provisions shall apply:
   (a)   Criteria for Action. In considering a request to demolish or move a
building or other structure located within a Design Review District, the City
Planning Commission and its Local Design Review Advisory Committee shall
consider the following factors in making its decision to approve or disapprove
the request:
      (1)   The architectural and historic significance of the subject building
or structure;
      (2)   The significance of the building or structure in contributing to
the architectural or historic character of its environs;
      (3)   In the case of a request to move a building or other structure, the
relationship between the location of the subject building or structure and its
overall significance;
      (4)   The present and potential economic viability of the subject
building or structure, given its physical condition and marketability;
      (5)   The presence of conditions on the subject property that are
dangerous or are detrimental to the immediate area and cannot be reasonably
remedied other than by the proposed demolition;
      (6)   The degree to which the applicant proposes to salvage and
facilitate re-use of structures proposed for demolition; and
      (7)   The design quality and significance and the appropriateness of the
proposed re-use of the property.
   (b)   Nature of Action. The City Planning Commission may delay action, for a
period of not more than six (6) months, on the demolition or moving of a
building in order to allow economic viability studies to be conducted, as well
as to allow interested parties the opportunity to explore alternatives to the
proposed action. At the end of such period, the Commission shall either approve
or disapprove the request to demolish or move, or may choose to delay action
for a second and final period of not more than six (6) months if the Commission
determines that this additional time period may be useful in securing an
alternative to the proposed demolition or moving. At the end of such second and
final period, the Commission shall either approve or disapprove the request.
(Ord. No. 1827-08. Passed 2-9-09, eff. 2-11-09)
CHAPTER 342 – OPEN SPACE AND RECREATION (OSR) DISTRICTS
342.01   Purpose
342.02   Definitions
342.03   Permitted Main Uses
342.04   Permitted Accessory Uses
342.05   Location Regulations
§ 342.01 Purpose
   The “Open Space & Recreation District” is hereby established as part of the
Zoning Code to ensure that public parks, public recreation areas and other
public natural areas, as well as uses along waterfronts and waterways, are
appropriately located and protected in order to meet needs for recreation,
scenic enjoyment and environmental enhancement.
(Ord. No. 1172-05. Passed 10-10-05, eff. 10-12-05)
§ 342.02 Definitions
   As used in this chapter, the term “public” means ownership of property by
any municipal, county or state government or the federal government, or by any
agency of such governments.
(Ord. No. 1172-05. Passed 10-10-05, eff. 10-12-05)
§ 342.03 Permitted Main Uses
   Only the following main uses shall be permitted in an Open Space and
Recreation District:
   (a)   Public parks, playgrounds, athletic fields, and recreation center
buildings, including such recreation facilities as swimming pools, tennis
courts, basketball courts, playground equipment, skateboard ramps, exercise
rooms, meeting rooms and similar uses;
   (b)   Public open space areas including wooded areas, stream valleys, grassy
areas, nature preserves, wildlife habitats, scenic overlooks, gardens, beaches,
fishing areas, multi-purpose trails, etc.; and
   (c)   Marinas, yacht clubs, golf courses, and cemeteries.
(Ord. No. 1172-05. Passed 10-10-05, eff. 10-12-05)
§ 342.04 Permitted Accessory Uses
   Only the following accessory uses shall be permitted in an Open Space and
Recreation District:
   (a)   Accessory structures and uses located on the property of and
exclusively serving main uses described in Section
342.03, including benches, bleachers, bike racks, water fountains, trails,
concession stands, clubhouses, piers, boardwalks, promenades, recreation
equipment rental facilities, boat ramps, greenhouses, restrooms, fences (as
regulated in Chapter
358), and similar structures accessory to a permitted main use;
   (b)   Restaurants located on the property of main uses described in
divisions Section
342.03, if approved by the City Planning Commission as complimentary to the
principal recreation or open space use of the property with respect to the
size, placement and design of the restaurant facility;
   (c)   Surface parking lots and garages located on the property of main uses
described in Section
342.03 and exclusively serving uses located on such property;
   (d)   Signs accessory to a permitted use, excluding off-premise advertising
signs, limited to identification, information and directional signs, including
sponsorship information where the sponsorship information is clearly secondary
to other permitted information on any particular sign; and
   (e)   Any use permitted as a main use.
(Ord. No. 1172-05. Passed 10-10-05, eff. 10-12-05)
§ 342.05 Location Regulations
   Uses and structures in an Open Space and Recreation District shall be
located in accordance with the following regulations.
   (a)   Buildings. Buildings shall be set back from property lines of a
Residential District a minimum of one (1) foot for each foot of building
height, excluding the height of rooftop structures permitted to exceed height
limits.
   (b)   Outdoor Activity Facilities. Outdoor activity facilities such as
swimming pools, basketball courts, tennis courts, and athletic fields shall be
set back a minimum of fifty (50) feet from property lines of a Residential
District. Playground facilities shall be set back a minimum of twenty-five (25)
feet from property lines of a Residential District. These setbacks shall not
apply to adjoining property in a Residential District occupied by a school or
other institution or a recreation use as its main use.
   (c)   Exceptions. The City Planning Commission may reduce the setback
requirements in particular instances if it determines that such reduction will
not adversely impact the use of adjoining properties.
(Ord. No. 1172-05. Passed 10-10-05, eff. 10-12-05)
CHAPTER 343 – BUSINESS DISTRICTS
343.01   Local Retail Business District
343.02   Purpose and Definition of Shopping Center Districts
343.03   Approval of Plans for Shopping Center Districts
343.04   Permitted Buildings and Uses in Shopping Center Districts
343.05   Purpose of University (College) Retail Districts
343.06   Definition of University, College
343.07   Permitted Buildings and Uses in University (College) Retail Districts
343.08   Use Conditions for University (College) Retail Districts
343.09   Reserved
343.10   Location of University (College) Retail Districts
343.11   General Retail Business Districts
343.12   Central Business District Liquor Sales
343.13   Entertainment Overlay (EO) District
343.14   Motor Vehicle Service Stations and Service Garages and Car Washes
343.15   Locations of Service Stations – Repealed
343.16   Remodeling Existing Service Stations – Repealed
343.17   Refusal of Permit to Construct or Alter Service Stations – Repealed
343.18   Driveway Regulations in Local Retail and General Retail Business
Districts
343.19   Location Restrictions of Service Stations and Public or Repair Garages
– Repealed
343.20   Service Station Parking Restrictions – Repealed
343.21   Restriction on Location of Fuel-Filling Appliances – Repealed
343.22   Limited Retail District
343.23   Pedestrian Retail Overlay (PRO) District
Cross-reference:
   Central Business District defined, CO
325.12
   Front yard regulations in Local Retail Business Districts, CO
357.04
   Off-street parking and loading in Central Business District, CO
Ch. 349
   Sale of fuel and car repairs prohibited in Residence-Office Districts, CO
337.16
   University Circle Design District (UCDD), CO
341.023
   Variance from use regulations, CO
329.03
   Yard regulations for Central Business Districts, CO
357.11
§ 343.01 Local Retail Business District
   (a)   “Local Retail District” means a business district in which such uses
are permitted as are normally required for the daily local retail business
needs of the residents of the locality only.
   (b)   Permitted Buildings and Uses. The following buildings and uses are
permitted in a Local Retail Business District; and no buildings or premises
shall hereafter be erected, altered, used, arranged or designed to be used, in
whole or in part for other than one (1) or more of the following specified
uses:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this Zoning Code, all uses
permitted in the Multi-Family District and as regulated in that district,
except that “kindergartens, day nurseries and children’s boarding homes” shall
be permitted without the requirement for a specified setback from an adjoining
premises in a Residence District not used for a similar purpose;
      (2)   Retail business for local or neighborhood needs to the following
limited extent:
         A.   The sale of baked goods, confectionery, dairy products,
delicatessen, fruits, vegetables, groceries, meats;
         B.   The sale of dry goods and variety merchandise, excluding
department stores;
         C.   The sale of men’s and boy’s furnishings, shoes, hats, women’s
ready-to-wear, furs, millinery, apparel, accessories;
         D.   The sale of china, floor covering, hardware, household
appliances, radios, paint, wallpaper, materials and objects for interior
decorating;
         E.   The sale of books, magazines and newspapers, including adult book
stores subject to Section
347.07, cigars, drugs, flowers, gifts, music, photographic goods, sporting
goods, stationery;
         F.   Eating places, lunch rooms, restaurants, cafeterias and places
for the sale and consumption of soft drinks, juices, ice cream and beverages,
but excluding buildings which provide entertainment or dancing and buildings in
which beer and intoxicating liquor are sold for consumption on the premises,
provided such building for the sale of beer or intoxicating liquor is within
five hundred (500) feet of the boundary of a parcel of real estate having
situated thereon a school, church, library, nonprofit recreational or community
center building or public playground;
         G.   Service establishments: barber or beauty shops, custom tailors,
laundry agencies, self- service laundries, hand laundries, shoe repair, ice
stations and dry cleaning, pressing or tailoring shops in which not more than
five (5) persons are engaged in such work or business at any one time, and in
which only nonexplosive and nonflammable solvents are used and no work is done
on the premises for retail outlets elsewhere and pet shops, provided noise and
odors are effectively confined to the premises. As used in this division (b)
(2)G., “pet shops” does not include businesses which board dogs and cats
overnight or any pet hospital.
      (3)   Business offices: banks, real estate, insurance and other similar
offices, and the offices of the architectural, clerical, engineering, legal,
dental, medical or other established recognized professional, but excluding
morticians, undertakers and funeral directors, in which only such personnel are
employed as are customarily required for the practice of such business or
profession;
      (4)   Automotive services: public parking garages and parking lots;
      (5)   Charitable institutions not for correctional purposes;
      (6)   Signs: permitted in accordance with the requirements of Chapter
350;
      (7)   Other main uses: any other neighborhood store, shop or service
similar to the uses listed in this division in type of goods or services sold,
in business hours, in the number of persons or cars to be attracted to the
premises and in effect upon the adjoining Residence Districts;
      (8)   Accessory uses, only to the extent necessary normally accessory to
the limited types of neighborhood service use permitted under this division;
      (9)   State-licensed medical marijuana retail dispensary or adult use
dispensary, as defined in and subject to Section
347.19 or Section
347.191 of this Code.
(Ord. No. 529-2024. Passed 6-3-24, eff. 7-3-24)
§ 343.02 Purpose and Definition of Shopping Center Districts
   (a)   As used in this Zoning Code, “Shopping Center District” means a retail
business area within or adjacent to a Residence District, characterized by a
concentrated grouping of stores, shops and other uses herein permitted,
ordinarily planned as a unit and built according to such plan. The designation
Shopping Center District shall apply to all areas so designated on the Building
Zone Map by appropriate symbol and to all Local Retail Business Districts more
than 200 feet in lot depth and more than one (1) acre in area, and, where such
local retail business zone is separated from a street line by an adjoining
general retail business zone, the Shopping Center District includes such
General Retail Business District zone.
   (b)   The Shopping Center District is hereby created in order to secure in
such store groupings, so located, traffic safety through provisions for proper
traffic routing and car parking, freedom from traffic congestion on public
streets through provision for adequate off-street car parking and off-street
loading and protection of residential character of neighborhoods through
provision of adequate and suitably treated business area open spaces at
boundaries adjacent to residential areas.
(Ord. No. 1144-51. Passed 6-25-51, eff. 6-28-51)
§ 343.03 Approval of Plans for Shopping Center Districts
   No permit for the construction or occupancy of a Shopping Center District or
part thereof shall be issued unless the plans have been approved by the
Planning Commission with respect to the provision for off-street parking, the
provision for loading docks, the width and location of driveways for the car
parking areas and the loading docks, the adequacy of open spaces and
suitability of their proposed planting or other treatment at boundaries
adjoining or adjacent to Residence Districts.
(Ord. No. 1144-51. Passed 6-25-51, eff. 6-28-51)
§ 343.04 Permitted Buildings and Uses in Shopping Center Districts
   In a Shopping Center District the following buildings and uses are
permitted:
   (a)   All uses permitted and as regulated in a Local Retail Business
District;
   (b)   The sale of general merchandise, including sale of department stores;
   (c)   Banks.
(Ord. No. 1144-51. Passed 6-25-51, eff. 6-28-51)
§ 343.05 Purpose of University (College) Retail Districts
   A University (College) Retail District is established in order to provide a
zoning use district in which retail uses that relate to the university or
college needs may be located as compatible land uses. This District is provided
with adequate regulatory controls to protect the surrounding development.
(Ord. No. 1501-72. Passed 4-9-73, eff. 4-12-73)
§ 343.06 Definition of University, College
   As used in this Zoning Code, “university” or “college” means an educational
institution as defined in RC 3377.01(A).
(Ord. No. 1501-72. Passed 4-9-73, eff. 4-12-73)
§ 343.07 Permitted Buildings and Uses in University (College) Retail Districts
   In a University (College) Retail District the following buildings and uses
are permitted:
   Antique shops;
   Art galleries;
   Barber shops and beauty parlors;
   Bicycle rental and repair shops;
   Bookstores;
   Coffee houses;
   Coin and stamp stores;
   Coin-operated dry cleaners and laundries;
   Dressmaking and tailoring shops;
   Eating and drinking establishments for the sale of food, beer or wine for
consumption on the premises;
   Gift shops;
   Musical instrument repair shops;
   Private clubs without living accommodations;
   Small appliance, radio and television repair shops, including cameras and
typewriters;
   Watch and clock repair shops;
   Wood, leather and metal craftshops;
   Hotels;
   Accessory uses related to a university or college.
(Ord. No. 826-87. Passed 6-16-87, eff. 6-19-87)
§ 343.08 Use Conditions for University (College) Retail Districts
   No University (College) Retail District shall be established unless at the
time of the introduction of an ordinance therefor, a comprehensive development
plan for such area has been approved by the Planning Commission. The
comprehensive development plan submitted to the Commission for approval shall
contain the following information:
   (a)   The extent, boundaries and area of the proposed district, and the
ownership or control of the properties therein;
   (b)   The size and location on the lot of existing and proposed buildings;
   (c)   The size and location of all off-street parking areas;
   (d)   The size and location of any signs.
(Ord. No. 1501-72. Passed 4-9-73, eff. 4-12-73)
§ 343.09 Reserved
§ 343.10 Location of University (College) Retail Districts
   A University (College) Retail District may only be located within an area in
which the properties are owned or controlled by a university or college.
(Ord. No. 1501-72. Passed 4-9-73, eff. 4-12-73)
§ 343.11 General Retail Business Districts
   (a)   “General retail business” means an enterprise for profit for the
convenience and service of, and dealing directly with, and accessible to, the
ultimate consumer; neither injurious to adjacent premises or to the occupants
thereof by reason of the emission of cinders, dust, fumes, noise, odors, refuse
matter, smoke, vapor or vibrations; nor dangerous to life or property. It
includes buildings or spaces necessary to a permitted use for making or storing
articles to be sold at retail on the premises. Except as provided in division
(b) of this section, it does not include any establishment which supplies a
retail outlet other than that on the premises, or any building or use
specifically mentioned as permitted only in a Semi-Industry or Industry
District.
   (b)   Permitted Buildings and Uses. The following buildings and uses are
permitted in a General Retail Business District; and no buildings or premises
shall hereafter be erected, altered, used, arranged or designed to be used, in
whole or in part for other than one (1) or more of the following specified
uses:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this Zoning Code, all uses
permitted and as regulated in any Local Retail Business District;
      (2)   All retail business uses and buildings specified in division (b) of
Section
343.01, and uses and buildings to provide for:
         A.   The sale of food and beverages of all kinds, including sale for
consumption on the premises;
         B.   The sale of general merchandise, including sale in department
stores;
         C.   The sale of apparel of all kinds;
         D.   The sale of furniture and household goods, including furniture
and accessory furniture storage;
         E.   The sale of other goods or merchandise;
         F.   Eating places of all types;
         G.   Service establishments: service establishments permitted in a
Local Retail Business District without limitation on the number of persons
engaged in such work or business; mortuary or undertaking establishment;
printing shop, provided not more than five (5) persons are engaged in such work
or business; research laboratory, radio or television station, telephone
exchange or transformer station, provided all buildings and structures except
fences and barriers are located not less than fifteen (15) feet from a
Residence District; hospital, sanitarium, convalescent home, rest home, nursing
home, orphanage or home for the infirm or aged, provided that all main
buildings are not less than fifteen (15) feet from any adjoining premises in a
Residence District not used for a similar purpose; cat and dog hospital or pet
shop, provided noise and odors are effectively confined to the premises;
         H.   Business offices and services: in addition to the uses permitted
in Local Retail Districts, office buildings, banks, business colleges, private
trade schools;
         I.   Automotive services: in addition to the uses permitted in Local
Retail Districts:
            1.   Motor vehicle service station, as defined in Section
325.486, and meeting the provisions of Section
343.14;
            2.   Car wash, as defined in Section
325.111, and meeting the provisions of Section
343.14;
            3.   Motor vehicle service garage, as defined in Section
325.487, and meeting the provisions of Section
343.14;
            4.   Motor vehicle sales facility, as defined in Section
325.485, except for vehicles exceeding six thousand (6,000) pounds of gross
vehicle weight.
         J.   House trailer or travel trailer park, as defined in RC 3733.01,
when approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals after public hearing, and when
used and maintained in conformity with any conditions specified in such
approval;
         K.   Signs: signs permitted in accordance with the requirements of
Chapter
350;
         L.   Amusement and recreation: armory, assembly hall, bowling alley,
dance hall, video and pinball arcade, pool and billiards theater, skating rink
or other social, sport or recreational center operated as a business, all such
uses subject to the regulations of Section
347.12 and adult entertainment uses, subject to Section
347.07, provided that the place or building in which any such amusement or
recreation use is operated is sufficiently sound-insulated to confine the noise
to the premises;
         M.   Transportation services: railroad station; public service
station; bus passenger station; bus terminal, provided the roadway of the
street upon which the bus entrance or exit is located is at least forty-four
(44) feet wide between curbs;
         N.   Office, display or sales space of a wholesale, jobbing or
distributing establishment and specifically mentioned as permitted only in a
less restricted district, in connection with which not more than twenty-five
percent (25%) of the floor area of the building or part of the building
occupied by the establishment is used for making, assembling, remodeling,
repairing, altering, finishing or refinishing its products or merchandise and
provided that:
            1.   Any resulting cinders, dust, fumes, noise, odors, refuse
matter, smoke, vapor or vibration is effectively confined to the premises;
            2.   The ground floor premises facing upon and visible from a major
street upon which the premises abut shall be used only for entrances, offices
or display;
            3.   Adequate off-street loading and unloading facilities are
provided and so designed that any standing vehicles using them shall be within
the property lines and be either not visible from streets within Retail
Business, Local Retail Business or Residence District, or not nearer than fifty
(50) feet to such streets.
         O.   Retail poultry business: either as a main use or as an accessory
use, including the storing and killing of poultry or game to be sold entirely
at retail upon the premises and directly to the ultimate consumer, provided
that the enterprise is conducted in strict compliance with all applicable
statutes, laws, rules and regulations, including those requiring rat- proofing,
and that adjacent premises or the occupants thereof are not injured by reason
of the emission of dust, odor, smoke or noise or the accumulation of refuse or
offal, and provided further that the buildings in which the killing, storing
and selling are done are either detached masonry structures or part of a
masonry building used entirely for the handling of poultry and/or game.
            1.   A detached masonry structure used for slaughtering or for
storing of live poultry shall have not less than one hundred (100) square feet
of floor area and shall be located at least ten (10) feet from any other
building or part thereof on the same lot which is used for human habitation, or
as a place where other food is prepared, placed, kept or sold.
            2.   Where the slaughtering room is part of a masonry building used
entirely for the handling of poultry and/or game, such slaughtering room shall
be separated from the sales or storage room by a solid masonry wall in which
there may be only one (1) opening not greater than four (4) square feet in
size, located not less than four (4) feet above the floors of both rooms,
equipped with either a self-closing window or self-closing door. Such
slaughtering room shall be entered only from outside the building.
            3.   In either case, such slaughtering room shall be used only for
killing, flicking and dressing and shall be not less than twenty- five (25)
feet from the boundary of the premises upon which it is located. All offal and
refuse must be kept in covered containers within such slaughtering room until
removed from the premises.
         Such slaughtering room and every building, room or space used for
storage or sale of poultry or game in connection therewith shall be not less
than three hundred (300) feet from any Residence District, church, school,
playground, library or building of Institutional H Occupancy classification.
         P.   Tattooing and body piercing. As used in this division:
            1.   “Body Piercing” means the piercing of any part of the body by
someone other than a physician licensed under RC Chapter 4731, who utilizes a
needle or other instrument for the purpose of inserting an object into the body
for non-medical purposes; body piercing includes ear piercing except when the
ear piercing procedure is performed on the ear with an ear piercing gun.
            2.   “Tattoo” means any method utilizing needles or other
instruments by someone other than a physician licensed under RC Chapter 4731,
to permanently place designs, letters, scrolls, figures, symbols or any other
marks upon or under the skin of a person with ink or any other substance
resulting in an alteration of the appearance of the skin.
         Q.   Kennels, either as a main use or an accessory use, provided that
all odors, fumes, and noise be confined to the premises and the lot upon which
the kennel is located is greater than one hundred (100) feet from a residence
district.
            1.   Notwithstanding division (d)(3) of Section
329.03, the Board, on application for a use variance, may permit a Kennel in
any use district.
            2.   The limitations stated in divisions (b) and (c) of Section
329.03 shall not apply when deciding whether to issue a use variance for a
Kennel, the Board shall evaluate the applicant Kennel’s probable impact on the
overall tranquility of the surrounding properties by considering all odors,
noises, and fumes that will emanate from the lot on which the applicant Kennel
is located.
         R.   Any other building, use or service similar to the uses herein
listed in the type of services or goods sold, in the number of persons or cars
to be attracted to the premises or in the effect upon adjacent areas in more
restricted use districts.
         S.   Any accessory use customarily incident to a use authorized by
this section, except that no use specified in divisions (b) and (c) of Section
345.04 as prohibited or permitted only by special permit in a General Industry
District shall be permitted as an accessory use.
         T.   Hookah lounge: any facility, establishment or location with
patron seating or that is classified or seeks classification as an assembly use
as defined in the Ohio Building Code whose business operation includes the
smoking of tobacco or any organic or synthetic material, including but not
limited to plants, herbs or tobacco, through one or more hookah pipes (also
commonly referred to as a hookah, waterpipe, shisha or narghile), including but
not limited to establishments known variously as hookah bars, hookah lounges,
or hookah cafes that are exempt from the Smoke Free Workplace Act under RC
3794.03.
         U.   Vapor lounge: any facility, establishment or location, whether
fixed or mobile, with patron seating or that is classified or seeks
classification as an assembly use as defined in the Ohio Building Code whose
business operation includes the utilization of a heating element that vaporizes
a substance that releases nicotine, tobacco, flavored vapor, or vapor or fumes
from any other organic or synthetic material including but not limited to
plants, herbs or tobacco, through one or more electronic or battery operated
delivery device, including any device known as an electronic cigarette (also
commonly referred to as e-cig, e-cigarette, e-pipe, electronic cigarillo,
hookah pen, vape pen, vape pipe or any other electronic cigarette product),
including but not limited to establishments known variously as vape bars, vape
lounges, e-cigarette bars or vape cafes.
      (3)   Hotels;
      (4)   Motels;
      (5)   Charitable institutions, including correctional halfway houses, as
regulated in Section
347.15; and notwithstanding any Section of the Codified Ordinances of
Cleveland, Ohio, 1976, to the contrary, the Cuyahoga County Youth Intervention
Center, providing temporary detention and shelter for juveniles, to be located
at East 93rd Street, and Quincy Avenue.
(Ord. No. 529-2024. Passed 6-3-24, eff. 7-3-24)
§ 343.12 Central Business District Liquor Sales
   Beer and intoxicating liquor may be sold in a Central Business District, as
defined in Section
325.12, for consumption on or off the premises, notwithstanding the provisions
of Sections
343.01 and
343.11.
(Ord. No. 1232-52. Passed 2-2-53, eff. 2-5-53)
§ 343.13 Entertainment Overlay (EO) District
   (a)   Purpose. The Entertainment Overlay District is established to provide
appropriate locations for entertainment uses that serve a city-wide or regional
market and that are generally incompatible with areas characterized by a
concentration of residential uses and uses serving children. In establishing
the Entertainment Overlay District, this Council considered the findings stated
in division (a) of Section
347.07 and incorporates those findings in this section.
   (b)   Applicability. The Entertainment Overlay District shall be mapped to
supplement an underlying zoning district. Regulations of the underlying zoning
district shall govern except where in conflict with regulations of the
Entertainment District, in which case the regulations of the Entertainment
District shall govern. The findings stated in Section
347.07 and the location regulations contained in that section, as well as any
location regulations applicable to the other uses permitted in an Entertainment
Overlay District, shall be considered when an Entertainment Overlay District is
mapped. An Entertainment Overlay district shall be mapped only in General
Retail Business Districts and Industrial Districts.
   (c)   Permitted Uses. Only the following uses are permitted in an
Entertainment Overlay District:
      (1)   All main and accessory uses permitted in the underlying zoning
district;
      (2)   Night clubs, dance halls, game rooms, pool halls, video arcades,
bowling alleys, skating rinks, theaters, movie theaters and similar uses
providing entertainment and recreation services;
      (3)   Restaurants, bars, taverns, banquet halls, catering halls and
similar uses serving food for consumption on the premises;
      (4)   “Adult Entertainment” uses as defined in Section
347.07 of the Zoning Code and as regulated in that section.
   (d)   Number and Location of Adult Entertainment Uses. Not more than one (1)
“adult entertainment” use shall be permitted for each one (1) acre of “land
area” in an Entertainment Overlay District. Otherwise, adult entertainment uses
shall be permitted without the location restrictions specified in division (c)
of Section
347.07.
   (e)   Definitions. As used in this section, “land area” means all contiguous
land within an Entertainment Overlay District, including land occupied by
public streets, but excluding areas occupied by rivers and lakes.
(Ord. No. 990-07. Passed 7-11-07, eff. 7-18-07)
   Note: Former Section
343.13 was repealed by Ord. No. 729-91, passed 3-28-91, eff. 4-2-91.
§ 343.14 Motor Vehicle Service Stations and Service Garages and Car Washes
   Motor vehicle service stations, motor vehicle service garages and car washes
located in General Retail Business Districts shall be established and
maintained in accordance with the following provisions. These regulations shall
also be considered by the Board of Zoning Appeals in hearing zoning variance
applications for alterations to such uses or variances to establishment of such
uses as nonconforming uses in other Business Districts.
   (a)   Location With Respect to Zoning Districts. No motor vehicle service
station, motor vehicle service garage or car wash shall be located on a parcel
that is within one hundred (100) feet of a Residence District unless the
following conditions are met:
      (1)   A solid board-on-board wood fence or brick or stone wall at least
six (6) feet in height is placed along any property line abutting a Residence
District, in addition to any otherwise required landscaping;
      (2)   No motor vehicle repair activity occurs within ten (10) feet of a
Residence District;
      (3)   No service bay or garage door is oriented toward a Residence
District.
   (b)   Location With Respect to Streets. No service station shall be located
on a “mid-block” property except if located on a street with a right-of-way
that is at least eighty (80) feet wide. A “mid-block” property is any property
other than a corner property, which is a property located at the intersection
of two (2) streets.
   (c)   Hours of Operation. No motor vehicle repairs shall be performed before
7:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m.
   (d)   Number and Orientation of Service Bays. A motor vehicle service garage
or service station shall include no more than four (4) service bays. For corner
properties, such service bays shall be oriented to a street characterized by
commercial or industrial uses as opposed to residential or local retail uses,
if one (1) or more of the abutting streets can be so characterized. The
Department of Building and Housing may consult the City Planning Commission in
making such determinations.
   (e)   Outdoor Storage of Materials. All tires, barrels, discarded auto
parts, and other outdoor storage of materials used or sold on the premises must
be screened from view from adjacent properties and streets by a “screen
barrier” as required in Section
352.10.
   (f)   Outdoor Storage of Vehicles. No commercial tractor, trailer or semi-
trailer, except trailers designed to be pulled by passenger automobiles, may be
parked on the premises of a motor vehicle service station or service garage for
more than four (4) hours within any twenty-four (24) hour period, except in
case of emergency. Not more than four (4) customer vehicles may be stored
overnight in an outdoor location on the premises of a motor vehicle service
station or service garage. A vehicle that is not in working order shall not be
stored on such premises for more than forty-eight (48) hours.
   (g)   Location of Fuel Pumps. Fuel pumps at motor vehicle service stations
may be located in a required yard but shall be set back at least fifteen (15)
feet from any street right-of-way line and any property line.
(Ord. No. 729-09. Passed 7-1-09, eff. 7-8-09)
§ 343.15 Locations of Service Stations – Repealed
(Ord. No. 729-09. Passed 7-1-09, eff. 7-8-09)
§ 343.16 Remodeling Existing Service Stations – Repealed
(Ord. No. 729-09. Passed 7-1-09, eff. 7-8-09)
§ 343.17 Refusal of Permit to Construct or Alter Service Stations – Repealed
(Ord. No. 729-09. Passed 7-1-09, eff. 7-8-09)
§ 343.18 Driveway Regulations in Local Retail and General Retail Business
Districts
   In a Local Retail Business District or a General Retail Business District,
plans for access to the land uses therein shall be approved by the Commissioner
of Traffic Engineering and Parking who shall ascertain that the driveways used
to provide accessibility to these uses shall be located and arranged to
minimize traffic congestion in conformity with the regulations herein set
forth:
   (a)   Not more than one (1) driveway shall be permitted on a lot of land
with a frontage of one hundred (100) feet or less, but two (2) driveways may be
permitted on a lot of land with a frontage of not less than one hundred fifty
(150) feet. However, the Commissioner of Traffic Engineering and Parking may
permit two (2) driveways on a lot of land with a frontage of not less than one
hundred thirty (130) feet if the driveways are so located and constructed as to
provide safety to the pedestrians and to the motorists using the property.
   Where two (2) driveways are permitted:
      (1)   If the center line of the driveway is at right angles to the
property line, there shall be a minimum of thirty (30) feet of unbroken curb
between driveways and a minimum driveway radius of six (6) feet;
      (2)   If the center line of the driveway is at other than right angles to
the property line there shall be a minimum of thirty (30) feet of unbroken curb
between driveways, the acute angle radius shall be not less than three (3)
feet, and there shall be a minimum of sixteen (16) feet between the inside
lines of the driveways at the property line.
   (b)   No driveway shall be located so that there would be less than fifteen
(15) feet between the point of tangency of the driveway apron radius and the
outside crosswalk line at the intersection when such driveway is on the
approach side of an intersection. In such cases as the driveway is on the
leaving side of the intersection, the requirement shall be five (5) feet
between the outside crosswalk line and the point of tangency of the driveway
apron radius.
   (c)   Any other driveway providing access to a property shall be located so
that there would be not less than fifteen (15) feet between the point of
tangency of the driveway apron radius and a prolongation of the property line
to the curb line measured at the curb line.
   (d)   The maximum width of a driveway shall be thirty (30) feet measured at
right angles to the angle of the driveway entrance. Such driveway shall have a
curb cut of not more than sixty (60) feet.
   (e)   There must be a minimum of thirty (30) feet of unbroken curb between
successive driveways on the same or adjoining land uses.
   (f)   Where there is a lot of land with a frontage of not less than one
hundred fifty (150) feet, a divided driveway may be permitted provided that the
median strip between each roadway of the divided driveway shall be at least six
(6) feet in width and each roadway shall be not less than twenty-four (24) feet
in width nor more than thirty (30) feet in width provided that the total width
of any divided driveway shall not exceed sixty-six (66) feet in width.
(Ord. No. 914-A-70. Passed 6-29-70, eff. 6-29-70)
§ 343.19 Location Restrictions of Service Stations and Public or Repair Garages
– Repealed
(Ord. No. 729-09. Passed 7-1-09, eff. 7-8-09)
§ 343.20 Service Station Parking Restrictions – Repealed
(Ord. No. 729-09. Passed 7-1-09, eff. 7-8-09)
§ 343.21 Restriction on Location of Fuel-Filling Appliances – Repealed
(Ord. No. 729-09. Passed 7-1-09, eff. 7-8-09)
§ 343.22 Limited Retail District
   (a)   Purpose. The Limited Retail District is established in order to
provide a zoning use district in retail areas undergoing planned redevelopment
and public reinvestment. This district is provided with adequate regulatory
controls which restrict permitted uses of land and buildings to those
compatible with a district’s emerging character while, simultaneously, reducing
hardships for existing uses which do not conform with these regulations.
   (b)   Permitted Buildings and Uses. Except as provided in division (c) of
this section, all uses permitted and as regulated in any General Retail
Business District shall be permitted in a Limited Retail District. No buildings
or premises shall hereafter be erected, altered, used, arranged or designed to
be used, in whole or in part, for other than one (1) or more of such permitted
uses.
   (c)   Prohibited Uses. The following uses as permitted and described in
Section
343.11 of the General Retail Business District are hereby prohibited in the
Limited Retail District:
      (1)   Mortuary or undertaking establishments;
      (2)   Telephone exchanges and transformer stations;
      (3)   Service garages;
      (4)   Sale of new or used motor vehicles or trailers;
      (5)   House trailers or trailer parks;
      (6)   Transportation services;
      (7)   Retail Poultry business;
      (8)   Auto car wash or auto laundry;
      (9)   Adult Entertainment;
      (10)   Billboards and advertising signs as defined in division (b) of
Section
325.64 of this Zoning Code.
   (d)   Nonconforming Uses. Notwithstanding division (c) of this section and
the provisions of Chapter
359, any non-conforming use legally established within the Limited Retail
District prior to the effective date of this section may move to one (1) and
only one (1) other location within said District, provided, however, that any
such use which moves pursuant to the provisions of this division shall cease
operation no later than eight (8) years after the effective date of this
section.
(Ord. No. 1368-90. Passed 6-18-90, eff. 6-27-90)
§ 343.23 Pedestrian Retail Overlay (PRO) District
   (a)   Purpose. The Pedestrian Retail Overlay (PRO) District is established
to maintain the economic viability of older neighborhood shopping districts by
preserving the pedestrian-oriented character of those districts and to protect
public safety by minimizing conflicts between vehicles and pedestrians in
neighborhood shopping districts.
   (b)   Mapping. The PRO District is an overlay district which shall be mapped
only in an area where at least seventy-five percent (75%) of the underlying
zoning is either Local Retail or General Retail. In every PRO District, any
street frontage to be considered a "Pedestrian Retail Street Frontage," as
defined in this section, shall be marked on the Zoning Map, with either one (1)
or both sides of a street designated as such.
   (c)   Applicability. The PRO District regulations shall apply only in those
portions of a PRO District in which the underlying zoning is either Local
Retail or General Retail. In the relevant portions of a PRO District, the
regulations of the underlying zoning district shall govern except where in
conflict with the regulations of the PRO District, in which case the
regulations of the PRO District shall govern.
   (d)   Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall be
defined as stated below:
      (1)   "Pedestrian Retail Street Frontage" means that side or sides of a
public street frontage where pedestrian-oriented retail shopping activity
exists or is expected to exist and such street frontage is specifically
designated on the Zoning Map.
      (2)   "Pedestrian Retail Space" means that portion of a building or
property located at or closest to the level of the public sidewalk and within
forty (40) feet of a Pedestrian Retail Street Frontage.
      (3)   "Open Sales Lot" means a property or portion of a property used for
the sale of merchandise stored in outdoor, unenclosed locations.
      (4)   "Institutional Use" means, for purposes of this section, a school,
day care center, place of worship, place of assembly, hospital, nursing home,
residential treatment facility, or similar use.
      (5)   "Non-Retail Office" means an office use whose primary activity does
not involve service to customers or clients on the premises.
   (e)   Use Regulations. All uses permitted in the underlying retail zoning
district shall be permitted in the PRO District, except that the use of
Pedestrian Retail Spaces, as defined in this section, shall be further limited
as follows.
      (1)   Prohibited Uses. For Pedestrian Retail Spaces, as defined in this
section, the following uses shall be prohibited:
         A.   Open sales lots, as defined in this section;
         B.   Filling and service stations;
         C.   Car washes; and
         D.   Any business served by a drive-through lane providing access to
windows or other facilities at which food or merchandise can be ordered or
picked up, or business can be transacted by a person in a motor vehicle.
      (2)   Conditional Uses. For Pedestrian Retail Spaces, as defined in this
section, the following uses shall be permitted as Conditional Uses, as approved
by the City Planning Commission under the approval criteria provided in this
section:
         A.   Off-street parking or loading areas;
         B.   Driveways extending across a public sidewalk;
         C.   Residential, institutional and non-retail office uses, as defined
herein, except that ground-floor entrances and lobbies serving such uses
located on upper floors or in a basement level shall be permitted without the
requirement for conditional approval;
         D.   Any building-enclosed use that does not have a public pedestrian
entrance from the Pedestrian Retail Street Frontage; and
         E.   A building with an interior side yard more than four (4) feet in
width and located within forty (40) feet of a Pedestrian Retail Frontage.
   (f)   Criteria for Conditional Uses. The City Planning Commission shall
approve a Conditional Use application if it determines that the application
meets the following criteria:
      (1)   In the case of a proposed residential, institutional or non-retail
office use, one (1) or more of the following conditions apply:
         A.   The subject building space was designed specifically for the type
of use proposed and, as such, occupancy by an allowed use is an unreasonable
expectation;
         B.   Denial of the application for occupancy by a conditional use
would result in a long-term vacancy of the subject property, as demonstrated by
the applicant;
         C.   It has been determined that the proposed use is needed in the
immediate area and that suitable alternative locations are unavailable.
      (2)   In the case of a proposed off street parking or loading area or
driveway, one (1) or both of the following conditions apply.
         A.   The size, shape or layout of the subject property does not permit
placement of the parking, loading or driveway in a more suitable location.
         B.   It has been demonstrated by the applicant that placement of the
parking, loading or driveway in an allowed location would jeopardize the
continued occupancy of the subject property by uses suited to the PRO District.
      (3)   In the case of a building enclosed use that does not have an
entrance from the Pedestrian Retail Street Frontage, one (1) or both of the
following conditions apply:
         A.   The proposed use will occupy an existing building that lacks such
pedestrian entrance, and the addition of a conforming pedestrian entrance is
made infeasible by the configuration of the interior space or other factors
related to the design and placement of the building.
         B.   Placement of the pedestrian entrance in a location other than on
the Pedestrian Retail Street Frontage will result in more suitable pedestrian
access.
      (4)   In the case of an interior side yard more than four (4) feet in
width and located within forty (40) feet of a Pedestrian Retail Frontage, the
subject building will be occupied by residential units which require the
greater side yard area to allow for desirable levels of light and air.
   (g)   Maximum Setbacks. Notwithstanding the provisions of the underlying
zoning district, properties in PRO Districts shall conform to the following
regulations with respect to maximum setbacks.
      (1)   Front Street Yard. No main building on a lot abutting a Pedestrian
Retail Street Frontage shall be set back more than five (5) feet from the
Pedestrian Retail Street Frontage unless the City Planning Commission has
approved establishment of a surface parking lot in such location as a
Conditional Use. Such building features as entrances and display windows may be
set back up to an additional five (5) feet as long as these features occupy no
more than fifty percent (50%) of the building's total frontage. These setback
regulations shall not apply to portions of buildings above the first-story
level.
      (2)   Interior Side Yard. No portion of an interior side yard located
within forty (40) feet of a Pedestrian Retail Street Frontage shall exceed four
(4) feet in width on the ground floor level, unless the City Planning
Commission has approved a driveway or a residential side yard in such location
as a Conditional Use.
      (3)   Exceptions for Outdoor Cafes. A building may be set back a maximum
of fifteen (15) feet from the Pedestrian Retail Street Frontage in order to
accommodate a permanent outdoor café. If use of such café is discontinued for a
period of two (2) years or more, the setback area shall be landscaped or
otherwise improved in accordance with a plan approved by the City Planning
Commission.
   (h)   Window Areas. For any nonresidential building or storefront facing a
Pedestrian Retail Street Frontage, not less than sixty percent (60%) of the
front facade between two and one-half (2-1/2) and seven and one-half (7-1/2)
feet in height shall be composed of transparent windows or doors. In addition,
not more than twenty-five percent (25%) of such window or door area on a
building or storefront shall be covered with permanent signs.
   (i)   Parking. In recognition of the expected greater use of public transit,
bicycles and walking by customers and employees traveling to PRO Districts, the
minimum number of parking spaces otherwise required by the Zoning Code shall be
reduced by thirty-three percent (33%) for retail business uses in the
districts. The Board of Zoning Appeals may further reduce parking requirements
where it has been demonstrated that additional parking is available in common
or shared parking facilities or in on-street parking areas located within a
reasonable walking distance of the use, given the nature of the use and the
district. The Board shall also consider factors as the number of bicycle racks
available in proximity to a use. In making its determination, the Board shall
be guided by an up-to-date analysis of parking supply and demand and other
relevant factors submitted by or on behalf of the applicant. The City Planning
Commission shall maintain a file of all such parking analyses submitted for
properties in each PRO District.
   (j)   Signs in the Public Street Right-of-Way. An ordinance to map a PRO
District in a particular location may include permission to place private signs
in the public street right-of-way under the regulations of
Chapter 512 of the Codified Ordinances. Such provision shall be included in the
PRO designation only if it is determined, on the basis of a survey and analysis
conducted by the City Planning Commission, that the particular PRO District is
characterized by a preponderance of restaurants and small independent stores
for which signs placed near the street curb would provide useful information to
pedestrians seeking goods and services and would enhance the pedestrian-
oriented image of the district. Any PRO District designated for display of
signs in the street right-of-way shall be shown on the Zoning Map as a "PRO-S"
District, with "S" noting the presence of special sign provisions. No sign
permitted by these provisions shall be displayed without design approval of the
sign's structure and permanent elements by the City Planning Commission, or
where applicable, by the Landmarks Commission.
   (k)   Variances. The Board of Zoning Appeals may grant variances to
requirements of this section under the applicable criteria stated in
Chapter 329 of this code. In the case of an appeal for a variance to permit a
drive-through business in a PRO District, the Board shall consider the
following factors based, in part, on a traffic study performed by the
applicant:
      (1)   The anticipated volume of vehicular use of the proposed drive-
through facility, with higher volumes considered to detract from the pedestrian
character of the district;
      (2)   The anticipated proportion of drive-through customer transactions
to all transactions at the business, with over fifty percent (50%) of drive-
through transactions indicating that the business is an inappropriate use for a
Pedestrian Retail District.
      (3)   The impact of the drive-through facility on the pedestrian
character of the designated Pedestrian Retail Street Frontage;
      (4)   The impact on traffic safety and pedestrian safety in the vicinity
of the drive-through business.
   (l)   Appeals. Appeals from the decision of the City Planning Commission to
approve or disapprove Conditional Uses in Pedestrian Retail Spaces shall be
made to the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(Ord. No. 887-18. Passed 6-3-19, eff. 7-3-19)
CHAPTER 344 – MIDTOWN MIXED-USE DISTRICT
344.01   Definitions
344.02   Purpose
344.03   Establishment of a Midtown Mixed-Use District
344.04   Permitted Uses
344.05   Building and Parking Setback Requirements
344.06   Building Width Requirements
344.07   Building Height Requirements
344.08   Off-Street Parking and Loading
344.09   Site Development Standards
344.10   Design Criteria
344.11   Supplemental Regulations for the MMUD-1
344.12   Conditional Use Regulations
344.13   Approval of MMUD Projects
§ 344.01 Definitions
   (a)   Light Industrial. An establishment engaged in the indoor
manufacturing, assembly, fabrication, packaging or other industrial processing
of finished parts or products, primarily from previously prepared materials, or
the indoor provision of industrial services, where there are few external
effects across property lines. This term includes, but is not limited to, a
business engaged in the processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment or
packaging of food and beverages, textile, leather, wood, paper, chemical,
plastic or metal products, but does not include basic industrial processing
from raw materials.
   (b)   Outdoor Display. The placing of merchandise in an outdoor area that is
open to the general public when the merchandise on display is removed from its
shipping package and is representative of merchandise that is available for
purchase inside the building and/or is available for purchase by the general
public directly from the display area.
   (c)   Outdoor Storage. The keeping, in an area outside of a building, of any
goods, materials, or merchandise in the same place for more than twenty- four
(24) hours, except for merchandise placed in an area for outside display.
(Ord. No. 910-05. Passed 7-13-05, eff. 8-22-05)
§ 344.02 Purpose
   A Midtown Mixed-Use District (MMUD) and its regulations are established in
order to permit and encourage an intensity and mix of development that supports
and implements the development policies that have been established for this
area by the City of Cleveland, the Greater Cleveland Regional Transit Authority
(GCRTA), and Midtown Cleveland, Inc. The intention in establishing this
District in the development regulations to is to permit specific uses, at a
development intensity and with an urban form in a manner that:
   (a)   Encourages a pedestrian-oriented mix of uses including retail,
residential, offices and light industrial;
   (b)   Expands the available economic development options while strengthening
the existing uses found in the Midtown District;
   (c)   Encourages a compact land development pattern that increases resident
and employment densities to support the GCRTA’s Euclid Corridor Transportation
Project investment and facilitates transit usage to/from the Midtown area;
   (d)   Ensures that new development and/or redevelopment will occur in a
unified manner consistent with the Midtown Cleveland Inc. Strategic Plan as
adopted by the Cleveland City Planning Commission;
   (e)   Establishes design criteria for new development or redevelopment to
ensure that an aesthetically pleasing and pedestrian friendly environment is
provided.
(Ord. No. 910-05. Passed 7-13-05, eff. 8-22-05)
§ 344.03 Establishment of a Midtown Mixed-Use District
   The boundaries of the Midtown Mixed-Use District (MMUD), and any of its four
(4) sub-areas, as defined below, may be established only in accordance with the
required procedures for a Zoning Map amendment under Chapter
331. The boundaries of the Midtown Mixed-Use District and its sub-areas shall
be indicated on the official City of Cleveland Zoning Map with the symbol MMUD.
   (a)   Euclid Corridor Development Sub-Area (MMUD-1): Provides for a mix of
land uses to be built at higher densities; requiring the siting of buildings
closer to the front property line and closer to each other; facilitating
pedestrian access to the proposed transit stops and to buildings; and
encouraging the location of retail shops, plazas and other pedestrian amenities
at the ground level of buildings.
   (b)   Chester Corridor Development Sub-Area (MMUD-2): Provides for a
residential area of medium density adjacent to the existing residential areas
on the north side that reinforces the landscaped character of Chester Avenue
and permits expansion of the Euclid Corridor Development Area patterns when a
mixed-use project extends to Chester Avenue from Euclid Avenue.
   (c)   Carnegie Corridor Development Sub-Area (MMUD-3): Provides for a mix of
uses that includes accommodating auto-oriented retail and light industrial uses
in a manner that encourages placing buildings near the street with landscaping
along the frontage.
   (d)   Chester Corridor West Development Sub- Area (MMUD-4): Provides for
light industrial uses in a manner that encourages placing buildings near the
street with landscaping along the frontage.
(Ord. No. 910-05. Passed 7-13-05, eff. 8-22-05)
§ 344.04 Permitted Uses
   Buildings and land shall be used, and buildings shall be designed, erected,
altered, moved or maintained, in whole or in part in the MMUD only for the uses
listed herein.
   (a)   A use listed in
Schedule 344.04 shall be permitted by right when denoted by the letter “P”
provided that all requirements of other City ordinances and this zoning code
have been met;
   (b)   A use listed in
Schedule 344.04 shall be permitted as a conditional use when denoted by the
letter “C” subject to the approval of the City Planning Commission as set forth
in the regulations contained in Section
344.12.
   (c)   A use listed in
Schedule 344.04 shall be permitted as an accessory use when denoted by the
letter “A”. Such accessory uses shall be permitted as a subordinate use when it
is clearly incidental to and located on the same zoning lot as the principal
building or use.
   (d)   A use not listed in
Schedule 344.04 as either a permitted principal or conditional use shall be a
prohibited use in the MMUD zoning district.
   Schedule 344.04
   Midtown Mixed Use District Permitted Uses
USES           Euclid MMUD-1 Chester MMUD-2 Carnegie MMUD-3 Chester West MMUD-4
PERMITTED USES
USES             Euclid MMUD-1 Chester MMUD-2 Carnegie MMUD-3 Chester West
PERMITTED USES                                                MMUD-4
Residential
Apartment House
or Multiple      P             P              P               P
Dwelling Units
(1)
Townhouse Unit,
Row House or
Dwelling,        C             P
Single-Family
Attached (1)
Residential
above First      P                            P
Floor Retail
Live-Work
Residential
Dwellings (as    P             P              P               P
defined in
Chapter 346)
Retail and Professional Services
Retail           P (2)         A              P               C
Retail, Stand    P                            P
Alone (4)
Personal         P (2)         A              P
Services
Research         P             P              P               P
Laboratories
Professional and
Administrative   P             A              P               P
Offices
Sales Office
(with only       P (2)                        P               P
samples of
products)
Financial        P             A              P
Offices, Bank
Business         P (2)                        P
Services
Automotive Sales                              C
and Related
Gasoline Service
Stations,
Automotive
Services and
Automotive
Repair Garages
Restaurants,     P             A              P
Dine-in
Walk-up ATM,     P             P              P
Similar
Drive-Thru       C                            P
Facilities
Indoor
Recreation       P (2)         A              P               P
Facility
Industrial
Light Industrial                              P               P
Warehouse                                     P
Other
Outdoor Display  A             C              A
Outdoor Storage                               C               C
Application of
MMUD-1 Uses and                C                              C
Standards (3)
Hotels                                        P
Playgrounds,     A             P              P               P
Parks
Churches and
Places of        P                            P               P
Worship (4)
Day Care
Centers,         P (2)                        P               P
Children and
Adults
Libraries and    P                            P               P
Museums (4)
Schools and
Educational      P                            P               P
Facilities (4)
Government       P                            P               P
Offices
Government
facilities,                                   P               P
including police
and fire
Parking Garages
and Off-Street   A             A              A               A
Parking
Signs            A             A              A               A
P = Use Permitted by Right
C = Conditional Use
A = Accessory Use
Blank Cell = Use not permitted in this Sub-area
Notes:
  (1)   Residential projects, both apartment and townhouse/attached housing
projects, in the MMUD-1 will include at least 60% of the ground floor area of
the project as retail, day care, or similar use providing tenant/resident
amenity or service. See Section
344.11 for additional information.
(2)   These uses are permitted in the MMUD-1 when part of a mixed use project,
meaning that the project includes uses other than the proposed use that account
for at least 50% of the total square footage of the building area.
(3)   The City Planning Commission may allow the extension of uses permitted in
the MMUD-1 to the MMUD-2 when a mixed-use project proposed for an MMUD-1 parcel
extends through to the MMUD-2 and is complementary to the primarily residential
uses permitted in the MMUD-2.
(4)   Stand-alone buildings must meet the building width and height
requirements set forth in Schedules 344.06 and
344.07.
 
(Ord. No. 910-05. Passed 7-13-05, eff. 8-22-05)
§ 344.05 Building and Parking Setback Requirements
   (a)   Principal and accessory buildings shall be located on a lot in a
manner that maintains the front, side and rear yard requirements as set forth
in
Schedule 344.05.
   Schedule 344.05
   Building and Parking Setback Requirements
 Euclid MMUD-1 Chester MMUD-2 Carnegie MMUD-3 Chester West MMUD-4
                                                                      Euclid   Chester Carnegie Chester
                                                                      MMUD-1   MMUD-2  MMUD-3   West
                                                                                                MMUD-4
A.   Building
   1.   Front Setback from Street Right-of-Way
      (a)   Minimum                                          None     20 feet 5 feet   20 feet
      (b)   Maximum                                          10 feet  30 feet 30 feet  30 feet
                                                                      (1)      (2)     (2)      (2)
   2.   Side and Rear Setback
      (a)   From Residential District property line          25 feet  25 feet 25 feet  25 feet
      (b)   From Non-Residential District property line      None     10 feet 10 feet  10 feet
B.   Parking
                                                                      Equal to
   1.   From Street                                             Building
                                                                      Setback
      (a)   Minimum                                          5 feet   30 feet 10 feet  30 feet
                                                                      (3)
      (b)   Maximum                                          None     None    None     None
   2.   From Rear or Side Lot Line of Adjacent Residential Distr10 feet  10 feet 10 feet  10 feet
   3.   From Rear or Side Lot Line of Adjacent Non- Residential 5 feet   5 feet  5 feet   5 feet
District
Notes:
  (1)   The maximum setback from the street right-of-way may be increased to 20 feet with the approval
of the City Planning Commission for the purpose of providing a plaza, café, public art or similar
pedestrian- oriented amenity.
  (2)   Parcels with projects extending the full length from Euclid to either Chester or Carnegie will
be required to use only the Building and Parking Setback Requirements in this Schedule that apply to
the Euclid side of the project.
  (3)   Must be sufficient to meet landscape requirements for screening as provided in Section
344.09(a).
 
(Ord. No. 910-05. Passed 7-13-05, eff. 8-22-05)
§ 344.06 Building Width Requirements
   (a)   Principal buildings shall have building width characteristics as set
forth in
Schedule 344.06:
   Schedule 344.06
   Building Width Requirements
 
                  Euclid MMUD-1 Chester MMUD-2 Carnegie MMUD-3 Chester West
                                                               MMUD-4
Minimum building
width at the
building line as
a percent of the
lot width:
Buildings
Fronting Euclid,  80% (1)       50% (1)        50% (1)         50% (1)
Chester and
Carnegie
Buildings
Fronting on the
Side Streets      50%           50%            50%             50%
(perpendicular to
Euclid, Chester
and Carnegie)
Notes:
  (1)   Parcels with projects extending the full length from Euclid to
either Chester or Carnegie will be required to use only the Minimum
Building Requirements in this Schedule that apply to the Euclid side of the
project.
 
(Ord. No. 910-05. Passed 7-13-05, eff. 8-22-05)
§ 344.07 Building Height Requirements
   Principal buildings shall have height characteristics as set forth in
Schedule 344.07:
   Schedule 344.07
   Building Height Requirements
 
               Euclid MMUD-1 Chester MMUD-2 Carnegie MMUD-3 Chester West MMUD-
                                                            4
               3 stories
Minimum height (that are     None           None            None
requirement    occupiable
               floors)
Maximum height 115 feet      60 feet        60 feet         60 feet
requirement
 
(Ord. No. 161-06. Passed 4-17-06, eff. 4-21-06)
§ 344.08 Off-Street Parking and Loading
   (a)   Off-street parking and loading areas in the MMUD shall conform to the
parking requirements in Chapter
349, except as modified herein. Where there is conflict between a provision in
this section and a provision in Chapter
349, the requirement of this section shall prevail.
   (b)   All accessory off-street parking spaces in the entire MMUD shall
comply with parking setback requirements set forth in division (a) of Section
344.05.
   (c)   Off-street loading in the entire MMUD shall be from the rear if
possible, or from the side where rear loading is not possible.
   (d)   In the MMUD-1:
      (1)   The minimum parking requirement for various uses shall be fifty
percent (50%) of what is required in Section
349.04;
      (2)   Accessory off-street parking spaces serving two (2) or more uses
that are located on the same lot or parcel may be combined and used jointly by
such uses, and may have its total parking requirement reduced by up to fifty
percent (50%), as approved by the City Planning Commission notwithstanding the
provisions of Section
349.06 “Mixed Use Facilities,” if it can be demonstrated that the lesser number
of spaces is appropriate and consistent with these regulations;
      (3)   Maximum parking for retail uses may not exceed one hundred percent
(100%) of the requirements specified in Chapter
349;
      (4)   Vehicle access to parking should be from side streets and not from
Euclid Avenue where possible.
      (5)   Bicycle parking shall be provided at the level of one (1) for every
twenty (20) automobile parking spaces, with a minimum of two (2) spaces and a
maximum of forty (40) spaces. No bicycle parking is required where less than
twenty (20) automobile parking spaces are required.
   (e)   In the MMUD-2 and MMUD-3:
      (1)   Maximum parking for retail uses may not exceed one hundred twenty
percent (120%) of the requirements specified in Chapter
349.
(Ord. No. 910-05. Passed 7-13-05, eff. 8-22-05)
§ 344.09 Site Development Standards
   (a)   Visual Screening and Landscape Buffers. Visual screening and
landscaping buffers shall be provided for all lots in the entire MMUD in
accordance with the provisions in Chapter
352 as applicable to the Central Business District, referenced in Section
352.03(d)(6), except as modified herein. Where there is conflict between a
provision in this section and a provision in Chapter
352, the requirement of this section shall prevail.
      (1)   A Frontage Strip shall be provided as specified in Section
352.10 – “Table Containing Uses Requiring Other Screening or Landscaping.”
         A.   In the MMUD-1 and MMUD-3, the frontage strips shall be at least
of the intensity specified in Section
352.11 – “Table Containing Screening Intensity” and required setback areas may
be enhanced further with pedestrian amenities such as benches, public art and
similar features.
         B.   In the MMUD-2, the frontage strips shall be at least twenty (20)
feet.
      (2)   An Island Strip as required by Section
352.10 – “Table Containing Uses Requiring Other Screening or Landscaping.”
      (3)   Off-street accessory parking spaces shall be screened from an
adjacent Residential District consistent with the provisions of Section
349.08.
      (4)   A landscaping plan shall be submitted consistent with the
requirements of Section
352.04.
      (5)   Materials used for landscaping shall be consistent with the
requirements provided in Section
352.05.
   (b)   Fencing. Fencing requirements shall be provided for all lots in the
MMUD in accordance with the provisions set forth herein and those referenced in
Chapter
352. Where there is conflict between a provision in this section and a
provision in Chapter
352, the requirement of this section shall prevail.
      (1)   In the entire MMUD, only ornamental fences up to five (5) feet in
height with twenty-five percent (25%) maximum opacity are permitted in the
required building and parking setback area unless provided for screening
pursuant to Chapter
352. Alternatively, a masonry wall up to three (3) feet in height may be
provided in lieu of an ornamental fence in the required building and parking
setback area unless the fence is provided for screening pursuant to Chapter
352.
      (2)   In the entire MMUD, fences and walls shall be permitted in interior
rear and side yards consistent with the following:
         A.   The fence shall not exceed seven (7) feet in height.
         B.   The fence shall be to the side and rear of the building, starting
at the building line, and may not encroach on the front setback.
   (c)   Lighting Requirements. Appropriate site lighting, including lights for
signs, buildings and streets, shall be arranged so as to provide safety,
utility and security and control light trespass and glare on adjacent
properties and public roadways. Lighting shall be provided for all parking lots
in the entire MMUD in accordance with the provisions set forth herein.
      (1)   All developments with ten (10) or more parking spaces are required
to provide exterior lighting for all vehicular use areas including entrance and
exit access drives and pedestrian paths connecting parking areas to principal
buildings.
      (2)   Lighting shall be integrated into the public character both in
terms of illumination and fixtures.
      (3)   Light poles shall not be higher than thirty (30) feet.
      (4)   All parking lot and security lighting fixtures shall be full cut-
off fixtures except for decorative lighting meaning that the lighting fixture
is shielded or constructed so that all light emitted is projected below a
horizontal plane running through the lowest light-emitting part of the fixture.
      (5)   Automobile-oriented uses such as gasoline service stations,
automotive service stations and drive-through facilities shall install recessed
ceiling fixtures in any canopy.
(Ord. No. 910-05. Passed 7-13-05, eff. 8-22-05)
§ 344.10 Design Criteria
   All new development or redevelopment projects in the MMUD shall be subject
to the design guidelines and review procedures established in Section
303.08. The following design criteria are also established to ensure that new
development or redevelopment in the MMUD-1 complies with the purpose and
objectives of this chapter, as set forth in Section
344.01.
   (a)   General Criteria.
      (1)   The proposal shall enhance and improve the character of the
community and be appropriate and compatible with its surroundings in accordance
with the intent, objectives and development requirements set forth in this
chapter.
      (2)   Buildings, structures and landscaping should be designed and
located on the site and be of a scale and massing to complement adjacent
buildings and enhance the character of the surrounding area.
      (3)   Each building or unit of a multiple building development should
have its own distinct identity, yet should also be compatible with adjacent
units or buildings in terms of scale, proportion, color, and materials.
      (4)   Ingress and egress to drive-thru facilities, if permitted, should
be from side streets, not from Euclid Avenue.
   (b)   Building Design, Walls and Materials.
      (1)   Building Design.
         A.   Building entrances should be oriented to Euclid Avenue where
feasible.
         B.   Architectural style is not restricted, but the evaluation of the
appearance of the project shall be based on the quality of its design and
relationship to the prevailing design characteristics of the surrounding area.
         C.   Building components, such as windows, doors, eaves, and parapets,
shall be composed on a facade of a building with harmonious proportions in
relationship to one another and surrounding buildings.
         D.   Architectural features should be placed upon a facade of a
building in a pattern that creates a building fenestration that has a constant
rhythm and harmonious appearance.
      (2)   Building Walls.
         A.   When the wall of a non-residential building faces a public right-
of-way or is within forty- five (45) degrees of facing a public right-of-way, a
minimum of fifty percent (50%) of such wall area, on the ground floor, shall
have display-type windows. The bottom edge of such window shall not be higher
than three (3) feet above grade. A maximum of twenty percent (20%) of such
windows may be opaque.
         B.   Walls shall have no more than twenty (20) feet of continuous wall
length devoid of windows, on any ground floor, unless the wall includes
architectural features such as piers, columns, defined bays or an undulation of
the building, so that a pedestrian scale, rhythm, and visual interest is
created.
         C.   Walls that meet the following criteria shall be exempt from the
requirements of division (c)(2) above:
            1.   Two (2) walls face one another, are separated by not more than
thirty (30) feet and the space between the two (2) walls is used for servicing
the buildings; or
            2.   The wall faces an area devoted solely to loading and delivery
and the wall is screened from view from all public rights-of-way, parking areas
and abutting residential areas.
      (3)   Building Materials.
         A.   Buildings shall have finish materials on all sides, including
brick, stone, decorative split face block or similar materials. Finish
materials shall not include exposed concrete or cinder block or stucco
(commonly known as “dryvit”) unless it is utilized with bands of accent color,
recessed or protruding belt courses, wide reveals or combinations thereof.
         B.   A combination of materials, textures, colors, and finishes are
preferred to create visual interest.
(Ord. No. 910-05. Passed 7-13-05, eff. 8-22-05)
§ 344.11 Supplemental Regulations for the MMUD-1
   (a)   Any existing building in MMUD-1 that contains an industrial use at the
time that the boundaries for the MMUD-1 in which it is located are established
shall be considered conforming to the use provisions of Chapter
344 and may continue as an industrial use.
   (b)   Any existing building in MMUD-1 that does not meet the minimum height
requirements at the time that the boundaries for the MMUD-1 in which it is
located are established shall be considered as conforming to the building
height requirements of Chapter
344.
   (c)   Residential projects, both apartment and townhouse/attached housing
projects, in the MMUD-1 will include at least sixty percent (60%) of the ground
floor area of the project as retail, day care, or similar use providing tenant/
resident amenity or service. This requirement may be suspended or reduced if it
is determined by the City Planning Commission that (1) sufficient ground-level
retail is provided by other projects constructed or approved in the MMUD-
1 District, or (2) the particular configuration of an existing building and its
property make compliance infeasible.
(Ord. No. 910-05. Passed 7-13-05, eff. 8-22-05)
§ 344.12 Conditional Use Regulations
   (a)   General Criteria. A conditional use, and uses accessory to such
conditional use, shall be permitted in the MMUD only when specified as a
conditional use in such District, and only if such use conforms to the
following general criteria, and the specific conditions, standards and
regulations set forth in this section. The City Planning Commission shall
review the particular facts and circumstances of each proposed use in terms of
the following criteria and shall find adequate evidence that the use, as
proposed, satisfies the following criteria:
      (1)   Will be designed, constructed, operated and maintained so as to be
harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended
character of the general vicinity, and that such use will not essentially
change the character of the same area;
      (2)   Will not restrict or adversely affect the existing use of the
adjacent property owners;
      (3)   Will be properly landscaped in compliance with Section
344.09;
      (4)   That the establishment, maintenance or operation of the conditional
use will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety or general
welfare.
   (b)   Supplemental Criteria for Specific Uses. The following are specific
conditions, standards and regulations for certain conditional uses.
      (1)   Automotive Sales and Related. (MMUD-3)
         A.   A service garage, leasing department and other activities,
including cleaning, servicing and repair, customarily incidental to an
automobile dealer shall be permitted provided these activities are conducted in
a wholly enclosed building; vehicles currently being repaired at a service
garage may be stored outside for up to forty-eight (48) hours.
         B.   No junk, inoperative or unlicensed vehicle, except for the
inventory of new or used cars for sale, shall be permitted to remain outside an
enclosed building for more than forty-eight (48) hours.
         C.   Display of vehicles for sale shall be located on a paved surface
and shall comply with the parking setback requirements of division (a) of
Section
344.05.
         D.   Lighting for all areas used for the outdoor display of
automobiles shall be in accordance with a lighting plan approved by the City
Planning Commission pursuant to Section
344.09(c).
      (2)   Drive-thru Facility. (MMUD-1)
         A.   Such facilities shall be located to the rear of the building if
possible or in an area least disruptive to pedestrian or vehicular traffic if
location to the rear of the building is not feasible.
         B.   To the extent possible, access to the drive-thru should be
provided from a side street and, if necessary, there shall be only one (1)
access to/from Euclid Avenue.
         C.   Any proposed loudspeaker system shall be approved by the City
Planning Commission.
         D.   At least five (5) waiting or stacking parking spaces shall be
provided in addition to the required number of parking spaces specified in
Section
344.08 unless deemed unnecessary by the City Planning Commission.
      (3)   Gasoline Service Stations, Automotive Service Stations and
Automotive Repair Garages. (MMUD-3)
         A.   Fuel pumps and associated access aisles and canopies shall comply
with the parking setbacks set forth in Schedule 344.05(a).
         B.   When located on a corner lot, the location of access drives shall
be placed as far as possible from the intersection and shall be limited to no
more than one (1) access drive per fronting street.
         C.   A car wash establishment may be combined with a gasoline station
or automotive service station provided that the minimum lot are for the
combined uses is a minimum of fifty thousand (50,000) square feet.
         D.   An area for vehicular circulation that is not otherwise used for
required parking shall be provided at each end of a gasoline pump island. Such
area shall be a minimum of thirty (30) feet in width.
      (4)   Outdoor Storage. (MMUD-3 and MMUD-4)
         A.   Outdoor storage of materials includes the storage of goods,
materials or products associated with the principal use. The storage of
radioactive, toxic or otherwise hazardous materials shall not be permitted.
         B.   The following provisions shall apply to outdoor storage of goods
and materials:
            1.   Areas devoted to outdoor storage shall be located in a side or
rear yard only and shall comply with the building setbacks set forth for the
sub-districts in Schedule 344.05;
            2.   All outdoor storage areas shall be contiguous to the principal
building;
            3.   No outdoor storage area shall be permitted to occupy or
interfere with traffic circulation, required parking areas, public sidewalks or
pedestrian access;
            4.   The area of the lot devoted to outdoor storage shall not
exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the ground floor area of the principal
building;
            5.   Areas devoted to outdoor storage shall be paved with asphalt
or concrete and free of dust;
            6.   All outdoor storage areas shall be enclosed with a solid wall
or fence, including solid gates. The wall or fence shall be at least seven (7)
feet tall. No razor or barb wire shall be permitted. Where the fencing presents
a face to the front or to a public street, a landscaping strip of at least
three (3) feet shall be provided with fifty percent (50%) opacity at planting
as a means of camouflaging the storage wall or fence;
            7.   No signs shall be permitted in conjunction with outdoor
storage areas except those otherwise in compliance with the sign regulations in
Chapter
350;
            8.   No junk, inoperative or unlicensed vehicle, except for the
inventory of new or used cars for sale, shall be permitted to remain outside an
enclosed building for more than forty-eight (48) hours.
      (5)   Outdoor Display. (MMUD-2)
         A.   Outdoor display of materials includes merchandise in an outdoor
area that is representative of the merchandise for sale from inside the
building and is permitted by retail uses subject to the following provisions:
         B.   The display of merchandise for sale is limited to products that
are customarily associated with the operation of the principal business located
on the premises and conducted by the employees of such principal business;
         C.   The areas devoted to outdoor display must comply with all
building setbacks and yard regulations set forth in Schedule 344.05 and be
contiguous to the building;
         D.   The height of the outdoor display may not exceed six (6) feet;
         E.   No outdoor display is permitted to occupy or interfere with
traffic circulations, required parking areas, public sidewalks or pedestrian
access;
         F.   No signs are permitted in conjunction with the outdoor display
except those otherwise in compliance with the sign regulations in Chapter
350.
      (6)   MMUD-1 Uses and Development Standards in the MMUD-2. (MMUD-2 and
MMUD-4)
         A.   The intention is to permit the extension of a mixed-use
development project initiated on Euclid Avenue through the block to the south
side of Chester Avenue when the project would complement the residential uses
on Chester Avenue.
         B.   When approved by the City Planning Commission, such a mixed-use
development project as permitted in the MMUD-1, including the permitted uses
and development standards, shall be acceptable for property located in the
MMUD-2 or MMUD-4 when the following are provided:
            1.   Building frontage on both Chester and Euclid Avenues with at
least one (1) main building entrance provided on each street;
            2.   Accessory parking is provided internal to the site and is
accessed from a side street.
      (7)   Retail Uses. (MMUD-4)
         A.   Retail uses in the MMUD-4 shall be permitted only if fronting W.
55th Street.
      (8)   Townhouse Unit, Row House or Dwelling, Single-family Attached.
(MMUD-1)
         A.   Single-family units in the MMUD-1 are permitted to locate on the
side streets perpendicular to Euclid Avenue.
         B.   Single-family units in the MMUD-1 must have vehicle ingress/
egress from the side streets and not from Euclid Avenue.
(Ord. No. 910-05. Passed 7-13-05, eff. 8-22-05)
§ 344.13 Approval of MMUD Projects
   All development within the MMUD shall be subject to the development review
requirements set forth in Chapter
303, Business Revitalization District.
(Ord. No. 910-05. Passed 7-13-05, eff. 8-22-05)
CHAPTER 345 – INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
345.01   Residence-Industry District Defined and Established
345.02   Permitted Buildings and Uses in Residence-Industry District
345.03   Semi-Industry Districts
345.04   General Industry Districts
345.05   Unrestricted Industry Districts
345.06   Reserved
Cross-reference:
   Junkyard regulations, CO
347.06
   Trucking terminal location restrictions, CO
347.01
   Variance from use regulations, CO
329.03
§ 345.01 Residence-Industry District Defined and Established
   (a)   As used in this Zoning Code, “Residence- Industry District” means an
industrial area controlled with respect to character of occupancy,
manufacturing processes, provision for off-street parking and off-street
loading, location of driveways, setbacks from residential boundary lines and
from residential streets and treatment of such setback open spaces, so as to
protect the character of any adjoining or adjacent residential area.
   (b)   The Residence-Industry District is hereby created in order to permit
lands suitable for industrial use and in locations where such use is consistent
with the general plan for the City adopted by the City Planning Commission,
including locations which are adjoining or adjacent to a Residence District, to
be used for industrial purposes under conditions that will not be detrimental
to such Residence District.
(Ord. No. 2215-96. Passed 4-7-97, eff. 4-7-97; Reprinted 7-2-97 CR)
§ 345.02 Permitted Buildings and Uses in Residence-Industry District
   Within any Residence-Industry District no building or premises shall be
erected, altered, used, arranged or designated to be used, in whole or in part
for other than one (1) or more of the following specified uses, provided that:
   (a)   All resulting cinders, dust, flashing, fumes, gases, noises, odors,
refuse matter, smoke, vapors and vibrations are effectively confined to the
premises;
   (b)   All materials are stored inside buildings;
   (c)   Setback building lines to the same extent as required in this Zoning
Code for Residence Districts are observed on any street on which the Residence-
Industry District adjoins a Residence District, and suitable planting is
maintained in the setback area. Side yards and rear yards not less than twenty-
five (25) feet are provided at lot lines which are also boundary lines of
Residence Districts or of lots used for residences in a Local Retail Business
District or Shopping Center district. A chain link fence not less than six (6)
feet high is constructed on lot lines which are also boundary lines of
Residence districts or of lots used for residences in a Local Retail Business
District or Shopping Center District;
   (d)   There are adequate off-street loading and unloading facilities so
designed that any standing vehicle using them is within the property lines and
is either not visible from streets or not nearer than fifty (50) feet to
streets;
   (e)   There is adequate off-street car parking for the employees, owners and
others coming to the premises on matters incidental to the uses thereof, and
adequate off-street parking of trucks in space so located as not to be visible
from the streets or not nearer than fifty (50) feet to streets;
   (f)   Entrance and exit to any building or premises are from a street
designated as a major thoroughfare on the general plan adopted by the City
Planning Commission or, if the premises in question does not abut such street,
then from any street approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals if it finds the
probable volume and type of traffic to such premises will not change materially
the existing character of such streets nor be detrimental to the adjoining or
adjacent residential area;
   (g)   In the case of nonresidential use, trucking operations are not
conducted evenings, nights, Sundays nor on holidays generally observed by
business and single-shift industry:
      (1)   Any use permitted in a Multi-Family District;
      (2)   Office buildings, loft buildings, telephone exchanges, transformer
stations, research laboratories;
      (3)   Retail tin shops and furnace shops, retail plumbing shops, and
plumbing supply shops, signs, display or decorating shops, printing shops;
      (4)   The following uses if located not less than one hundred (100) feet
from a Residence district: repair garage for repair or painting of motor
vehicles, creamery, milk bottling or milk distributing stations;
      (5)   Operation of any internal combustion engines in connection with any
use permitted in the District, provided such engines are equipped and operated
only with an effective muffling device;
      (6)   Carpet cleaning, dry cleaning or dyeing, laundries, cold storage
plants, bottling works, ice plants, ice cream plants, cigar factories;
      (7)   Wholesale, jobbing, distributing or warehouse establishments for
such materials as cotton, wool, clothing, fabrics, furniture, hardware, ice,
leather, metals other than scrap or junk metals, rubber, shop and store
supplies, including the making, assembling, remodeling, repairing, altering,
finishing or refinishing of these products or merchandise, provided the
processes used comply with the limitations specified in this section;
      (8)   Machine shops in which only lathes, drill presses, hydraulic
presses, shavers, milling machines, planers, grinders and similar tools are
used, and no hammering, rolling, spinning, heat treating by other than
induction processes or riveting is done and no forges, metal saws other than
automatic hack saws, heavy shears, multiple spindle automatic screw machines or
other noise or vibration-producing tools or machines are operated;
      (9)   Charitable institutions, including correctional halfway houses, as
regulated in Section
347.15;
      (10)   Hospitals, sanitariums, nursing, rest or convalescent homes;
      (11)   State-licensed medical marijuana cultivator, adult use cultivator,
or level III adult use cultivator as defined in and subject to Section
347.19 or Section
347.191 of this Code;
      (12)   State-licensed medical or adult use marijuana processor, as
defined in and subject to Section
347.19 or Section
347.191 of this Code;
      (13)   Any other building or use similar in character and operation and
in effect on conforming uses in adjoining more restricted use districts as the
buildings or uses herein permitted.
(Ord. No. 529-2024. Passed 6-3-24, eff. 7-3-24)
§ 345.03 Semi-Industry Districts
   (a)   Definition. As used in this Zoning Code, “Semi-Industry District”
means an area usually adjacent to a Retail Business District or more restricted
use district, in which storage, wholesaling, passenger or motor-freight
transportation terminals, light manufacturing and other semi-industrial
operations of such nature as not to be detrimental to an adjacent Retail
Business District or more restricted use district, are permitted.
   (b)   Retail Business Uses, Conditions. Within any Semi-Industry District no
building or premises shall hereafter be erected, altered, used, arranged or
designed to be used, in whole or in part for other than one (1) or more of the
following specified uses; provided that all resulting cinders, dust, flashing,
fumes, gases, odors, refuse matter, smoke and vapor either are effectively
confined to the premises or are disposed of in a manner which will not create a
nuisance or hazard to safety or health, and provided further that noise and
vibration are effectively prevented from being audible or perceptible at a
distance of fifty (50) feet from such premises;
   Except as otherwise provided in this Zoning Code, all uses permitted and as
regulated in a General Retail Business District. However, after the effective
date of this Zoning Code no dwelling house, row house or multiple dwelling, and
no building or Institutional H Occupancy Classification, shall be located
within two hundred (200) feet of the boundary line of an adjoining General or
Unrestricted Industry District, and no existing building within two hundred
(200) feet of such boundary line shall be converted or altered to any such use,
except that the Board of Zoning Appeals may, in specific instances, permit such
erection, conversion or alteration when the development of the immediately
surrounding area is essentially residential in character and the erection or
establishment of an additional residence building would not be incompatible
with or hamper or obstruct the use of the Semi-Industry District and the
adjoining General or Unrestricted Industry Districts for the uses for which
they are intended, and except that the Board may grant special permission for
temporary dwellings, or for permanent dwellings for a limited number of
personnel required to reside on the premises of a permitted use for the safe
and proper operation of that use.
   (c)   Additional Commercial and Semi-Industrial Buildings and Uses.
      (1)   Second-hand truck lot;
      (2)   Repair garage for repair or painting of motor vehicles, provided
that such use is located not less than one hundred (100) feet from a Residence
District;
      (3)   Amusement enterprises operated as a business; provided that the
Board may, in specific instances, exempt such enterprises from the requirement
that noise be effectively prevented from being audible at a distance of fifty
(50) feet from such premises where the premises upon which such enterprise is
located and operated is sufficiently distant from any existing residential
occupancy, and noise is confined to a practicable degree, or where the use is
of a temporary nature, or where the audibility of noise beyond the fifty (50)
foot limit would not adversely affect the use of surrounding premises, if the
Board determines that the intent and purpose of such requirement are adequately
served, under the circumstances;
      (4)   Operation of internal combustion engines in connection with any use
permitted in the District, provided such engines are equipped and operated only
with an effective muffling device;
      (5)   Carpet cleaning;
      (6)   Dry cleaning or dyeing;
      (7)   Laundries employing any number of persons;
      (8)   Cold storage plants;
      (9)   Bottling works;
      (10)   Ice plants;
      (11)   Ice cream plants;
      (12)   Creamery, milk bottling or milk distributing stations, if such
buildings or uses are located not less than one hundred (100) feet from a
Residence District;
      (13)   Except where prohibited by division (a) of Section
347.01, motor freight depots or trucking terminals; provided such buildings or
uses are not less than three hundred (300) feet from a Residence District and
the entrances thereto and exits therefrom are not located where prohibited by
division (b) of Section
347.01, and are to or from a permitted street whose near curb, in front of the
property, is not less than twenty-two (22) feet from the center line of the
street; and provided further that any loading or unloading platform facing such
street is not less than eighty (80) feet from the center line of the street and
not less than fifty (50) feet behind any setback building line on the street;
      (14)   Tin shops, furnace shops;
      (15)   Plumbing shops, plumbing supply shops, blacksmith shops;
      (16)   Sign, display or decorating shops;
      (17)   Wagon sheds or stables for any number of horses;
      (18)   Wholesale bakeries;
      (19)   Manufacture of food products;
      (20)   Manufacture of confections;
      (21)   Breweries or distilleries;
      (22)   Cigar factories;
      (23)   Garment factories;
      (24)   Printing shops;
      (25)   Newspaper plants;
      (26)   Painting or varnishing shops;
      (27)   Cold mixing or grinding of paint;
      (28)   Vulcanizing shops;
      (29)   Woodworking shops;
      (30)   Monument shops;
      (31)   Machine shops in which only lathes, drill presses, hydraulic
presses, shapers, milling machines, planers, grinders and similar tools are
used, and no hammering, rolling, spinning, heat treating by other than
induction processes or riveting is done, and no forges, metal saws other than
automatic hack saws, heavy shears, multiple spindle automatic screw machines or
other noise or vibration-producing tools or machines are operated;
      (32)   Any other manufacturing or industrial enterprise, operation or
process, whether making, assembling, repairing, buffing, finishing, plating,
painting, annealing or brazing by electric furnace, polishing, tempering,
packing, shipping or storing, of a character, extent and hazard similar to
those specified above and not specifically permitted only in a General Industry
or Unrestricted Industry District, provided the building or use complies with
the requirements of this section relating to the control of cinders, dust,
flashing, fumes, gases, odors, refuse matter, smoke, vapor, noise and
vibration;
      (33)   Storage in bulk of, or warehouse for, such materials as building
materials, contractors' equipment, cotton, wool, clothing materials, fabrics,
feed, furniture, hardware, ice, leather, machinery, metals other than scrap or
junk metals, petroleum and other flammable liquids in above-ground tanks of
less than ten thousand (10,000) gallons capacity each, paint and paint
materials, pipe, rubber, shop and store supplies, provided that any material
stored in unenclosed premises to a height greater than four (4) feet above
grade level shall be a surrounded by a substantial seven (7) foot high wall or
fence erected to observe all required building lines. Any lumber used for such
wall or fence shall be new sound material surfaced and painted on the outside.
There shall be no storage of salvaged lumber or other used building material,
junk, paper, glass, rags, rubber, unclean or unrepaired containers or other
discarded or salvaged articles or materials either in buildings or on premises,
and there shall be no wrecking or dismantling of motor vehicles or storage of
vehicles pending wrecking or dismantling on the premises. There shall be no
storage of dirt, soil, crushed stone or gravel, mulch, construction and
demolition debris, solid waste, or similar material. There shall be no
processing of dirt, soil, crushed stone or gravel, mulch or similar material or
construction and demolition debris, or construction material either in
buildings or on a premises;
      (34)   Storage of coal in buildings, silos, hoppers or packages and
storage of coke, wood or other solid fuel; provided that all dust, dirt and
noise incident to such storage or handling are effectively confined to the
premises and a fence or wall is provided around unenclosed premises when and as
required by division (c)(33) of this section;
      (35)   Wholesale businesses;
      (36)   Produce markets;
      (37)   Poultry raising for profit;
      (38)   Wholesale sale of poultry or the storage or sale of poultry in
crate lots, or the killing of poultry or game in wholesale quantities for
persons other than the ultimate consumer, provided that such business is
conducted in strict compliance with applicable statutes, laws, ordinances,
rules and regulations including those requiring rat proofing, and provided
further that the building in which the slaughtering is done, either for
wholesale or for retail purposes, is located, arranged, built and equipped as
required by division (b)(2) of Section
343.11;
      (39)   Charitable institutions, including correctional halfway houses, as
regulated in Section
347.15;
      (40)   Any other building or use similar in operation and in effect on
adjacent premises in adjoining more restricted use districts as the buildings
or uses herein listed;
      (41)   Signs: Signs permitted in accordance with the requirements of
Chapter
350;
      (42)   An accessory use customarily incident to a use authorized by this
section, except that no use prohibited or permitted only by special permit in a
General Industry District shall be permitted as an accessory use in a Semi-
Industry District unless authorized under division (c)(43) of this section;
      (43)   The Board of Zoning Appeals may, after public notice and hearing
and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, permit the location of a
use authorized in a General Industry District on any lot in a Semi-Industry
District that adjoins a railroad right-of- way, or adjoins a nonconforming use
which is regularly permitted only in an industrial district.
(Ord. No. 806-18. Passed 7-18-18, eff. 7-20-18)
§ 345.04 General Industry Districts
   (a)   Permitted Building and Uses. Within any General Industry District the
following buildings or uses are permitted; no building or premises shall
hereafter be erected, altered, used, arranged or designed to be used, in whole
or in part for other than one (1) or more of the following specified uses:
      (1)   All buildings and uses permitted in a Semi-Industry District
without the restrictions contained in Section
345.03 applying to such buildings or uses except that:
         A.   Loading or unloading platforms of motor freight depots or
trucking terminals shall not be less than fifty (50) feet from the street line
unless such platforms are so located that freight handling vehicles will not
stand or maneuver in the space between the platform and the street line;
         B.   Dusty material storage and handling shall be subject to the
limitations and restrictions of Section
347.05;
         C.   All buildings and uses shall conform to other applicable
regulations of this Zoning Code and other applicable statutes, ordinances,
rules or regulations.
      (2)   Any industrial, manufacturing, commercial or other nonresidential
use, except the uses hereinafter listed as prohibited uses in a General
Industry District;
      (3)   The open yard storage of dirt, soil, crushed stone or gravel, mulch
or construction material, secondhand lumber or other used building material,
junk, paper, rags, unrepaired or uncleaned containers or other salvaged
articles provided the lot upon which the storage use occurs is located no
closer than five hundred (500) feet to a residence district, and such uses are
enclosed within a minimum seven (7) foot high solid masonry wall or solid,
nontransparent, well-maintained substantial fence not closer to the street line
than the setback building line. Such wall or fence may have one (1) opening not
more than twenty (20) feet in width for street access, and may have two (2)
such openings if the wall or fence along the street is more than two hundred
(200) feet in length. Materials shall not be stored more than eight (8) feet
above the top height of the wall or fence enclosing the property measured from
the outside base elevation of the required screening fence;
      (4)   The operation of wrecking or dismantling of motor vehicles, or the
storage of motor vehicles, pending wrecking or dismantling, in areas with a
minimum area of fifty thousand (50,000) square feet providing such premises is
enclosed within a minimum seven (7) foot high solid masonry wall or slightly
solid, nontransparent, well-maintained substantial fence. Such wall or fence
may have one (1) opening not more than twenty (20) feet in width for street
access and may have two (2) such openings if the wall or fence along the street
is more than two hundred (200) feet in length. All walls or fences referred to
in this chapter shall be neatly constructed, kept in good order and repair; no
printing, lettering or advertisement shall be made part of or attached thereto
or painted on the outside of the wall or fence, except that a sign located at
the entrance to the yard may be provided to identify the yard;
      (5)   The sale or storage for sale of liquefied petroleum gases and
acetylene and other compressed or liquefied gases of a highly flammable nature;
      (6)   Buildings and structures in Use Group I-3 in the Ohio Building Code
but only at the State of Ohio Pre-Release Center located on Orange Avenue and
the Community Based Correctional Facility (CBCF) and/or Minimum Security
Misdemeanant Jail (MSMJ) located on Croton Avenue, N.E.;
      (7)   The operation of a Recycling Facility provided the lot upon which
the use occurs is located no closer than five hundred (500) feet to a residence
district, and such uses are enclosed within a minimum seven (7) foot high solid
masonry wall or solid, nontransparent, opaque, well-maintained substantial
fence not closer to the street line than the setback building line. Such wall
or fence may have one (1) opening not more than twenty (20) feet in width for
street access, and may have two (2) such openings if the wall or fence along
the street is more than two hundred (200) feet in length. All walls or fences
referred to in this chapter shall be neatly constructed, kept in good order and
repair; no printing, lettering or advertisement shall be made part of or
attached thereto or painted on the outside of the wall or fence, except that a
sign located at the entrance to the yard may be provided to identify the yard.
Materials shall not be stored more than eight (8) feet above the top height of
the wall or fence enclosing the property measured from the outside base
elevation of the required screening fence;
      (8)   The operation of a Construction and Demolition Debris Processing
Facility provided the lot upon which the use occurs is located no closer than
five hundred (500) feet to a residence district, and such uses are enclosed
within a minimum seven (7) foot high solid masonry wall or solid,
nontransparent, opaque, well-maintained substantial fence not closer to the
street line than the setback building line. Such wall or fence may have one (1)
opening not more than twenty (20) feet in width for street access, and may have
two (2) such openings if the wall or fence along the street is more than two
hundred (200) feet in length. All walls or fences referred to in this chapter
shall be neatly constructed, kept in good order and repair; no printing,
lettering or advertisement shall be made part of or attached thereto or painted
on the outside of the wall or fence, except that a sign located at the entrance
to the yard may be provided to identify the yard. Materials shall not be stored
more than eight (8) feet above the top height of the wall or fence enclosing
the property measured from the outside base elevation of the required screening
fence;
      (9)   The operation of a Solid Waste Transfer Facility, Solid Waste
Landfill, Construction and Demolition Debris Landfill, Composting Facility,
Scrap Tire Collection Facility, Scrap Tire Monofill Facility, Scrap Tire
Monocell Facility, or Scrap Tire Recovery Facility, as those terms are defined
in Title XXXVII of the Revised Code and Ohio Administrative Code, provided the
lot upon which the use occurs is located no closer than five hundred (500) feet
to a residence district, and such uses are enclosed within a minimum seven (7)
foot high solid masonry wall or solid, nontransparent, opaque well-maintained
substantial fence not closer to the street line than the setback building line.
Such wall or fence may have one (1) opening not more than twenty (20) feet in
width for street access, and may have two (2) such openings if the wall or
fence along the street is more than two hundred (200) feet in length. All walls
or fences referred to in this chapter shall be neatly constructed, kept in good
order and repair; no printing, lettering or advertisement shall be made part of
or attached thereto or painted on the outside of the wall or fence, except that
a sign located at the entrance to the yard may be provided to identify the
yard. Materials shall not be stored more than eight (8) feet above the top
height of the wall or fence enclosing the property measured from the outside
base elevation of the required screening fence.
   (b)   Accessory Uses by Special Permit. The following uses are prohibited as
the main or primary use of the premises; they are permitted only as uses
accessory or incidental to a permitted use and only if approved by the Board of
Zoning Appeals through a Special Permit granted in accordance with the
standards of division (c) of this section:
      (1)   Asphalt or tar manufacturing or refining;
      (2)   Blast furnaces, ore smelting or reduction, metal refining or
smelting;
      (3)   Carbon, coke or lampblack manufacture;
      (4)   Coal gas manufacture;
      (5)   Cremation within three hundred (300) feet of a Residence District;
      (6)   Creosote manufacture or treatment;
      (7)   Dextrine, glucose or starch manufacture;
      (8)   Disinfectant or insecticide manufacture which emits offensive
odors;
      (9)   Dye stuffs manufacture;
      (10)   Manufacture of steel by the Bessemer process;
      (11)   Match manufacture;
      (12)   Oil cloth or linoleum manufacture;
      (13)   Paper and pulp manufacturing by sulphite processes emitting
noxious gases or odors;
      (14)   Production or refining of petroleum or other flammable liquids;
      (15)   Rock crushing;
      (16)   Rubber manufacture by reclaiming processes;
      (17)   Stock feed manufacture from refuse;
      (18)   Tanning, curing or storing of raw hides or skins;
      (19)   Wool pulling or scouring;
      (20)   Hair processing;
      (21)   Any other trade, industry or use that will be no more injurious,
hazardous, noxious or offensive than the enterprises listed in division (b) of
this section.
   (c)   Special Permits. In evaluating applications for Special Permits
required by division (b) of this section, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall act
to ensure that the proposed use or development does not adversely impact other
properties and the uses located on those properties.
      (1)   Criteria for Special Permits. In its evaluation of potentially
adverse impacts, the Board shall consider, among others, the following factors:
         A.   The degree to which dust, smoke, cinders, heat, flares, odor,
fumes, gases, radioactive materials, glare, noise, vibration and other
potentially harmful emissions or externalities are effectively confined to the
premises of the proposed use;
         B.   The nature and proximity of nearby uses with respect to their
vulnerability to the off-site impacts of the proposed use;
         C.   The extent to which impacts of the proposed use are comparable to
the impacts typically associated with uses permitted in the General Industry
District without the requirement for issuance of a Special Permit;
         D.   Hours of operation of the proposed use;
         E.   Hazards associated with combustible, flammable or explosive
materials on the property of the proposed use;
         F.   The potential for adverse impacts to streams, rivers and lakes;
and
         G.   Potentially mitigating effects of landscaping, buffering, or
topographical features.
      (2)   Applications for Special Permits. The applicant for a Special
Permit in the General Industry District shall submit to the Board of Zoning
Appeals an application demonstrating that the proposed use will not adversely
impact other properties, specifically with respect to the factors listed in
this division. In evaluating the application, the Board may solicit comments
from City officials or others with appropriate technical expertise.
   (d)   Buildings and Uses Prohibited.
      (1)   In a General Industry District no building or premises shall
hereafter be erected, altered or arranged for human habitation other than at
the State of Ohio Pre-Release Center located on Orange Avenue, and the
Community Based Correctional Facility (CBCF) and/or Minimum Security
Misdemeanant Jail (MSMJ) located on Croton Avenue, N.E., provided that these
facilities are subject to review by the City Planning Commission and further,
except that the Board of Zoning Appeals may grant special permission for
temporary dwellings or for permanent dwellings for a limited number of
personnel required to reside on the premises of a permitted use for the safe
and proper operation of that use.
      (2)   In a General Industry District no building or premises shall
hereafter be erected, altered, used, arranged or designed to be used, in whole
or in part, for any of the following uses:
         A.   Acid manufacture, including hydrochloric acid, nitric acid,
picric acid, sulphuric acid, and sulphurous acid;
         B.   Ammonia, bleaching powder, soda, soda compound, potash or
chlorine manufacturing or refining;
         C.   Bronze powder or other metallic powder manufacture;
         D.   Cement, gypsum, lime, or plaster of Paris manufacture;
         E.   Distillation of bones, coal or wood, or manufacture of any of the
by-products of such distillation;
         F.   Fat, grease, lard or tallow manufacturing, rendering or refining;
         G.   Fertilizer manufacture from phosphates or organic matter;
         H.   Gelatine, glue or size manufacture;
         I.   Incineration or reduction of dead animals, garbage, offal or
refuse, except in a private incinerator constructed and operated as required by
Section
337.23;
         J.   Manufacture of incendiary devices, pyrotechnical devices,
fireworks, and other explosives, or the storage thereof;
         K.   Mineral insulation manufacture;
         L.   Rayon manufacture;
         M.   Slaughtering of animals, except poultry;
         N.   Stockyards;
         O.   Any other trade, industry or use that will be injurious,
hazardous, noxious, or offensive to an extent equal to or greater than any one
(1) of the enterprises enumerated in division (c)(2) of this section.
(Ord. No. 806-18. Passed 7-18-18, eff. 7-20-18)
§ 345.05 Unrestricted Industry Districts
   (a)   Buildings and Uses Permitted. Except as limited or restricted in this
section or under Sections
343.19 to
343.21,
347.01 to
347.05 and Chapter
349, buildings or premises in an Unrestricted Industry District may be utilized
for any use, provided such buildings, premises and uses conform to other
applicable statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations.
   (b)   Buildings and Uses Prohibited.
      (1)   In an Unrestricted Industry District no building or premises shall
hereafter be erected, altered or arranged for human habitation, except that the
Board of Zoning Appeals may grant special permission for temporary dwellings,
or for permanent dwellings for a limited number of personnel required to reside
on the premises of a permitted use for the safe and proper operation of that
use.
      (2)   Except as may be permitted by the Board of Zoning Appeals in
specific instances, in an Unrestricted Industry District no open or unroofed
yard for the storage of secondhand lumber or other used building material,
junk, paper, unrepaired or uncleaned containers or other salvaged articles, or
for the wrecking or dismantling of motor vehicles, may be established within
fifty (50) feet of any public thoroughfare, public land or Residence District.
(Ord. No. 2204-A-48. Passed 12-19-49, eff. 1-29-50)
§ 345.06 Reserved
CHAPTER 346 – LIVE-WORK OVERLAY DISTRICTS
346.01   Purpose
346.02   Definitions
346.03   Mapping and Applicability
346.04   Certificate of Occupancy
346.05   Permitted Uses
346.06   Conditional Use Determination
346.07   Dividing Walls, Access, Identification and Fire Code Regulations
346.08   Parking, Sign and Yard Regulations
346.09   Acknowledgment of Industrial Use
346.10   Submission Requirements
346.11   Right of Appeal
§ 346.01 Purpose
   The Live-Work Overlay (LWO) District is established to permit and promote
shared occupancy by residential uses in combination with work activities in
suitable locations. By facilitating establishment of such “live-work” space,
the district is intended to meet an identified need for buildings that combine
living space with work space. In addition, the district is intended to assist
in revitalizing areas impacted by the presence of under-utilized and
deteriorated buildings suitable for re-use as live-work space.
(Ord. No. 309-01. Passed 6-19-01, eff. 7-27-01)
§ 346.02 Definitions
   (a)   “Live-Work Unit” means a room or rooms used by a single household both
as a dwelling unit and as a “Work Space,” as defined herein, where such Work
Space occupies at least fifty percent (50%) of the unit’s total floor area. The
living space of a Live-Work unit shall contain a kitchen area and sanitary
facilities.
   (b)   “Work Space” means an area within a Live- Work Unit that is designed
or equipped exclusively or principally for the conduct of work activities and
is to be regularly used for such work activities by one (1) or more occupants
of the unit.
(Ord. No. 309-01. Passed 6-19-01, eff. 7-27-01)
§ 346.03 Mapping and Applicability
   The LWO District shall be mapped as an overlay district by an ordinance of
Council, and shall be mapped only in locations where the underlying zoning
district is a Business District, a Residence-Industry District, a Semi-Industry
District or a General Industry District. The regulations of the underlying
district shall govern except where in conflict with the regulations of the LWO
District. The LWO District shall be mapped in an area where the underlying
zoning prohibits residential occupancy only if it has been determined that
current and anticipated future uses in the immediate vicinity will be
compatible with live-work occupancy.
(Ord. No. 309-01. Passed 6-19-01, eff. 7-27-01)
§ 346.04 Certificate of Occupancy
   No Live-Work Unit shall be occupied nor shall the use of a Live-Work Unit,
including the work use, be changed without issuance of a Certificate of
Occupancy by the Commissioner of Building and Housing. Such Certificate shall
be issued only if the Commissioner determines that the proposed work activities
and living space meet all applicable regulations of these Codified Ordinances.
including the Health and Fire Codes.
(Ord. No. 309-01. Passed 6-19-01, eff. 7-27-01)
§ 346.05 Permitted Uses
   All uses permitted in the underlying zoning district shall be permitted in a
LWO District except as provided in this section.
   (a)   Conditionally Permitted Uses. Notwithstanding otherwise applicable
restrictions on residential occupancy in Semi-Industry and General Industry
Districts, such residential occupancy shall be permitted in a LWO District as
part of a Live-Work Unit if approved by the City Planning Commission in
accordance with the conditional use criteria of Section
346.06.
   (b)   Prohibited Uses. The following uses and activities are prohibited
within a Live-Work Unit:
      (1)   Amusement and recreation uses, as listed in Section
343.11;
      (2)   Adult entertainment uses, as listed in Section
347.07;
      (3)   Pet stores, kennels, animal hospitals;
      (4)   Gun and firearms sales;
      (5)   Automotive service stations, and motor vehicle repair garages; and
      (6)   Liquor sales.
(Ord. No. 309-01. Passed 6-19-01, eff. 7-27-01)
§ 346.06 Conditional Use Determination
   (a)   Approval Criteria. The City Planning Commission shall approve
establishment of Live-Work space as a Conditional Use in a General Industry
District or in that portion of a Semi-Industry District where residential uses
are otherwise prohibited if the Commission determines that the following
conditions have been met.
      (1)   The subject building was constructed prior to the initial effective
date of this chapter.
      (2)   Individuals residing in Live-Work Units will not be subject to
excessive levels of noise, vibration, fire hazards, explosion hazards, smoke,
or other potentially harmful health or environmental conditions by existing or
likely future industrial uses and conditions in the immediate vicinity.
      (3)   By virtue of the nature and location of current and likely future
uses, existing industrial or commercial activities in the immediate vicinity
will not be impaired by the presence of the proposed Live-Work Units.
   (b)   Notice Requirements. Prior to taking action on any application for
establishment of a Live-Work Unit, the City Planning Commission shall notify
the Division of Fire of such application and shall seek its comment on
applicable safety issues. Subsequent to approving establishment of a Live-Work
Unit, the Commission shall notify the Division of Fire of such approval,
including the address of the subject property.
(Ord. No. 309-01. Passed 6-19-01, eff. 7-27-01)
§ 346.07 Dividing Walls, Access, Identification and Fire Code Regulations
   A wall dividing the living space from the Work Space is not required in any
Live-Work Unit, but each Live-Work Unit shall be separated from all other uses
in the building and shall have separate access either from the building
exterior or from an interior corridor that is separate from such other uses.
The bathroom in any Live-Work Unit shall be enclosed and shall comply with
requirements of the Building and Housing Code. All Live-Work Units shall comply
with applicable Fire Code regulations, including applicable fire resistance
requirements and emergency egress requirements of the Codified Ordinances. Each
exterior door providing access to Live-Work Units shall be identified by a
plaque marked in lettering at least two (2) inches in height with the words
“Live-Work Units” or similar language.
(Ord. No. 309-01. Passed 6-19-01, eff. 7-27-01)
§ 346.08 Parking, Sign and Yard Regulations
   (a)   Parking. Within a LWO District, no additional parking shall be
required for establishment of a Live-Work Unit in a building which was
constructed prior to the initial effective date of this chapter. For a Live-
Work Unit proposed in a building first occupied after the initial effective
date of this chapter, parking shall be provided to meet the requirements of the
underlying zoning district. Such parking requirements shall be applied in a
manner that considers each Live-Work Unit as a single dwelling unit and that
measures the floor area of Work Space exclusive of the area devoted to living
space.
   (b)   Signs. Signs shall be permitted in accordance with the regulations
applicable to the underlying zoning district.
   (c)   Yards. Within a LWO District, requirements for residential interior
side yards and rear yards shall not apply to a Live-Work Unit established in a
building which was constructed prior to the initial effective date of this
chapter.
(Ord. No. 309-01. Passed 6-19-01, eff. 7-27-01)
§ 346.09 Acknowledgment of Industrial Use
   In a General Industry District and in any portion of a Semi-Industry
District where residential occupancy is otherwise prohibited, the Certificate
of Occupancy establishing a Live-Work Unit or changing the use of a Live-Work
Unit shall include a statement, signed by the applicant, stating the following:
“The applicant acknowledges that the Live-Work Unit is located in an area zoned
for industrial uses that may be incompatible with a typical residential
environment. The applicant further acknowledges that these and future
industrial uses in this district have the right to operate without any
restrictions other than those applicable to uses in the underlying industrial
zoning district or otherwise imposed by law.” Such language shall be included
in any lease or deed pertaining to the Live-Work space.
(Ord. No. 309-01. Passed 6-19-01, eff. 7-27-01)
§ 346.10 Submission Requirements
   In addition to otherwise required plans and information, any application to
establish a Live-Work Unit or to change the use of a Live-Work Unit, including
the work use, shall identify the nature of the work activities to be performed
in the Live-Work Unit and shall be accompanied by a floor plan that identifies
those areas to be used as living space and those areas to be used as Work
Space. Such plan shall also identify the nature and location of equipment,
furnishings or other improvements that cause the Work Space to meet the
definition in division (b) of Section
346.02. For applications subject to the conditional use provisions of Section
346.06, the owner or lessor of the property shall demonstrate that the
environmental condition of the property is not harmful to human health and
safety and is safe for residential use. Such demonstration may be made through
the issuance of a “No Further Action” Letter by a Certified Professional
pursuant to the requirements for residential sites of RC Chapter 3746 et seq.
(the “Ohio Voluntary Action Program”). A “No Further Action” Letter shall not
relieve the owner or lessor from compliance with any applicable municipal,
state or federal law. If the applicant does not possess a “No Further Action”
Letter as described above, the applicant must submit a Phase I or Phase 2
environmental assessment, as applicable, to demonstrate that the site meets
environmental standards for residential use. If an environmental assessment
shows environmental threats to residential occupancy, then the owner must
demonstrate that those conditions have been abated.
(Ord. No. 1233-15. Passed 11-9-15, eff. 11-11-15)
§ 346.11 Right of Appeal
   Appeals from the decision of the City Planning Commission to approve or
disapprove the establishment of a Live-Work space as a Conditional Use in a
General Industry District or in that portion of a Semi-Industry District where
residential uses are otherwise prohibited shall be made to the Board of Zoning
Appeals.
(Ord. No. 309-01. Passed 6-19-01, eff. 7-27-01)
CHAPTER 347 – SPECIFIC USES REGULATED
347.01   Trucking Terminals Prohibited in Certain Areas
347.011   Ingress and Egress of Truck Traffic
347.02   Restrictions on the Keeping of Farm Animals and Bees
347.03   Location of Recreational Places
347.04   Location of Cemeteries
347.05   Location of Dusty Material Storage and Bitumen Processing
347.06   Regulations for Junk and Wrecking Yards; Walls or Fences
347.07   Adult Entertainment
347.08   Regulations for Trash Areas and Refuse Containers
347.09   Location of Skate Board Facilities
347.10   Temporary Use Permits
347.11   Open Sales Lots
347.12   Amusement, Recreation, Tattooing and Body Piercing Uses
347.121   Hookah Lounges and Vapor Lounges
347.13   Outdoor Works of Art
347.14   Liquor Sales Stores
347.15   Correctional Halfway Houses
347.16   Drive-Through Establishments
347.17   Check Cashing Businesses, Short-Term Loan Lenders, Small Loan Lenders
and Mortgage Loan Lenders
347.18   Size and Location Restrictions of Satellite Dishes
347.19   State-licensed Medical Marijuana Cultivators, Processors, Retail
Dispensaries and Testing Laboratories
347.191   State-Licensed Adult Use Marijuana Cultivators, Processors, Retail
Dispensaries and Testing Laboratories
347.20   Small Box Discount Retail Stores
347.21   Smoke Shops
Cross-reference:
   Junk yard defined, CO
325.40
   Open yard storage of junk in General Industry Districts, CO
345.04
§ 347.01 Trucking Terminals Prohibited in Certain Areas
   (a)   No motor freight depot or trucking terminal shall have truck entrance
from, or exits to, any street within the following areas or within fifty (50)
feet of such areas:
      (1)   Beginning at a point on the shoreline of Lake Erie one hundred
fifty (150) feet east of the northerly extension of the easterly line of East
14th St., thence southerly, along a line one hundred fifty (150) feet east of
and parallel to East 14th St., to the northerly line of St. Clair Ave.; thence
easterly along said line of St. Clair Ave. to the easterly line of East 55th
St.; thence southerly along said line of East 55th St. to a point one hundred
(100) feet north of the northerly line of Hough Ave., N.E.; thence westerly
along a line one hundred (100) feet north of and parallel to the northerly line
of Hough Ave. and its westerly projection to the easterly line of East 36th
St.; thence southerly along said line of East 36th St. to the southerly line of
Central Ave.; thence westerly along said line of Central Ave. to the southerly
line of Carnegie Ave.; thence westerly along said line of Carnegie Ave. to the
easterly line of East 9th St.; thence southerly along said line of East 9th St.
to the southerly line of Broadway; thence westerly along said line of Broadway
to the southerly line of Carnegie Ave.; thence westerly along said line of
Carnegie Ave. to the southerly extension of the westerly line of Ontario St.;
thence northwesterly along said extension and line of Ontario St. to the
southerly line of Huron Rd.; thence westerly along said line of Huron Rd. and
its westerly extension to the westerly line of West 9th St.; thence northerly
along said line of West 9th St. to the northerly line of Lakeside Ave.; thence
easterly along said line of Lakeside to the westerly line of West 3rd St.;
thence northerly along said line of West 3rd St. to the shore line of Lake
Erie; thence easterly with said shore line to the point of beginning.
      (2)   Beginning at the intersection of the center line of the Main Ave.
Bridge and the easterly line of West 25th St.; thence southerly along said line
of West 25th St. to the northerly line of Franklin Blvd., N.W.; thence easterly
along said line of Franklin Blvd. to the easterly line of Columbus Rd., N.W.;
thence northerly along said line of Columbus Rd. to the southerly line of the
right-of-way of the Erie Railroad; thence easterly along said line of the
right-of-way to the northerly extension of the easterly line of West 10th St.;
thence southerly along said extension and line of West 10th St. to the
southerly line of Fairfield Ave., S.W.; thence westerly along said line of
Fairfield Ave. to the easterly line of Scranton Rd., S.W.; thence southerly
along said line of Scranton Rd. to the southerly line of Barber Ave., S.W.;
thence westerly along said line of Barber Ave. to the westerly line of West
25th St.; thence northerly along said line of West 25th St. to the southerly
line of Monroe Ave., S.W.; thence westerly along said line of Monroe Ave. to
the westerly line of West 28th St.; thence northerly along said line of West
28th St. and its extension to the center line of Cleveland Memorial Shoreway
West; thence easterly along said center line to its intersection with the
center of the Main Ave. Bridge; and thence to the point of beginning.
   (b)   No motor freight depot or trucking terminal shall have truck entrances
from, or exits to, any of the following streets, or within fifty (50) feet of
such streets on any street intersecting such streets:
      Berea Rd., S.W.;
      Broadway, S.E., from East 9th St. to East 14th St. and from East 37th St.
to the easterly City limits;
      Buckeye Rd., S.E., from Woodland Ave., S.E. to Woodhill Rd., S.E.;
      Carnegie Ave., S.E. from East 36th St. to East Blvd., S.E.;
      Chatfield Ave., from West 150th St. to West 157th St.;
      Denison Ave., S.W. from Jennings Rd. to Lorain Ave., W.;
      Detroit Ave., N.W. from West 28th St. to the westerly City limits;
      East 14th St., from Carnegie Ave., S.E. to Broadway, S.E.;
      East 30th St., from Central Ave., S.E. to Pittsburgh Ave., S.E.;
      East 40th St., from one hundred (100) ft. north of Hough Ave., N.E. to
Woodland Ave.;
      East 55th St., from the center line of the right-of- way of the main line
of the New York Central Railroad, approximately one thousand six hundred
(1,600) feet north of St. Clair Ave. to Broadway, S.E.;
      East 71st St., from Euclid Ave., E. to Woodland Ave., S.E.;
      East 79th St., from Carnegie Ave., S.E. to Kinsman Rd., S.E.;
      East 93rd St., from Woodhill Rd. to Broadway, S.E.;
      East 175th St., from St. Clair Ave. to Glen Ave.;
      East 176th St., from Codo Ave. to St. Clair Ave.;
      Glen Ave., from East 175th St. to East 172nd St.;
      Glen Ave. east of East 175th St. to Larchmont Ave.;
      Harvard Ave., S.E. from Jones Rd., S.E. to East 93rd St.;
      Harvard-Denison Viaduct;
      Independence Rd., S.E. from Wheeling and Lake Erie Railroad to Fleet
Ave., S.E.;
      Jennings Rd., S.W. from West 14th St. to Valley Rd., S.W.;
      Jones Rd., S.E. from Harvard, S.E. to Broadway, S.E.;
      Kinsman Rd., S.E. from East 55th St. to East 93rd St.;
      Lakewood Heights Blvd., southerly side;
      Puritas Ave., from West 158th St. to Martha Rd.;
      Ridge Rd., S.W. from Denison Ave., S.W. to Memphis Ave., S.W.;
      Triskett Rd.;
      Valley Rd., S.W. between Broadview Rd., S.W. and approximately 424 feet
north of the northerly line of Elston Ave., S.W.;
      West 25th St., from Mulberry St., N.W. to Pearl Rd., S.W.;
      West 117th St., from Sector Ave. to Berea Rd.;
      West 121st St., from Triskett Rd., northerly;
      West 130th St., from Bellaire Rd. to Witlow Ave.;
      West 130th St., from Spreacher Ave. to Brookpark Rd.;
      West 140th St., from Lorain Ave. to Triskett Rd.;
      West 150th St., from Lorain Ave. to Puritas Ave.;
      West 150th St., from Justin Ave. to Brookpark Rd.;
      Woodhill Rd., S.E. from Woodland Ave., S.E. to East 93rd St.;
      Woodland Ave., S.E. from East 9th St. to Woodhill Rd., S.E.
(Ord. No. 1757-63. Passed 3-2-64, eff. 3-4-64)
§ 347.011 Ingress and Egress of Truck Traffic
   (a)   Intent. Within the unique mixed-use industrial/entertainment/retail/
residential district known generally as the Flats-Oxbow area, and as referenced
in divisions (b) and (e) below, it is recognized that industries in areas
currently zoned for industrial use require property ingress and egress by
trucks on a twenty-four (24) hour, seven (7) day-a-week basis and may also
require twenty-four (24) hour-a-day operation of facilities.
   (b)   Applicability. The regulations of this section shall apply within the
Flats-Oxbow Business Revitalization District and the Whiskey Island area, as
described in division (e) below, to all industrial facilities located on
property which was zoned for industrial use on the date of passage of the
ordinance enacting this section.
   (c)   Unimpeded Ingress. Ingress and egress by trucks shall be permitted for
all applicable properties on a twenty-four (24) hour-a-day, seven (7) day-a-
week basis.
   (d)   Hours of Operation. Industrial facilities on applicable properties
shall be permitted to operate on a twenty-four (24) hour-a-day, seven (7) day-
a-week basis, in accordance with all other applicable City regulations.
   (e)   The Whiskey Island area is described as follows:
      Situated in the City of Cleveland, County of Cuyahoga and State of Ohio
and further bounded and described as follows:
      Beginning at the intersection of the Southeasterly right-of-way line of
the Conrail Railroad and the Westerly prolongation of the centerline of the Old
Ship Channel, so called:
      Thence Northeasterly along said Southeasterly right-of-way line to its
intersection with the Northerly prolongation of the centerline of the Willow
Street bridge:
      Thence Southerly along said Northerly prolongation and the centerline of
the Willow Street bridge to its intersection with the centerline of the Old
Ship Channel, as aforesaid:
      Thence in a meandering Westerly direction along the centerline of the Old
Ship Channel and its Westerly prolongation to the place of beginning, be the
same more or less, but subject to all legal highways.
(Ord. No. 178-A-92. Passed 2-24-92, eff. 3-4-92)
§ 347.02 Restrictions on the Keeping of Farm Animals and Bees
   (a)   Purpose. The regulations of this section are established to permit the
keeping of farm animals and bees in a manner that prevents nuisances to
occupants of nearby properties and prevents conditions that are unsanitary or
unsafe.
   (b)   Chickens, Ducks, Rabbits and Similar Animals. The keeping of chickens,
ducks, rabbits and similar farm animals, and cages, coops and enclosures for
the keeping of such animals, shall be governed by the following regulations.
      (1)   In Residential Districts. In Residential Districts, the following
regulations shall apply:
         A.   Number. No more than one (1) such animal shall be kept on a
parcel of land for each eight hundred (800) square feet of parcel or lot area.
For a standard residential lot of four thousand eight hundred (4,800) square
feet, this regulation would permit no more than a total of six (6) such
animals.
         B.   Setbacks. The coops or cages housing such animals may not be
located in front yard or side street yard areas and shall not be located within
five (5) feet of a side yard line nor within eighteen (18) inches of a rear
yard line, except where the rear lot line forms the side lot line or front lot
line of an abutting property, in which case the setback from such rear lot line
shall be five (5) feet. No animals shall be kept in required front yard or side
street yard areas.
         C.   Prohibitions. No roosters, geese or turkeys may be kept in a
Residential District except on a parcel that is at least one (1) acre in area
and only if the coop or cage housing the bird(s) is at least one hundred (100)
feet from all property lines. For parcels greater than one (1) acre in area,
one (1) additional such bird may be kept for each twenty-four thousand (24,000)
square feet in excess of one (1) acre. No predatory birds may be kept on any
property under the regulations of this section.
         D.   Coops and Cages. All animals shall be provided with a covered,
predator-proof coop or cage or other shelter that is thoroughly ventilated,
designed to be easily accessed and cleaned, and of sufficient size to permit
free movement of the animals exclusive of areas used for storage of materials
or vehicles. The total area of all coops or cages on a lot shall not be greater
than thirty-two (32) square feet for up to six (6) animals. Coops and cages,
singly or in combination, shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height.
         E.   Enclosures and Fences. Chickens and other birds shall have access
to an outdoor enclosure adequately fenced or otherwise bounded to contain the
birds on the property and to prevent access by dogs and other predators and
providing at least ten (10) square feet of area for each bird.
      (2)   In Non-Residential Districts. In zoning districts other than
Residential Districts, all regulations applicable in Residential Districts
shall apply except that the number of such animals shall be limited to one (1)
animals for each four hundred (400) square feet of lot area.
   (c)   Goats, Pigs, Sheep and Similar Animals. The keeping of goats, pigs,
sheep and similar farm animals, and stables and enclosures for the keeping of
such animals, shall be governed by the following regulations:
      (1)   In Residential Districts. In Residential Districts, no goats, pigs,
sheep or similar farm animals shall be kept on a parcel of land less than
twenty-four thousand (24,000) square feet in area. For a parcel that is at
least twenty-four thousand (24,000) square feet in area, a maximum of two (2)
such animals may be kept on the property, with one (1) additional animal
permitted for each additional two thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet of
area. Stables or other enclosures for such animals shall not be permitted in
front yards or in side street yards and shall be set back at least forty (40)
feet from any street and from any property other than a property located in an
Industrial District and shall be set back at least one hundred (100) feet from
a dwelling on another parcel or from the permitted placement of a dwelling on
an adjoining vacant parcel.
      (2)   In Non-Residential Districts. In zoning districts other than
Residential Districts, no goats, pigs, sheep or similar farm animals shall be
kept on a parcel of land less than fourteen thousand four hundred (14,400)
square feet in area. For a parcel that is at least fourteen thousand four
hundred (14,400) square feet in area, a maximum of two (2) such animals may be
kept on the property, with one (1) additional animal permitted for each
additional one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet of area. Stables or
other enclosures for such animals shall be set back at least forty (40) feet
from any street and from any property other than a property located in an
Industrial District and shall be set back at least one hundred (100) feet from
a dwelling on another parcel or from the permitted placement of a dwelling on
an adjoining vacant parcel.
      (3)   Prohibitions. No horses, cows, alpacas, llamas or similar animals
shall be kept on a property except in areas specifically designated for the
keeping of such animals.
   (d)   Bees. The keeping of bees, and associated beehives, shall be governed
by the following regulations.
      (1)   In Residential Districts. In Residential Districts, the following
regulations shall apply:
         A.   Number. No more than one (1) beehive shall be kept for each two
thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet of lot area, and no beehive shall be
kept on a lot less than two thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet in area.
         B.   Location and Setbacks. No beehive shall be kept closer than five
(5) feet to any lot line and ten (10) feet to a dwelling or the permitted
placement of a dwelling on another parcel, and no beehive shall be kept in a
required front yard or side street yard. The front of any beehive shall face
away from the property line of the Residential property closest to the beehive.
         C.   Fences and Shrubs. A solid fence or dense hedge, known as a
“flyway barrier,” at least six (6) feet in height shall be placed along the
side of the beehive that contains the entrance to the hive, and shall be
located within five (5) feet of the hive and shall extend at least two (2) feet
on either side of the hive. No such flyway barrier shall be required if all
beehives are located at least twenty-five (25) feet from all property lines and
for beehives that are located on porches or balconies at least ten (10) feet
above grade, except if such porch or balcony is located less than five (5) feet
from a property line.
         D.   Water Supply. A supply of fresh water shall be maintained in a
location readily accessible to all bee colonies on the site throughout the day
to prevent bees from congregating at neighboring swimming pools or other
sources of water on nearby properties.
         E.   Prohibitions. No Africanized bees may be kept on a property under
the regulations of this section.
      (2)   In Non-Residential Districts. In zoning districts other than
Residential Districts, all regulations applicable in Residential Districts
shall apply except that the number of beehives shall be limited to one (1) for
each one thousand (1,000) square feet of lot area.
   (e)   Lots Without a Residence. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section
337.23 regarding Accessory Uses, farm animals or bees may be kept on a lot that
is vacant or has no occupied residence but only if the applicant for such
activity submits written documentation to the Director of Public Health, in
accordance with the provisions of Section
205.04, demonstrating that the use will be managed in a manner that prevents
the creation of nuisances or unsanitary or unsafe conditions.
   (f)   Sanitation and Nuisances. Farm animals shall be kept only in
conditions that limit odors and noise and the attraction of insects and rodents
so as not to cause a nuisance to occupants of nearby buildings or properties
and not to cause health hazards. Furthermore, farm animals shall not be kept in
a manner that is injurious or unhealthful to the animals being kept on the
property.
   (g)   Animal or Bird Noise. It shall be unlawful for any person or other
party operating or occupying any building or premises to keep or allow to be
kept any animal or bird that makes noise so as to habitually disturb the peace
and quiet of any person in the vicinity of the premises.
   (h)   Slaughtering of Animals. Chickens, ducks, rabbits and similar small
animals may be slaughtered on site only if for consumption by the occupants of
the premises. No other farm animal may be slaughtered on site.
   (i)   Application to Building and Housing Department. A proposal for the
keeping of farms animals or bees is subject to approval by the Department of
Building and Housing only if a Building Permit is required by the regulations
of division (i)(2) of this section.
      (1)   Contents of Application. The application shall include the
information required by the provisions of division (a) of Section
205.04.
      (2)   Building Permits. A Building Permit shall be required for
installation of a fence or for construction of a stable or other structure
routinely requiring such permit, except that no Building Permit shall be
required for cages, coops or beehives that are not permanently attached to the
ground or to another structure and do not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in
area nor eight (8) feet in height. No Building Permit shall be required for the
barrier constituting a required enclosure if such barrier is not permanently
attached to the ground and does not exceed three (3) feet in height; and no
permit shall be required for a “flyway” barrier not exceeding six (6) feet in
height and six (6) feet in length.
   (j)   Application to Public Health Department. In accordance with the
provisions of Section
205.04, anyone proposing to keep farm animals or bees on a property in the City
of Cleveland shall apply for a two (2) year license from the City of Cleveland
through its Department of Public Health on a form provided by that office.
   (k)   Building Conditions. The keeping of farm animals or bees shall not be
permitted on a property occupied by a building that has been condemned by the
Department of Building and Housing.
   (l)   Enforcement. The Director of the Department of Building and Housing or
the Director’s designee shall have the authority to inspect any property to
determine compliance with the regulations of this section regarding the
construction and permitted placement of enclosures, fences, cages, coops,
beehives, stables and other structures used in the keeping of farm animals or
bees and shall have the authority to enforce the regulations of this section as
they apply to such matters. The Department of Public Health shall have the
authority to enforce regulations of this section in accordance with the
provisions of Section
205.04.
   (m)   Variances. The Board of Zoning Appeals may vary the regulations of
this section as they apply to a particular property if it determines that such
variance will be consistent with the stated purpose of this section.
   (n)   Definitions. Terms used in this section shall have the meanings
assigned to them in the following definitions:
      (1)   Farm Animal. “Farm animal” means any domestic species of animal
that is kept and raised for use as food or in the production of food or in the
operation of a farm and is not an “exotic animal” as defined in Section
603A.02 and is not a house pet such as a dog, cat or similar animal.
      (2)   Coop and Cage. “Coop” and “cage” mean a structure, not necessarily
attached to the ground, with a top and sides and designed to provide shelter
and protection for small animals or birds.
      (3)   Enclosure. “Enclosure” means a set of walls or fences designed to
confine animals or birds to a space that is large enough to permit the animals
and birds to roam relatively freely in an open yard area.
      (4)   Predatory Bird. “Predatory bird” means an owl, hawk, falcon, eagle
or similar bird that feeds principally by catching living prey.
      (5)   Similar Animal. Any farm animal that is similar to other animals
listed in a particular category of permitted animals with respect to impacts on
nearby properties, including noise, odors, safety hazards or other nuisances.
(Ord. No. 457-11. Passed 5-16-11, eff. 5-20-11)
§ 347.03 Location of Recreational Places
   No entrance to a pool room, skating rink, dance hall or amusement park,
shall be established less than four hundred (400) feet from the premises of an
existing nursery school, elementary school or high school.
(Ord. No. 2204-A-48. Passed 12-19-49, eff. 1-29-50)
§ 347.04 Location of Cemeteries
   No person shall establish any cemetery or other place for the interment of
dead bodies within the corporate limits of the City. However, nothing in this
section shall prevent cemeteries existing on November 5, 1929, from acquiring
land for expansion when done in accordance with the provisions of the Ohio
Revised Code.
(Ord. No. 2204-A-48. Passed 12-19-49, eff. 1-29-50)
§ 347.05 Location of Dusty Material Storage and Bitumen Processing
   No space for the storage or distribution of coal, cinders, stone, slag,
sand, cement, lime, iron ore or similar dust-producing material, and no space
for manufacturing, refining or mixing tar, asphalt or other similar binding or
waterproofing material, shall be located less than three hundred (300) feet
from a Residence District, Local Retail Business District or General Retail
Business District, except where the dust, smoke, odor, noise and vibration
therefrom will effectively be confined to the premises.
(Ord. No. 2204-A-48. Passed 12-19-49, eff. 1-29-50)
§ 347.06 Regulations for Junk and Wrecking Yards; Walls or Fences
   (a)   General Provisions. No junk or wrecking yard not within a General
Industry or Unrestricted Industry District, used for the storage or sale of
salvaged lumber or other used building material, or of junk metals, paper,
rags, rubber, glass or other discarded or salvaged articles, containers or
materials, or for the wrecking or dismantling of motor vehicles, shall be
operated or maintained for more than eighteen (18) months after a zoning change
to a use district within which such yards are not permitted, except that in a
Semi-Industry District such junk material or wrecking yard may continue to
operate as a nonconforming use if the yard has constructed around it a minimum
seven (7) foot high solid masonry wall or slightly solid, nontransparent, well-
maintained substantial fence.
   The Board of Zoning Appeals may grant a variance from the requirement of a
solid masonry wall or solid fence along any side of a junk or wrecking yard
which does not front upon a street or Residence District, in a Semi-Industry
District or General Industry District, if the Board determines that such
variance will not be offensive or objectionable by reason of topography,
adjacent land use or barriers including natural barriers such as shrubbery and/
or trees.
   No wall or fence shall be required to be constructed between two (2) junk or
wrecking yards immediately adjacent to each other. Should one (1) junk or
wrecking yard be discontinued then the remaining yard shall construct a wall or
fence in accordance with these provisions.
   (b)   Definitions. As used in this section:
      (1)   “Solid masonry wall or slightly solid, nontransparent fence” means
a barrier constructed of masonry, concrete block or precast concrete panels, or
chain link (steel or aluminum with slats), metal (corrugated or plain),
attached to metal or treated wood posts or cross members on other similar
material which is nontransparent and hides or shields the area behind the fence
from ordinary view. The minimum height shall not include barbed wire or other
similar wire.
      (2)   “Well maintained fence or wall” means a fence or wall which is
plumb with no more then a four (4) inch deflection from a vertical position,
measured at the top of the fence protected by painting or treated so as to be
corrosion and rust resistant and without any bends or breaks, or flaking or
peeling of paint or missing or broken slats.
   (c)   Existing Fence. As an exception to the requirements of subsection (a)
hereof, any fence, including wooden fence, at least six (6) foot high now
installed pursuant to a permit issued by the Building Commissioner, constructed
around a junk or wrecking yard may be continued except that any replacement or
substitution must conform to the minimum requirements and provide that the
existing fence shall be well maintained, sightly and solid.
   (d)   Height of Junk. In any use district allowing junk or wrecking yards,
the storage of such junk or used material shall not be piled higher than three
(3) feet above the height of the wall or fence enclosing the yard, provided
that at any point closer than five (5) feet, the junk or used material shall
not be piled above the heights of the wall or fence.
   (e)   Setback Requirements. Any junk or wrecking yard in any use district
wherein there is required a setback area between the street line and building
line shall construct an eighteen (18) inch high barrier around the setback
area.
(Ord. No. 407-70. Passed 6-1-70, eff. 6-4-70)
§ 347.07 Adult Entertainment
   (a)   Purpose. Based upon evidence and findings of negative secondary
effects of adult entertainment uses presented in hearings before the Council
and in studies from other communities, including the cities of Indianapolis and
New York, the Council finds that adult entertainment uses in Cleveland cause
negative secondary effects and has created this section to regulate adult
entertainment uses to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of
the citizens of Cleveland by establishing reasonable and uniform regulations to
prevent concentration of adult entertainment uses and location near specified
other uses. The provisions of this section have neither the purpose nor effect
of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative
materials, including adult entertainment materials. Similarly, it is not the
intent, or effect of this section to restrict or deny access by adults to adult
entertainment materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by
the distributors and exhibitors of adult entertainment to their intended
market. Additionally, it is not the intent or effect of this section to condone
or legitimize the distribution of obscene material.
   (b)   Definitions. As used in this Zoning Code:
      (1)   "Specified Sexual Activities" means any of the following:
         A.   The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus, or female breast;
         B.   Sex acts, actual or simulated, including masturbation,
intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy;
         C.   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in A. and B. above.
      (2)   "Specified Anatomical Areas" means:
         A.   The cleft of the buttocks, anus, male or female genitals, or the
female breast.
         B.   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
      (3)   "Adult Bookstore" or "Adult Video Store" means an establishment,
which, as one (1) of its principal purposes, offers for sale or rental for any
form of consideration any one (1) or more of the following:
         A.   Books, magazines, newspapers, periodicals, or other printed
matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, video
reproductions, slides, laser discs, compact discs or other visual
representations, which are distinguished or characterized by the depiction or
description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas";
or
         B.   Instruments, devices, or other paraphernalia, except prophylactic
products, designed or marketed for use in connection with "specified sexual
activities."
      An establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not
involve the offering for sale or rental material depicting or describing
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" and still be
categorized as an adult bookstore or adult video store. Such other business
purpose will not serve to exempt an establishment from being categorized as an
adult bookstore or adult video store so long as one (1) of its principal
business purposes is
the offering for sale or rental for consideration the above specified
materials.
      (4)   "Adult Motion Picture Theatre" means a commercial establishment,
regardless of capacity, where films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides
or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are
distinguished or characterized by the depiction or description of "specified
sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." This definition of adult
motion picture theater does not include the definitions of adult video arcade
and adult cabaret, which are separate uses.
      (5)   "Adult Video Arcade" means any place to which the public is
permitted or invited wherein one (1) or more enclosed or screened areas or
booths are maintained wherein still or motion picture machines, projectors,
video, compact or laser disc players or other image-producing devices are
operated or maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per enclosed
area or booth at any one time, and where the images so displayed are
distinguished or characterized by the depiction or description of "specified
sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
      (6)   "Adult Cabaret" means a commercial establishment, including a
nightclub, bar, juice bar, restaurant, bottle club, or similar establishment,
whether or not alcoholic beverages are served, which regularly features any of
the following:
         A.   persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nudity;
         B.   persons who expose specified anatomical areas, or dancers,
strippers or similar live entertainers in performances which are distinguished
or characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by the
depiction or description of "specified sexual activities";
         C.   films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other
photographic reproductions which are distinguished or characterized by the
depiction or description of "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual
activities."
      This definition of adult cabaret does not include the definitions of
adult live entertainment arcade or adult theater, which are separate uses.
      (7)   "Adult Theater" means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or
similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons who expose
"specified anatomical areas" or live performances which are distinguished or
characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by the
depiction or description of "specified sexual activities." This definition of
adult theater does not include the definition of adult live entertainment
arcade which is a separate use.
      (8)   "Adult Live Entertainment Arcade" means any place to which the
public is permitted or invited wherein one (1) or more enclosed or screened
areas or booths are maintained for viewing by five (5) or fewer persons at any
one (1) time live entertainment such as a dance routine, strip performance or
other similar entertainment, which live entertainment is distinguished or
characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by the
depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or by persons who
appear in a state of nudity or semi-nudity.
      (9)   "Nudity" or "state of nudity" means the showing of the human male
or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft, or cleavage with less
than a fully opaque covering; or the showing of the female breasts with less
than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple.
      (10)   "Semi-nudity" or "state of semi-nudity" means a state of dress in
which opaque clothing covers not more than the genitals, pubic region, and
nipple of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by
supporting straps or devices.
   (c)   Location. Uses defined in divisions (b)(3) Adult Bookstore or Adult
Video Store, (b)(4) Adult Motion Picture Theater, (b)(5) Adult Video Arcade,
(b)(6) Adult Cabaret, (b)(7) Adult Theater and (b)(8) Adult Live Theater
Entertainment Arcade of this section are designated "adult entertainment" uses.
Where permitted in a use district, adult entertainment uses are subject to the
following location restrictions:
      (1)   No adult entertainment use shall be established on a lot or lots
within one thousand (1,000) feet of a residence district.
      (2)   No two (2) adult entertainment uses shall be located in the same
premises or on the same lot. An adult entertainment use may never be an
accessory use as that term is used in this Zoning Code.
      (3)   No adult entertainment use shall be established on a lot or lots
within one thousand (1,000) feet of another lot or lots containing an existing
adult entertainment use, or of a lot or lots where there is no building or
structure, but for which a valid and current permit or certificate of occupancy
is issued for an adult entertainment use.
      (4)   No adult entertainment use shall be established on a lot or lots
within one thousand (1,000) feet of a pool or billiard hall or a video or
pinball arcade or tattooing or body piercing establishment.
      (5)   No adult entertainment use shall be located on a lot or lots within
one thousand (1,000) feet of a premises, which may be one (1) or more lots,
having as its principal use: a church, synagogue or mosque; special education,
preschool, kindergarten, elementary, junior high or high school; education or
training facility for mentally or physically disabled persons; public or
nonprofit community center in which there are regular programs for minors;
public library; public park; public recreation center; playground; hospital;
clinic; infirmary; nursing or convalescent homes; home for the aged; rest home;
orphanage or day care center.
   (d)   Permit Applications. The City shall approve or disapprove the portion
of the completed application requiring review under division (c) within thirty
(30) calendar days of submission.
   (e)   Signs and Exterior Display. No adult entertainment use shall be
conducted in any manner that permits the observation of any material depicting,
describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas" by display, decorations, sign, show window or other opening
from any public view.
   (f)   Disseminating and Displaying Material Harmful to Juveniles. All adult
entertainment uses shall comply with applicable state and local laws regarding
the dissemination and display of material harmful to juveniles.
(Ord. No. 922-15. Passed 3-21-16, eff. 3-24-16)
§ 347.08 Regulations for Trash Areas and Refuse Containers
   The following regulations apply to all lots in all zoning districts, except
for those lots located in any district with a single or two (2) family
dwelling- thereon.
   Where similar regulations are presented elsewhere in ordinances of the
Building or Zoning Codes, the most restrictive requirements shall govern.
   (a)   Location. Where permitted by the Zoning Code, trash areas and refuse
containers shall be located in such manner that they shall not be visible from
the public street or from any lot or lots designated for residential purpose.
Such trash areas shall be screened with opaque fencing not lower than the
height of the refuse containers therein.
   Adequate vehicular access to and from such area or areas for collection of
trash and/or garbage shall be provided at reasonable hours.
   (b)   Storage. All trash and garbage and all organic materials must be
compacted, and all odorous materials must be stored in airtight containers to
avoid emission of obnoxious odors.
   (c)   Construction. All refuse containers shall be built of noncombustible
materials and placed on concrete slab. Loading and unloading doors of refuse
containers shall have locking latches and must be locked at all times other
than when refuse is being loaded or collected.
(Ord. No. 1003-87. Passed 6-15-87, eff. 6-19-87)
§ 347.09 Location of Skate Board Facilities
   No skate board facility shall be erected less than one hundred (100) feet
from an existing residence building in any use district, or less than one
hundred (100) feet from any residential district.
(Ord. No. 235-88. Passed 6-13-88, eff. 6-15-88)
§ 347.10 Temporary Use Permits
   (a)   No temporary use shall be established until a permit for such use has
been issued by the Commissioner of Building and Housing. A temporary permit
shall not exceed thirty (30) days in duration. No temporary permit shall be
issued within sixty (60) days of the expiration of a previous temporary permit
for the same temporary use, on the same premises.
   (b)   Such temporary use permit shall constitute a temporary waiver of off-
street parking requirements.
   (c)   Temporary use permits for carnivals and open-air festivals shall be in
compliance with Sections
329.07 and
3105.29.
(Ord. No. 2228-A-88. Passed 2-27-89, eff. 3-7-89)
§ 347.11 Open Sales Lots
   (a)   Lot Width. Open sales lots, that are permanent uses shall have a
minimum lot width of sixty (60) feet.
   (b)   Surfacing. All open areas of permanent use open sales lots that are
intended either for display or for use as vehicular areas, shall be surfaced
with asphalt, Portland cement, brick, paving block, or other dustless hard-
surfaced, impervious all-weather material approved by the Commissioner of
Building and Housing, provided however, that surfacing shall not be required on
any open sales lot located on a lot in a General Industry or Unrestricted
Industry District which does not abut any lot located in Residence Districts.
   (c)   Grading and Drainage. All permanent use open sales lots shall be
graded for proper drainage. Storm water runoff shall be discharged into the
City storm sewers or in another manner approved by the Director of Public
Service. Water shall not be permitted to drain across public sidewalks or onto
abutting lots.
   (d)   Screening. Permanent use open sales lots shall be screened as provided
in Chapter
352, Landscaping, Screening, and Parking Lot and Public Garage Lighting.
   (e)   Definitions. As used in this section, “open sales lot” means open land
that is used or occupied for the purpose of displaying: motor vehicles, boats,
lawn tractors, trailers, manufactured homes, recreational vehicles, cemetery
monuments, nursery plants or supplies, or other merchandise available for sale,
lease, exchange, or other distribution.
(Ord. No. 1429-92. Passed 3-22-93, eff. 3-26-93)
§ 347.12 Amusement, Recreation, Tattooing and Body Piercing Uses
   (a)   Except as provided in Section
347.07 regarding land used for adult entertainment purposes, where permitted in
a particular use district, amusement and recreation uses, as described in
Section
343.11, are subject to the following location regulations:
      (1)   Separation. No such use shall be established within five hundred
(500) feet of a residential district or day care center, kindergarten,
elementary or secondary school, public library, church, playground, public or
nonprofit recreation center or community center;
      (2)   Spacing. No such use shall be established within five hundred (500)
feet of another such use.
   (b)   Where permitted in a particular use district, tattooing and body
piercing uses, as described in Section
343.11(b)(2)P., are subject to the following location regulations:
      (1)   Separation. No such use shall be established within one thousand
(1,000) feet of a residential district or day care center, kindergarten,
elementary or secondary school, public library, church, playground, public or
nonprofit recreation center or community center;
      (2)   Spacing. No such use shall be established within one thousand
(1,000) feet of another such use.
   (c)   Separation from Adult Entertainment. No pool or billiard hall or video
or pinball arcade or tattooing or body piercing establishment shall be
established within one thousand (1,000) feet of an adult entertainment use as
defined in Section
347.07.
   (d)   Appeals. The Board of Zoning Appeals may approve an application which
does not meet the regulations of this section if, after public notice and
hearing, the Board determines that the proposed use, by virtue of its nature
and location, will not adversely affect nearby residential areas or other
protected uses listed in division (a) of this section. The Board may impose any
conditions deemed necessary to prevent potential adverse impacts.
(Ord. 737-01. Passed 5-20-02, eff. 5-22-02)
§ 347.121 Hookah Lounges and Vapor Lounges
   (a)   Where permitted in a particular use district, hookah lounges and vapor
lounges, as described in Section
343.11, may only operate between 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Sunday through
Thursday and between 9:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. Friday and Saturday.
   (b)   Separation and Spacing. No such use shall be established within one
thousand (1,000) feet of any school, playground, daycare, public park or other
hookah lounge or vapor lounge, or within five hundred (500) feet of any
residential district, church or religious building.
   (c)   Parking. Hookah lounges and vapor lounges shall provide a minimum of
one (1) off-street parking place for each employee and one (1) for each seat
based on the maximum seating capacity for the establishment.
   (d)   The requirements of this section shall not apply to prior legally
conforming hookah lounge uses that are legally existing as of the effective
date of Ordinance No. 978-15.
(Ord. 978-15. Passed 11-30-15, eff. 12-2-15)
§ 347.13 Outdoor Works of Art
   (a)   Purpose. The regulations of this section establish a public review
process for the approval of outdoor works of art and will ensure that such
works of art are constructed, situated and installed in a manner which protects
the public safety.
   (b)   Applicability. This section shall apply to any work of art which is to
be installed in an outdoor location and which will be visible from a public
street or from another property. Customary holiday decorations and lighting
shall not be subject to the provisions of this section.
   (c)   Building Permit Requirement. Except artwork which is painted onto or
similarly applied to the surface of a building or other structure, and artwork
which is composed exclusively of landscaping, every outdoor work of art shall
be classified as a “structure” under the Zoning Code and shall be subject to
Building Permit requirements applicable to structures pursuant to Chapters 327
and 3105 of the Codified Ordinances.
   (d)   City Planning Commission Approval. Except as provided in division (e)
of this section, every outdoor work of art, whether or not such work of art is
classified as a structure, shall be installed or displayed only after the
approval of the City Planning Commission, acting in consultation with its
designated review committee.
   (e)   Exceptions. An outdoor work of art which will be displayed for a
period of thirty (30) days or less shall not be subject to approval by the City
Planning Commission. In residential zoning districts, an outdoor work of art
which is not more than four (4) feet in height and four (4) feet in width or
which is not more than six (6) feet in height and two (2) feet in width shall
not be subject to the provisions of this section, but shall be subject to all
otherwise applicable sections of these Codified Ordinances.
   (f)   Issuance of Building Permit. The Commissioner of Building and Housing
shall issue a permit for an outdoor work of art only, after approval by the
City Planning Commission, if such approval is required, and only after
determining that the work of art will not create safety hazards and that it
meets all applicable provisions of the Building, Fire and Zoning Codes.
   (g)   Zoning Variances. Approval by the City Planning Commission of an
outdoor work of art which fails to meet one (1) or more provisions of the
Zoning Code shall eliminate the need for otherwise required action by the Board
of Zoning Appeals.
   (h)   Meeting Notice Requirements. If the outdoor work of art is to be
located within one hundred (100) feet of a residential zoning district,
approval may be granted under division (g) of this section only after written
notification to affected property owners. In such cases, the City Planning
Commission shall send written notice to all owners of property located within
two hundred (200) feet of the subject property. Such notice shall be mailed or
delivered at least ten (10) days prior to the meeting at which the proposal
will be considered and shall provide information regarding the nature of the
proposal and the time and place of the City Planning Commission meeting.
(Ord. No. 876-94. Passed 6-13-94, eff. 6-18-94)
§ 347.14 Liquor Sales Stores
   (a)   Purpose. This section permits the location and operation of liquor
sales stores as necessary to achieve the following:
      (1)   Protect the character of residential areas and to safeguard the
economic health of local business districts;
      (2)   Protect the welfare of community facilities which provide on-
premise services to children and families; and
      (3)   Promote traffic safety and general public safety.
   (b)   Applicability. Unless otherwise provided, this section shall apply to
any “liquor sales store,” as defined herein, established on or after the
initial effective date of this section, through the establishment of a new
business or business activity, or conversion from State ownership to private
ownership.
   (c)   Definition. For purposes of this section, “liquor sales store” means
any business establishment which engages in the retail sale of “spirituous
liquor”, as defined in RC 4301.01(B)(5), in sealed containers for consumption
off the premises of such store.
   (d)   Zoning Districts. Liquor sales stores shall be permitted only in
General Retail, Shopping Center, Semi-Industry and General Industry zoning
districts, except that any such store in operation immediately prior to the
initial effective date of this section may continue in operation or be
converted to private ownership, in accordance with any and all sections of the
Codified Ordinances pertaining to non-conforming uses.
   (e)   Prohibited Signs. The following signs shall be prohibited for use at
all liquor sales stores:
      (1)   Flashing, moving or revolving signs; portable signs; and strings of
pennants, propellers, pinwheels, streamers, balloons and similar small objects;
      (2)   Any signs in violation of RC 4301.22(F) or any rule promulgated by
the Department of Liquor Control.
   (f)   Drive-Through Facilities. No liquor sales store shall sell spirituous
liquor products through a drive-through window or other device which permits
sales to motorists in their vehicles.
   (g)   Landscaping and Screening. No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued
for a liquor sales store which does not meet all landscaping and screening
regulations established in Chapter
352 of the Codified Ordinances for either a new use or a change of use, as
applicable, in accordance with the provisions of division (b) of Section
352.07. This requirement shall not, however, apply to a liquor sales store
which is located on a parcel shared by two (2) or more other businesses which
are not liquor sale stores if such liquor sales store was in operation
immediately prior to the initial effective date of this section.
(Ord. No. 960-95. Passed 6-19-95, eff. 6-28-95)
§ 347.15 Correctional Halfway Houses
   Correctional halfway houses, as defined in Section
325.121, shall be permitted only in accordance with the following regulations
and other applicable regulations of the Codified Ordinances of the City of
Cleveland.
   (a)   Purpose. The regulations of this section are intended to provide
suitable locations for residential institutions which assist in enabling
individuals to live independently, productively and lawfully as members of the
larger community, following a period of incarceration or following a conviction
for criminal activity. These regulations are also intended to ensure that such
institutions are operated in a manner which serves the best interests of their
residents, while protecting the safety of residents living in nearby
neighborhoods.
   (b)   Certificate of Occupancy. No correctional halfway house shall be
established or expanded before issuance by the Commissioner of Building and
Housing of a Certificate of Occupancy. The Commissioner shall issue such
Certificate only after approval by the Board of Zoning Appeals, as required in
division (c) of this section.
   (c)   Board of Zoning Appeals Approval. No Certificate of Occupancy for
establishment or expansion of a correctional halfway house shall be issued
without approval of such application by the Board of Zoning Appeals, after
public notice and a public hearing. In order to ensure compatibility between a
proposed correctional halfway house, or expansion thereof, and surrounding
properties, the Board may require modifications to a proposal as a condition of
its approval. The Board shall determine the suitability of a proposed
correctional halfway house, or expansion thereof, at a particular location,
through consideration of, among others, the following factors.
      (1)   Conformance of the proposal to the requirements of this section and
to other applicable regulations of the City’s Codified Ordinances;
      (2)   The record of the proposed operator in managing similar facilities;
and
      (3)   The size of the proposed facility as it affects potential over-
concentration of a correctional system population in the immediate vicinity.
   (d)   Permitted Locations. Correctional halfway houses shall be allowed in
General Retail Business, Residence-Industry and Semi-Industry zoning districts,
in accordance with all applicable regulations.
      (1)   Separation Standards. No correctional halfway house shall be
established on a lot or lots within five hundred (500) feet of a Residential
zoning district nor within five hundred (500) feet of the lot or lots occupied
by a playground, public park, public recreation center, church or similar place
of worship, public library, pre-school, day-care center, kindergarten, special
education center, or primary or secondary school, measured in accordance with
the standards of division (d)(3) of this section. Specifically, however, along
the rear lot line of a property to be occupied by a correctional halfway house,
this separation standard may be waived by the Board of Zoning Appeals, if, in
the determination of the Board, adequate fencing, buffer areas and/or other
barriers are in place or will be put in place to screen and separate the
adjoining properties, and to prevent access between the properties.
      (2)   Spacing Standard. No correctional halfway house shall be
established on a lot or lots within two thousand (2,000) feet of a lot or lots
occupied by another such facility measured in accordance with the standards of
division (d)(3) of this section. Furthermore, not more than two (2)
correctional halfway houses shall be located in any Police District.
      (3)   Measurement Standard. In all instances where this section requires
separation or spacing by a specified distance, such distance shall be measured
in a geometrically straight line which represents the shortest distance between
the lot or lots accommodating the proposed correctional halfway house and the
lot or lots or zoning district from which the correctional halfway house is to
be separated. Such measurement shall be made using a scaled map, or a survey if
deemed necessary, and shall be made without regard to intervening structures,
objects, uses, the street grid, landforms, waterways, or any other topographic
feature.
   (e)   Licensing and Supervision. All correctional halfway houses operating
in the City of Cleveland shall have all required licenses, including any
required for operation of a correctional halfway house. On-site supervision by
qualified staff shall be provided for all hours during which residents are on
the premises. Security measures shall be sufficient to protect the safety of
residents and other citizens in the vicinity of the facility.
   (f)   Floor Area and Occupancy Standards. A minimum of two hundred (200)
square feet of habitable floor area shall be provided, on average, for each
resident of a correctional halfway house, including staff members normally on
the premises after 11:00 p.m. A maximum of one hundred (100) residents subject
to correctional oversight shall be accommodated at any correctional halfway
house. No correctional halfway house may operate with a total resident
population of less than twenty (20) persons, which twenty (20) persons may
include individuals not subject to correctional oversight.
   (g)   Parking. A minimum of one (1) off-street parking space shall be
provided for every three (3) residents of a correctional halfway house, plus
one (1) space for each staff person on duty during the largest shift. Such
spaces shall be provided either on or directly adjacent to the property
occupied by the facility.
   (h)   Excluded Residents. Correctional halfway houses shall not admit or
accommodate residents who, at the time of their admission or at any time during
their stay, exhibit a pattern of violent behavior, nor shall correctional
halfway houses admit or accommodate residents who have been convicted of any of
the following crimes: murder, rape or felony crimes against children.
   (i)   Revocation of Certificate. The Commissioner of Building and Housing
shall revoke the Certificate of Occupancy issued to a correctional halfway
house if it is determined that the facility is no longer licensed as required
in this section or if compliance with City regulations or with requirements of
the Board of Zoning Appeals is not maintained.
   (j)   Application. An application for a Certificate of Occupancy for a
correctional halfway house shall include the following information, in addition
to such information and drawings otherwise required under the Codified
Ordinances.
      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the operator, the agency
holding the required State License, and the owner of the property on which the
facility is to be established;
      (2)   The address of the proposed site;
      (3)   The name of the government agency providing or expected to provide
a license to the operator; the term of such license; and the expiration date
thereof;
      (4)   The proposed design capacity of the facility in terms of the number
of residents and staff on the largest shift;
      (5)   Written policies of the operator governing admission to residence
in the facility, and rules for residents, including rules for the storing and
taking of medicine;
      (6)   A written affidavit from the operator that all residents will have
been determined to be capable of functioning adequately in a community setting
and will not constitute a reasonably foreseeable danger to the community;
      (7)   Client groups to be served by type, age, range, level of
functioning or rehabilitation, nature of past institutionalization or
incarceration, present status in treatment and in the correctional system
(e.g., with respect to furlough, parole or probation status);
      (8)   Description of supervision and security arrangements, and a
description of arrangements for maintenance of the facility and the grounds;
      (9)   Description of services to be provided to residents in on-site and
off-site locations;
      (10)   Addresses of all similar facilities currently or previously
operated by the proposed operator and the licensing agency;
      (11)   Plans and statements of all exterior and interior building
alterations proposed to accommodate the facility;
      (12)   Number, size, location and surfacing of all off-street parking
spaces, and a statement of the operator’s policy on keeping of cars by
residents;
      (13)   Any other information deemed necessary by the Commissioner of
Building and Housing to determine compliance with the provisions of this
section and other applicable provisions of these Codified Ordinances.
   (k)   Notification. Upon receipt of an application for a Building Permit or
Certificate of Occupancy for a correctional halfway house, the Division of
Building and Housing shall send a copy to the Council member in whose ward the
proposed facility would be located and shall submit a notification of the
receipt of the application, including the proposed address, to the Council
Clerk for publication in the City Record.
   (l)   Annual Registration. Prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy
for a correctional halfway house, the operator shall submit supervisor and
operator information to the Division of Building and Housing. This information
shall include the names and phone numbers of all on-site supervisors; the name,
address and telephone number of the operator; if the operator is a partnership
or a corporation, the names, addresses and telephone numbers of all general
partners or officers; if any of the general partners are partnerships or
corporations, the names, addresses and telephone numbers of all officers; and
the name and address of the statutory agent, if any. The address for
corporations and partnerships shall be the principal place of business and the
address for natural persons shall be the home address. This information shall
be amended upon a change to it, and shall be submitted annually to the Division
of Building and Housing by the first day of February.
(Ord. No. 2215-96. Passed 4-7-97, eff. 4-7-97; Reprinted 7-2-97 CR)
§ 347.16 Drive-Through Establishments
   (a)   Purpose. This section establishes regulations concerning the location
and operation of drive-through establishments to achieve the following:
      (1)   Promote safe and efficient vehicular and pedestrian circulation at
drive-through establishments to protect the health and safety of patrons,
employees and nearby residents;
      (2)   Protect adjacent properties from the adverse effects of drive-
through operations, including noise, light and traffic which adverse effects
have significantly increased due to technology upgrades in both lighting and
sound systems; and
      (3)   Prohibit the placement of drive-through establishments in locations
which could be hazardous to children and pedestrians.
   (b)   Definitions.
      (1)   For purposes of this section, “drive- through establishment” means
any business establishment which engages in the retail sale of products through
a drive-through window or other device to motorists in their vehicles.
      (2)   For purposes of this section, “bypass lane” means a lane allowing
motor vehicle traffic to enter and exit the site without using the drive-
through lane.
   (c)   Location. To prevent conditions hazardous to pedestrian children, no
drive-through establishment shall be erected on any lot that abuts an
elementary or junior high school, park, playground or public library.
   (d)   Lane Requirements.
      (1)   All drive-through establishments shall have no fewer than the
following number of off-street stacking spaces for customer vehicles in each
drive- through lane at the locations indicated:
 
Number of Spaces Required Between: and:
                 (location)        (location)
5                Entrance Street a First Station b
2 e              First Station b   Last Station c
1                Last Station c    Exit Street d
a   The right-of-way of the street from which vehicles enter the drive-through
lane.
b   The drive-through station abutting each drive- through lane closest to the
entrance to the such lane from the street.
c   The drive-through station abutting each drive- through lane closest to the
exit from such lane to the street.
d   The right-of-way of the street onto which vehicles exit from the drive-
through lane.
e   Requirement shall not apply to establishments having only one (1) drive-
through station.
 
      (2)   Drive-through establishments shall provide a bypass lane. This
requirement shall not apply; however, to establishments designed to permit
motor vehicle access only by using the drive-through facilities, such as double
drive-through restaurants having no customer parking.
      (3)   All drive-through and bypass lanes shall have a minimum width of
ten (10) feet and shall be striped or marked.
      (4)   Pedestrian routes between the entrances to the principal structure
and any parking area or sidewalk which require the crossing of drive-through
lanes shall either be avoided or shall be clearly identified to pedestrians and
motorists by pavements markings or signage.
   (e)   Litter Control. The operator of a drive- through establishment shall
keep the premises free of excess litter originating from the use and shall have
refuse containers readily available for use by customers.
   (f)   Lot Size. Drive-through establishments shall have a minimum lot width
of eighty (80) feet and a lot area of not less than twelve thousand (12,000)
square feet.
   (g)   Abutting Residential Use. Drive-through establishments abutting any
residential use shall conform to the applicable requirements of this division
in addition to the other divisions of this section.
      (1)   No drive-through establishment shall cause or create any sound at
any lot line of an abutting residential use that is greater than seventy (70)
dBA.
      (2)   Drive-through establishments shall be landscaped and screened in
conformance with Chapter
352 of the Codified Ordinances of Cleveland, Ohio, 1976.
      (3)   No drive-through establishment or any signage located on the site
shall produce direct or indirect illumination greater than five-tenths (0.5)
footcandles above the level of background effect at the boundaries of any
residential use.
      (4)   Sources of light from a drive-through establishment shall be
directed, shaded, shielded or otherwise arranged so as not to produce glare in
an abutting residential use.
      (5)   No alley between a drive-through establishment and abutting
residential use shall be used for circulation of customer traffic or as a
bypass lane.
      (6)   Retail sales from drive-through lanes of a drive-through
establishment abutting a residential use shall be prohibited from 9:30 p.m. to
6:00 a.m. daily.
   (h)   Application to Existing Drive-through Establishments. The Regulations
contained in division (g) above shall apply to drive-through establishments
that are legally existing as of the original date this section is enacted.
These existing drive-through establishments rendered nonconforming by this
section shall comply with the provisions of this section no later than May 1,
2000. The amendment to the Regulations in division (g)(6) as provided in
Ordinance No. 78-14, which amendment changed the prohibited hours of operation
from 11:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. to 9:30 p.m. to 6:00 a.m., shall not apply to
drive-through establishments that are legally existing as of the effective date
of Ordinance No. 78-14.
(Ord. No. 78-14. Passed 6-9-14, eff. 6-12-14)
§ 347.17 Check Cashing Businesses, Short-Term Loan Lenders, Small Loan Lenders
and Mortgage Loan Lenders
   (a)   Purpose. The regulations of this section are established to regulate
the location of check-cashing businesses, and certain businesses that make
short-term loans, small loans and mortgage loans, for the purpose of protecting
neighborhoods from negative secondary effects created by the concentration or
clustering of such businesses. Furthermore, the regulations are established to
guard against market saturation which may lead to increased rates as an offset
for lower business volume.
   (b)   Definitions. For purposes of this section:
      (1)   "Check-cashing business" means any business that is licensed, or is
required to be licensed to cash checks under RC 1315.21 through 1315.30;
      (2)   "Short-term loan lender" means any business that is licensed, or is
required to be licensed to make short term loans under RC 1321.35 through
1321.48;
      (3)   "Small loan lender" means any business that is licensed, or is
required to be licensed to make small loans under RC 1321.01 to 1321.19; and
      (4)   "Mortgage loan lender" means any business that is licensed or is
required to be licensed to make mortgage loans under RC 1321.51 through
1321.60.
      (5)   Exclusions. For purposes of this section, "check-cashing business",
"short-term loan lender", "small loan lender" and "mortgage loan lender" do not
include any bank, savings and loan, credit union or similar financial
institution that is not licensed under, required to be licensed under, or
otherwise regulated by the state laws cited in this division.
   (c)   Spacing. No check-cashing business, short-term loan lender, small loan
lender or mortgage loan lender shall be established on a lot or lots within one
thousand (1,000) feet of another lot or lots containing an existing check-
cashing business, short-term loan lender, small loan lender or mortgage loan
lender. No two (2) check-cashing businesses, short-term loan lenders, small
loan lenders or mortgage loan lenders, in any combination, shall be located in
the same building or on the same lot.
   (d)   Maximum Number. There shall be no more than one (1) check-cashing
business, short-term loan lender, small loan lender or mortgage loan lender
located within the City of Cleveland for each twenty thousand (20,000) persons
residing in the City as recorded in the most recent decennial U.S. Census. No
additional check-cashing businesses, short-term loan lenders, small loan
lenders or mortgage loan lenders shall be established if the current number of
check-cashing businesses, short-term loan lenders, small loan lenders or
mortgage loan lenders exceeds the maximum number permitted.
   (e)   Exception. This section shall not apply to any check-cashing business,
short-term loan lender, small loan lender or mortgage loan lender as defined
above currently in operation prior to passage of this section.
(Ord. No. 670-12. Passed 10-22-12, eff. 10-25-12)
§ 347.18 Size and Location Restrictions of Satellite Dishes
   (a)   Purpose. This section regulates the location and size of satellite
dishes in order to protect the public health and safety and to protect the
visual character of residential areas. This section is intended to comply with
state and federal law, policies and guidelines and does not intend to impair
the installation, maintenance, or use of satellite dishes.
   (b)   Definition. For purposes of this section, “satellite dish” means a
round or oblong parabolic antenna designed to receive transmission signals from
earth orbiting satellites.
   (c)   Location and Number.
      (1)   The preferred location of a roof-mounted satellite dish is as near
to the rear property line as in practicable to not impose unreasonable
limitations on reception.
      (2)   No satellite dish mounted in the ground or attached to a fence or
tree shall be placed in a front yard or in a side yard if such side yard is
located in a Residential District or adjacent to a Residential District.
      (3)   No free-standing satellite dish antenna shall be located closer
than three (3) feet to any property line.
      (4)   For buildings containing one (1) or more dwelling units, there
shall be no more than one (1) satellite dish antenna per dwelling unit and no
more than four (4) for any building, which is less.
   (d)   Size.
      (1)   The maximum diameter of a satellite dish mounted to a one-family,
two-family or three- family house shall be thirty-six (36) inches.
      (2)   The maximum length or diameter of any free-standing satellite dish
mounted in the ground shall be ten (10) feet.
   (e)   Permits. A Building Permit shall be required for a satellite dish
antenna only in the following instances:
      (1)   If the satellite dish antenna exceeds thirty-six (36) inches in
diameter; or
      (2)   If the satellite dish antenna is mounted to a pole or other support
structure that exceeds ten (10) feet in height.
   (f)   Applicability. The regulations of this section shall apply to all
satellite dish antennas installed more than ninety (90) days after the
effective date of this ordinance.
   (g)   Removal. Any satellite dish antenna that has been unused for reception
for a continuous period of six (6) months or more shall be removed by the owner
of the antenna.
      (1)   The maximum diameter of a satellite dish mounted to a one (1)
family, two (2) family or three (3) family house shall be thirty-six (36)
inches.
      (2)   The maximum length or diameter of any free-standing satellite dish
mounted in the ground shall be ten (10) feet.
   (h)   Penalty. Whoever violates subsections (c) or (d) hereof is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 675-09. Passed 11-29-10, eff. 11-30-10)
§ 347.19 State-licensed Medical Marijuana Cultivators, Processors, Retail
Dispensaries and Testing Laboratories
   (a)   Purpose. This section regulates the location and separation of state-
licensed medical marijuana cultivators, processors, retail dispensaries, and
testing laboratories in order to protect the public health and safety and to
protect the character of residential areas. This section complies with RC
3796.29 and RC 3796.30 and does not intend to impair the use of state-licensed
medical marijuana entities.
   (b)   Definitions. As used in this section and in this Zoning Code, and
defined in OAC 3796:1-1-01(A):
      (1)   "Cultivator" means an entity that has been issued a certificate of
operation by the Ohio Department of Commerce to grow, harvest, package, and
transport medical marijuana as permitted under RC Chapter 3796.
      (2)   "Manufacture" means the process of converting harvested plant
material into marijuana extract by physical or chemical means for use as an
ingredient in a medical marijuana product.
      (3)   "Medical marijuana" means marijuana that is cultivated, processed,
dispensed, tested, possessed, or used for a medical purpose.
      (4)   "Medical marijuana entity" means a licensed medical marijuana
cultivator, processor, dispensary or testing laboratory.
      (5)   "Processor" means an entity that has been issued a certificate of
operation by the Ohio Department of Commerce to manufacture medical marijuana
products.
      (6)   "Retail Dispensary" means an entity licensed pursuant to RC 3796.04
and RC 3796.10 and any rules promulgated thereunder to sell medical marijuana
to qualifying patients and caregivers.
      (7)   "Testing laboratory" means an independent laboratory located in
Ohio that has been issued a certificate of operation by the Ohio Department of
Commerce to have custody and use of controlled substances for scientific and
medical purposes and for purposes of instruction, research, or analysis.
   (c)   Location. Where permitted in a particular use district, no state-
licensed medical marijuana cultivator, processor, retail dispensary or
laboratory that tests medical marijuana, shall be located or relocated within
five hundred (500) feet of the boundaries of a parcel of real estate having
situated on it a school, church, public library, public playground or public
park. This requirement does not apply to research related to marijuana
conducted at a state university, academic medical center, or private research
and development organization as part of a research protocol approved by an
institutional review board or equivalent entity. As used in this section "state
university" and "academic medical center" have the same meaning as in RC
3796.01.
(RC 3796.30; Ord. No. 1009-17. Passed 10-31-17, eff. 11-1-17)
§ 347.191 State-Licensed Adult Use Marijuana Cultivators, Processors, Retail
Dispensaries and Testing Laboratories
   (a)   Purpose. This section regulates the location and separation of state-
licensed adult use marijuana cultivators, processors, retail dispensaries, and
testing laboratories in order to protect the public health and safety and to
protect the character of residential areas. This section complies with RC
3780.07 and RC 3780.25 and does not intend to impair the use of state-licensed
adult use cannabis operators.
   (b)   Definitions.
      (1)   As used in this section and in this Zoning Code, the following
terms shall have the same meaning as in RC 3780.01: “adult use cannabis
operator”, “adult use cultivator”, “adult use dispensary”, “adult use
processor”, “adult use testing laboratory”, and “level III adult use
cultivator”.
      (2)   As used in this section,
         A.   “Division” shall mean the Division of Cannabis Control of Ohio’s
Department of Commerce.
         B.   “State university” and “academic medical center” shall have the
same meanings as in RC 3796.01.
   (c)   Location. Where permitted in a particular use district, no state-
licensed adult cannabis operator or adult use testing laboratory shall be
located or relocated within five hundred (500) feet of the end boundaries of a
parcel of real estate having situated on it a church, public library, public
playground, public park, or school. This requirement does not apply to (i)
research related to adult use cannabis conducted at a state university,
academic medical center, or a private or public research and development
organization as part of a research protocol approved by an institutional review
board or equivalent entity, or any other entity as approved by the Division, or
(ii) the other exceptions provided in divisions (B) through (D) of RC 3780.07.
(RC 3780.07; Ord. No. 529-2024. Passed 6-3-24, eff. 7-3-24)
§ 347.20 Small Box Discount Retail Stores
   (a)   Purpose. The regulations of this section are established to regulate
the location of small box discount retail stores for the purpose of protecting
neighborhoods from negative secondary effects created by the concentration or
clustering of such businesses. Furthermore, the regulations are established to
avoid and reduce over-concentration and to maintain cleanliness for the health
and safety of residents within our neighborhoods.
   (b)   Definitions. For purposes of this section:
      (1)   "Small Box Discount Retail Store" means a retail store of between
three thousand (3,000) and fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet that dedicates
less than fifteen percent (15%) of shelf space to fresh or fresh frozen foods
and produce and sells at retail an assortment of physical goods, products or
merchandise directly to the consumer, including food or beverages for off-
premise consumption, personal grooming and health products, household goods and
other consumer products that generally cost less than ten dollars ($10.00).
      (2)   "Fresh Produce" means fruits and vegetables that have not been
processed in any manner. This term does not include such items as potted or
dried herbs, wild rice, dried fruits and vegetables, raw nuts of any kind,
popcorn, fruit or vegetable plants/seedlings, seeds/grains, flowers, maple
syrup, cider, eggs, meat, cheese and seafood.
      (3)   "Fresh or Fresh Frozen Food" means food for human consumption that
is in its raw state, or unprocessed; food that was quickly frozen while still
fresh (blanching, blast freezing) and no deterioration has taken place.
      (4)   Exclusions. For purposes of this section, "small box discount
retail store" does not include retail stores that dedicate less than five
percent (5%) of shelf space to food sales, sell gasoline or diesel fuel,
contain a prescription pharmacy or dedicate at least fifteen percent (15%) of
shelf space to fresh or fresh frozen foods and produce.
   (c)   Spacing. No small box discount retail store shall be established on a
lot or lots within ten thousand five hundred and sixty (10,560) feet (two (2)
miles) of another lot or lots containing an existing small box discount retail
store. No two (2) small box discount retail stores shall be located in the same
building or on the same lot. Such distance shall be measured in a geometrically
straight line which represents the shortest distance between the lot or lots
accommodating the proposed small box discount retail store and the lot or lots
from which the existing small box discount retail store is located. Such
measurement shall be made using a scaled map, or a survey if deemed necessary,
and shall be made without regard to intervening structures, objects, uses, the
street grid, landforms or any other topographic feature.
   (d)   Maps Maintained in the Office of the City Planning Commission. The
Director of City Planning shall maintain a map of existing Small Box Discount
Retail Store locations and other information necessary to determine compliance
with the spacing regulations under division (c) of this section.
   (e)   Floor and Shelf Plan Required. For any small box discount retail store
subject to Section
347.20(c), a Floor and Shelf Plan shall be submitted as part of its Building
Permit application in addition to any other required plans and information, and
shall contain each of the following:
      (1)   The amount of shelf space dedicated to food sales and the amount of
shelf space dedicated to fresh or fresh frozen foods and produce; and
      (2)   The types of goods, products, or merchandise to be sold and the
general cost of such items.
   (f)   Maintenance. The owner and/or operator of a small box discount retail
store shall comply with applicable provisions of these codified ordinances
regarding maintenance of the premises and shall comply with the following:
      (1)   Keep the exterior of the site including the sidewalks and treelawns
abutting the property free of litter and debris; and
      (2)   Provide one (1) or more solid waste containers located directly
outside the primary entrance for the placement of paper, wrappers, and other
items by customers and others. Such containers shall be maintained in good
condition and be of suitable capacity to sufficiently contain litter and debris
between scheduled waste collections.
   (g)   Exception. Section
347.20(c) shall not apply to any small box discount retail store as defined in
Section
347.20(b)(1) currently in operation prior to the effective date of this
section.
   (h)   Penalty. Whoever violates any provision of Section
347.20 shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Section
327.99.
(Ord. No. 816-2020. Passed 1-24-22, eff. 1-26-22)
§ 347.21 Smoke Shops
   (a)   Purpose. The regulations of this section are established to regulate
the location of Smoke Shops for the purpose of protecting neighborhoods from
negative secondary effects created by the concentration or clustering of such
businesses. Furthermore, the regulations are established to avoid and reduce
over-concentration.
   (b)   Definitions. For purposes of this section:
      (1)   “Cannabidiol” or “CBD” means the cannabidiol compound, containing
delta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol concentration of not more than three-tenths per
cent, derived from hemp.
      (2)   “Electronic Smoking Device” has the same meaning as defined in RC
2927.02.
      (3)   “Hemp” means the plant Cannabis sativa L. and any part of that
plant, including the seeds thereof and all derivatives, extracts, cannabinoids,
isomers, acids, salts, and salts of isomers, whether growing or not, with a
delta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol concentration of not more than three-tenths
percent percent on a dry weight basis.
      (4)   “Kratom” means any parts of the plant Mitragyna speciosa, whether
growing or not, and any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or
preparation of that plant, including but not limited to, mitragynine and 7-
hydroxymitragynine.
      (5)   “Smoke Shop” means any retail establishment at which twenty percent
(20%) or more of floor, shelf, and/or display area(s), individually or in the
aggregate, is used for the sale of Smoke Shop Products. No state-licensed
medical or adult-use marijuana operator, cultivator, processor, dispensary,
laboratory, or entity as defined in Sections
347.19(b) and
347.191(b) shall constitute a Smoke Shop for the purposes of this section.
      (6)   “Smoke Shop Product(s)” means:
         A.   Any product containing, made of, derived from, or containing any
form of CBD, Kratom, and/or Hemp-derived or synthetic cannabinoid, including
but not limited to Delta-8 THC, that is intended for human consumption or is
likely to be consumed, whether smoked, heated, chewed, dissolved, inhaled,
absorbed, or ingested by any other means;
         B.   Any product containing, made of, or derived from tobacco or
containing any form of nicotine that is intended for human consumption or is
likely to be consumed, whether smoked, heated, chewed, dissolved, inhaled,
absorbed, or ingested by any other means, including, but not limited to, a
cigarette, a cigar, pipe tobacco, chewing tobacco, snuff, or snus;
         C.   Any Electronic Smoking Device as defined in this section and any
substances intended to be aerosolized or vaporized during the use of the
device, whether the substance contains any form of tobacco, nicotine, CBD,
Kratom, and/or Hemp-derived or synthetic cannabinoids; or
         D.   Any component, part, or accessory of A., B., or C. above, whether
any of these contains tobacco, nicotine, CBD, Kratom, and/or Hemp-derived or
synthetic cannabinoids, including, but not limited to, filters, rolling papers,
blunt or hemp wraps, or pipes.
      Smoke Shop Product does not include any product that is a drug, device,
or combination product authorized for sale by the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration, as those terms are defined in the Federal Food, Drug and
Cosmetic Act.
   (c)   Spacing. No Smoke Shop shall be established on a lot or lots within
ten thousand five hundred and sixty (10,560) feet (two (2) miles) of another
lot or lots containing an existing Smoke Shop. No two (2) Smoke Shops shall be
located in the same building or on the same lot. Such distance shall be
measured in a geometrically straight line which represents the shortest
distance between the lot or lots accommodating the proposed Smoke Shop and the
lot or lots from which the existing Smoke Shop is located. Such measurement
shall be made using a scaled map, or a survey if deemed necessary, and shall be
made without regard to intervening structures, objects, uses, the street grid,
landforms or any other topographic feature.
   (d)   Location. Where otherwise permitted in a particular use district, no
Smoke Shop shall be located or relocated within five hundred (500) feet of the
end boundaries of a parcel of real estate having situated on it a church,
public library, public playground, public park, or school.
   (e)   Maps Maintained in the Office of the City Planning Commission. The
Director of City Planning shall maintain a map of existing Smoke Shop locations
and other information necessary to determine compliance with the spacing
regulations under division (c) of this section.
   (f)   Floor, Shelf, and Display Plan Required. For any Smoke Shop, a floor,
shelf and display plan shall be submitted as part of its Building Permit
application in addition to any other required plans and information, and shall
contain the amount of floor, shelf, and display area dedicated to Smoke Shop
Products.
(Ord. No. 188-2025. Passed 4-14-25, eff. 4-16-25)
CHAPTER 348 – FORM DISTRICTS
348.01   Definitions
348.02   Frontage Features
348.03   Applicability
348.04   Urban Form Overlay (UF) District
348.05   Urban Core Overlay (UC) District
§ 348.01 Definitions
   As used in this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as stated
below:
   (a)   "Active uses" are those uses that generate customer or visitor traffic
such as retail, restaurants, personal services, offices, residential uses, and
building lobbies. Uses that are not considered active uses include, but are not
limited to, non-habitable spaces, hallways, storage, mechanical, utility
spaces, trash rooms or areas, loading docks, parking, or similar.
   (b)   "Balcony" means an exterior space or platform that projects from the
wall of a building and includes a railing or balustrade.
   (c)   "Block" means the aggregate of private lots, pedestrian passages, and
alleys circumscribed by street right-of-ways (ROWs).
   (d)   "Block length" means the distance between the intersection of two (2)
street ROWs, measured at the street line.
   (e)   "Frontage build-out" means the portion of the principal and secondary
street frontage containing a building.
   (f)   "Human-scaled materials" are defined as twelve inch (12") maximum
width in either the vertical or the horizontal dimension. The other dimension
is unlimited. Examples include brick, stone, wood, fiber-cement lap siding,
terra cotta, or similar materials.
   (g)   "Liner building" means a building that is placed between a street line
and off-street parking in order to screen the parking from the public ROW.
   (h)   "Open sales lot" means open land that is used or occupied for the
purpose of buying, selling, or storing prior to sale passenger cars, trucks,
motor scooters, motorcycles, boats, trailers, recreational vehicles,
manufactured homes, cemetery monuments, nursery plants or supplies, or other
merchandise.
   (i)   "Plaza" means an open space available to the public for civic purposes
and commercial activities. A plaza shall be spatially defined by building
frontages. Its landscape shall consist primarily of pavement. Plazas are often
located at the intersection of important streets. Plazas generally range from
one-eighth (1/8) acre to two (2) acres in size.
   (j)   "Secondary street frontage" means that on corner lots, all street
lines that are not the principal frontage are considered secondary street
frontages; also known as the side street frontage.
   (k)   "Square" is an open space available to the public for unstructured
recreation and civic purposes. A square shall be spatially defined by building
frontages. Its landscape shall consist of paths, lawns and trees, formally
disposed. Squares are generally located at the intersection of important
streets. Squares may range from one (1) acre to five (5) acres in size.
   (l)   "Stoop" means an entrance wherein the facade of the main building is
aligned close to the urban frontage line with the first-story elevated from the
sidewalk for privacy, with an exterior stair and landing at the entrance.
   (m)   "Streetscreen" means a freestanding wall built along the street line,
in the front or sideyard setback, or coplanar with the main building facade.
Where permissible, it may mask a parking lot from the ROW, provide privacy to a
side yard, and/or strengthen the spatial definition of the public realm.
   (n)   "Street line" means the lot line dividing the lot from a street, under
Chapter 325 of this Code.
   (o)   "Urban frontage line" means that side or sides of a public street
frontage that is specifically designated on the Zoning Map.
   (p)   "Urban street space" means that portion of a building or property
located at or closest to the level of the public sidewalk and within forty (40)
feet of an urban frontage line.
(Ord. No. 364-16. Passed 5-2-16, eff. 5-4-16)
§ 348.02 Frontage Features
   One of the following features shall be required on principal street
frontages:
   Porch
   Terrace or lightwell
   Forecourt
   Stoop; twelve (12) sq. ft. min.
   Shopfront
   Gallery; eight (8) ft. min. depth
   Arcade; eight (8) ft. min. depth
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4cc937dcc99cd9ae45e5f9bfbf6bc5ab64112b8f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13292.jpg]
[Click_here_to_view_a_printable_PDF_version]
(Ord. No. 364-16. Passed 5-2-16, eff. 5-4-16)
§ 348.03 Applicability
   In a district created under this chapter, the regulations of the underlying
zoning district shall govern except where in conflict with the regulations of
the applicable district created under this chapter, in which case the
regulations of the applicable district created under this chapter shall govern.
(Ord. No. 364-16. Passed 5-2-16, eff. 5-4-16)
§ 348.04 Urban Form Overlay (UF) District
   (a)   Purpose. The Urban Form Overlay (UF) District is established to foster
a high level of walkability and design quality for Cleveland's urban streets.
The UF will do this by requiring pedestrian-oriented building features,
preserving and enhancing the architectural character of new and existing
buildings and protecting public safety by minimizing conflicts between vehicles
and pedestrians.
   (b)   Mapping. Areas designated as UF Districts are planned to be densely
developed areas characterized by a preponderance of buildings set relatively
close to the street with parking located behind the main building. In every UF
District, any street frontage to be considered an "Urban Frontage Line", as
defined in this section, shall be marked on the Zoning Map, with either one or
both sides of a street designated as such.
   (c)   Use Regulations. All uses permitted in the underlying zoning district
shall be permitted in the UF District, except that the following uses shall be
regulated as follows:
      (1)   Open sales lots are prohibited;
      (2)   Gas station pump islands are prohibited within the urban street
space;
      (3)   Any business served by a drive-thru shall have all points of
customer interaction located outside of the urban street space; and
      (4)   A parking lot as a main use is prohibited.
   (d)   New Construction and Additions.
 
(1)   Setbacks.
                                                                                                    All other
                                                                              Single-family, two-   building
   A.   Front yard depth; principal street frontage                     family, townhouse: 0  types: 0 ft.
                                                                              ft. min., 10 ft. max. min., 8 ft.
                                                                                                    max.
                                                                                                    All other
                                                                              Single-family, two-   building
   B.   Front yard depth; secondary street frontage                     family, townhouse: 0  types: 0 ft.
                                                                              ft. min., 6 ft. max.  min., 6 ft.
                                                                                                    max.
   C.   Interior side yard depth                                        0 ft. min.
   D.   Rear yard depth                                                 3 ft. min.
(2)   Building Configuration.
                                                                              80% min. of principal street
                                                                              frontage; 20% of this requirement
   A.   Frontage build-out; principal street frontage                   may be met with a streetscreen
                                                                              Streetscreens shall be masonry and
                                                                              min. 3.5' in height
   B.   Frontage build-out, secondary street frontage                   100% min. of the urban street space
   C.   Active use; first story principal and secondary street frontage Required on 60% of frontage
                                                                              buildout
   D.   Floor area ratio                                                No max
                                                                                                     All other
                                                                                                     building
                                                                                                     types:
                                                                                                     Required:
                                                                              Single-                Each use
                                                                              family,                fronting a
                                                                              two-                   principal or
                                                                              family,                secondary
                                                                              townhouse:             street
                                                                              Each       Multi-      frontage
                                                                              first-     family      shall
                                                                              story unit residential:provide a
                                                                              fronting a Required:   main
                                                                              principal  At least    pedestrian
                                                                              or         one main    entrance to
   E.   Entrances                                                       secondary  pedestrian  that
                                                                              street     entrance    frontage.
                                                                              shall      from a      Such
                                                                              provide a  principal   entrance
                                                                              main       or          shall be
                                                                              pedestrian secondary   recessed to
                                                                              entrance   street      prevent
                                                                              to that    frontage.   doors
                                                                              principal              swinging
                                                                              or                     over the
                                                                              secondary              ROW,
                                                                              street                 including
                                                                              frontage.              patio space
                                                                                                     in the ROW,
                                                                                                     under
                                                                                                     Section
                                                                                                     3109.03.
                                                                              First-story           First-story
                                                                              residential:          non-
   F.   Height of finished first floor above grade                      18 in. min., 5.5 ft.  residential:
                                                                              max, building lobby   0 ft. min.
                                                                              may be at 0 ft.
(3)   Building Design Features.
                                                                              75% min. of the frontage buildout
   A.   First-story glazing, non-residential; principal and secondary stbetween 3' and 8' above grade
                                                                              (excluding streetscreens) shall be
                                                                              transparent windows and doors
                                                                              45% min. of the frontage buildout
   B.   First-story glazing, residential: principal and secondary streetbetween 3' and 8' above grade shall
                                                                              be transparent windows and doors
                                                                              Single-family, two-
                                                                              family, townhouse:
                                                                              Required on 50% min.
                                                                              of all units facing
                                                                              both the principal    All other
   C.   Architectural articulation required: Balconies, bays, awnings,  and secondary street  building
sunshades, planter boxes, or similar                                          frontage;             types:
                                                                              balconies, if used,   Not required.
                                                                              shall be 1 ft. min.
                                                                              depth;
                                                                              balcony railing
                                                                              transparency: 30%
                                                                              min.
                                                                              First-story:
                                                                              Glass in any dimension is
                                                                              permitted.
                                                                              All other materials shall be human-
                                                                              scaled, except materials used on
                                                                              building bases (up to 3 ft. above
   D.   Materials; principal and secondary street frontage              grade) may be larger in size.
                                                                              Above first-story:
                                                                              Materials in any dimension are
                                                                              permitted.
                                                                              Prohibited: plain and split-face
                                                                              concrete masonry units, synthetic
                                                                              stucco, vinyl siding
(4)   Parking, Garages and Valet.
                                                                                                    New
                                                                              Existing Buildings    Construction:
                                                                              and Additions:        Min: 65% of
                                                                              Min: 25% of total     total
                                                                              required by Section   required by
                                                                              349.04, Max: 120% of  Section
                                                                              total required by     349.04, Max:
                                                                              Section               120% of total
                                                                              349.04                required by
   A.   Required parking                                                                      Section
                                                                                                    349.04
                                                                              Garage or structured parking shall
                                                                              have no maximum number of spaces.
                                                                              Sub-market rate housing in an
                                                                              existing building or new
                                                                              construction shall have a Min. 25%
                                                                              of total required by Section
                                                                              349.04, Max: 120% of total required
                                                                              by Section
                                                                              349.04
                                                                                         Townhouse:

                                                                                         Two-way
                                                                                         traffic:
                                                                              Single-    18 ft.
                                                                              family,    width max.
                                                                              Two-
                                                                              family:    One-way
                                                                                         traffic:   All other
                                                                              10 ft.     10 ft.     building
                                                                              max.       width      types:
                                                                              width/lot  max.; 20
                                                                                         ft. max.   20 ft. max.
                                                                                         aggregate  aggregate
                                                                                         width per  width per
                                                                                         frontage   frontage;
   B.   Parking access, drives and garage access
      Where a secondary street frontage or alley abuts the property, no                       10 ft. max.
access is permitted on a principal street frontage                            Prohibited: Garage    opening
                                                                              doors facing a        height for
                                                                              principal or          parking
                                                                              secondary street      entrances;
                                                                              frontage unless
                                                                              located behind the    14 ft. max.
                                                                              rear wall of the main opening
                                                                              building              height for
                                                                                                    service
                                                                              Garage doors          access
                                                                              perpendicular to
                                                                              secondary street
                                                                              frontage: Permitted;
                                                                              3.5 ft. tall masonry
                                                                              streetscreen required



                                                                              Alley: Unlimited
   C.   Surface parking; location                                       Primary street frontage: Behind the
                                                                              rear wall of the main building 1
   D.   Parking lot aisle width                                         22 ft. max.
   E.   Parking and drive aisles between a front building wall and the pProhibited
ROW
                                                                              Shall not reduce existing sidewalk
   F.   Valet zones                                                     width, or shall maintain 8' min.
                                                                              through pedestrian sidewalk zone
1   Where no alley or side street abuts the property, off-street parking between the main building actual front
setback and the rear wall of the main building shall be permitted, however limited to one, single loaded row of
parking spaces adjacent to the main building. A masonry streetscreen min 3.5 ft. min. in height shall be required
between the permitted parking and the public ROW.
(5)   Transition Strips and Screening.
                                                                              3 ft. min. deep landscape strip and
   A.   Secondary street frontage                                       streetscreen required
                                                                              Streetscreens shall be masonry and
                                                                              a min. 3.5' in height
   B.   Interior Side                                                   Not required
   C.   Rear abutting a less intensive use                              6 ft. high screen element, 100%
                                                                              opacity
                                                                              Liner building along principal and
                                                                              secondary street frontages
                                                                              required.
                                                                              Height of Liner Building shall be
                                                                              equal to or greater than the height
                                                                              of the parking structure. Frontage
   D.   Screening of structured parking and enclosed parking            build-out of liner building shall
                                                                              be equal to or greater than the
                                                                              width of the structured or enclosed
                                                                              parking it screens, less permitted
                                                                              access openings.
                                                                              Liner building shall meet all the
                                                                              requirements of any Overlay
                                                                              District in which it is located.
 
   (e)   For purposes of this section, "principal street frontage" means the
side or sides of a public street frontage that is specifically designated on
the Zoning Map or where there is only one street frontage, it is the street
line.
   (f)   Variances.
      (1)   An applicant seeking a variance shall submit a site plan, color
elevations, and other drawings as requested or necessary to compare and
contrast a code compliant building with the proposed non-compliant building.
Such exhibits shall demonstrate, based upon a preponderance of competent,
probative evidence as evaluated under the guidelines set forth in division (f)
(2) below, that the standard for granting a variance has been met.
      (2)   To ensure the development of a safe and cohesive district, the
Board of Zoning Appeals shall have limited authority to grant variances from
the following specific provisions of the UF District requirements.
         A.   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have no authority to grant a
variance to eliminate the requirement for the first story of a liner building.
Where the Board of Zoning Appeals grants a variance to eliminate the
requirement for a liner building above the first story, all building facades
above the first story shall have architectural treatments that screen the view
of parking from the ROW by the use of walls, glazing, decorative screens,
durable plantings, or similar materials. Exposed structural spandrels are
prohibited.
         B.   Parking Requirements. The Board may grant a variance above the
maximum amount of parking spaces permitted by this section, where the applicant
has either shown a good faith effort to first utilize district parking, on-
street parking and /or secure shared-use agreements with adjacent property
owners or has agreed to make its parking lot available for shared parking with
neighboring businesses.
(Ord. No. 364-16. Passed 5-2-16, eff. 5-4-16)
§ 348.05 Urban Core Overlay (UC) District
   (a)   Purpose. The Urban Core Overlay (UC) District is established to foster
the development of dense, vibrant, mixed-use neighborhoods that encourage a
quality pedestrian experience. The UC achieves this goal for urban cores by
setting forth requirements for consistent street walls, pedestrian-oriented
building features, minimizing conflicts between vehicles and pedestrians, and
screening of off-street parking and service areas.
   (b)   Mapping. The UC District may be overlayed on any zoning district where
authorized by ordinance of Council. Areas designated as UC Districts are
planned to be developed in accordance with the purpose set forth herein.
   (c)   Use Regulations. All uses permitted in the underlying zoning district
shall be permitted in the UC District, except that the following uses as
regulated below:
      (1)   Open sales lots are prohibited;
      (2)   Any establishment served by a drive-through lane providing access
to windows or other facilities at which food or merchandise can be ordered or
picked up, or business can be transacted by a person in a motor vehicle is
prohibited when accessed from a principal or secondary street frontage.
   (d)   New Construction and Additions.
(1)   Block Length.
                                                                                  500 ft. max.; No development shall
   A.   Block length                                                        cause a net increase in existing
                                                                                  block length.
   B.   Block perimeter                                                     1,400 ft. max.
   C.   Mid-block pedestrian connection or public alley                     Block lengths over 400 ft.
(2)   Setbacks.
                                                                                                All other building
                                                                                                types above the
                                                                                                ground floor:
                                                                                  Single-       80% of frontage
                                                                                  family, two-  build-out: 0 ft. to 3
   A.   Front yard depth; principal street frontage                         family,       ft. max., or
                                                                                  townhouse: 0  equivalent ground
                                                                                  ft. min., 10  plane area
                                                                                  ft. max.      20% of frontage
                                                                                                build-out: 12 ft.
                                                                                                max., or equivalent
                                                                                                ground plane area
                                                                                                All other building
                                                                                                types above the
                                                                                                ground floor:
                                                                                  Single-       80% of frontage
                                                                                  family, two-  build-out: 0 ft. to 3
   B.   Front yard depth; secondary street frontage                         family,       ft. max., or
                                                                                  townhouse: 0  equivalent ground
                                                                                  ft. min., 6   plane area
                                                                                  ft. max.      20% of frontage
                                                                                                build-out: 12 ft.
                                                                                                max., or equivalent
                                                                                                ground plane area
   C.   Interior side yard depth                                            0 ft. min.
   D.   Rear yard depth                                                     0 ft. min.
(3)   Building Configuration. 
                                                                                  90% min.; the frontage build-out
                                                                                  requirement may be met with a
                                                                                  streetscreen, plaza, or square for
                                                                                  up to 10% of the street frontage.
   A.   Frontage build-out, principal and secondary street frontage         Streetscreens shall be 3.5' in
                                                                                  height min.
                                                                                  Streetscreens screening non-active
                                                                                  uses shall be 6' in height min. and
                                                                                  shall have 50% opacity min.
                                                                                  Required on 70% of each of the
   B.   Active use; first-story                                             principal and secondary street
                                                                                  frontages
                                                                                  Minimum building height at actual
                                                                                  setback shall be 1/2 the width of
                                                                                  the street ROW on which the
                                                                                  building fronts. (ex. where a
   C.   Building height                                                     building fronts a 60' right of way
                                                                                  ROW, minimum building height shall
                                                                                  be 30')
                                                                                  Maximum height shall be as
                                                                                  regulated by the underlying Height
                                                                                  District.
   D.   Floor area ratio                                                    No max.
                                                                                                          All other
                                                                                                          building
                                                                                                          types:
                                                                                                          Required:
                                                                                  Single-                 Each use
                                                                                  family,                 fronting a
                                                                                  two-                    principal
                                                                                  family,                 or
                                                                                  townhouse:              secondary
                                                                                  Each                    street
                                                                                  first-     Multi-family frontage
                                                                                  story unit residential: shall
                                                                                  fronting a Required: At provide a
                                                                                  principal  least one    main
                                                                                  or         main         pedestrian
                                                                                  secondary  pedestrian   entrance to
   E.   Entrances                                                           street     entrance     that
                                                                                  shall      from a       frontage.
                                                                                  provide a  principal or Such
                                                                                  main       secondary    entrance
                                                                                  pedestrian street       shall be
                                                                                  entrance   frontage.    recessed to
                                                                                  to that                 prevent
                                                                                  principal               doors
                                                                                  or                      swinging
                                                                                  secondary               over the
                                                                                  street                  ROW,
                                                                                  frontage.               including
                                                                                                          patio space
                                                                                                          in the ROW,
                                                                                                          under
                                                                                                          Section
                                                                                                          3109.03.
                                                                                  First-story
                                                                                  residential:
                                                                                  18 in. min.,
                                                                                  5.5 ft. max,
                                                                                  subject to
                                                                                  increase of   First-story non-
   F.   Height of finished first floor above grade                          up to 3 ft.   residential:
                                                                                  to            0 ft. min.
                                                                                  accommodate
                                                                                  slope across
                                                                                  site.
                                                                                  building
                                                                                  lobby may be
                                                                                  at 0 ft.
   G.   First-story height; non-residential, principal and secondary street 11 ft. min. finished floor to
frontages                                                                         finished ceiling
(4)   Building Design Features. 
                                                                                  60% min. of each of the principal
   A.   First-story glazing, non-residential                                and secondary street frontages
                                                                                  between 3' and 8' above grade shall
                                                                                  be transparent windows and doors
                                                                                  30% min. of each of the principal
   B.   First-story glazing, residential                                    and secondary street frontages
                                                                                  between 3' and 8' above grade shall
                                                                                  be transparent windows and doors
                                                                                  One vertical break required at
   C.   First-story articulation; frontage build-out                        intervals not to exceed 60 ft. (ex.
                                                                                  piers, columns, and/or 3" min.
                                                                                  change in facade plane)
                                                                                  Single-
                                                                                  family, two-
                                                                                  family,
                                                                                  townhouse:
                                                                                  Required on
                                                                                  50% min. of
                                                                                  all units
                                                                                  facing each
                                                                                  of the
   D.   Architectural articulation required: Balconies, bays, awnings, sunshprincipal and All other building
planter boxes, or similar                                                         secondary     types:
                                                                                  street        Not required.
                                                                                  frontages;
                                                                                  Balconies, if
                                                                                  used, shall
                                                                                  be 1 ft. min.
                                                                                  depth, and
                                                                                  railings
                                                                                  shall have
                                                                                  minimum 30%
                                                                                  transparency.
                                                                                  Single-
                                                                                  family, two-
                                                                                  family,
                                                                                  townhouse:
                                                                                  Glass in any
                                                                                  dimension is
                                                                                  permitted.
                                                                                  All other
                                                                                  materials
                                                                                  shall be
                                                                                  human-scaled,
                                                                                  except        All other building
                                                                                  materials     types:
                                                                                  used on       Prohibited: plain and
   E.   Materials; principal and secondary street frontage                  building      split-face concrete
                                                                                  bases (up to  masonry units,
                                                                                  4 ft. above   synthetic stucco,
                                                                                  grade) may be vinyl siding
                                                                                  larger in
                                                                                  size.
                                                                                  Prohibited:
                                                                                  plain and
                                                                                  split-face
                                                                                  concrete
                                                                                  masonry
                                                                                  units,
                                                                                  synthetic
                                                                                  stucco, vinyl
                                                                                  siding
(5)   Parking, Loading and Garages.
   A.   Required parking                                                    None
                                                                                  Liner building or facade along
                                                                                  principal and secondary street
                                                                                  frontages that does not appear as a
                                                                                  parking structure required.
                                                                                  Height of liner building or facade
                                                                                  shall be equal to or greater than
                                                                                  the height of the parking
                                                                                  structure, and no less than
                                                                                  required by division (f)(3)C.
   B.   Screening of surface parking, structured parking, and enclosed parkibuilding height.
                                                                                  Frontage build-out of liner
                                                                                  building or facade shall be equal
                                                                                  to or greater than the width of the
                                                                                  surface parking, structured
                                                                                  parking, or enclosed parking it
                                                                                  screens, less permitted access
                                                                                  openings.
                                                                                  Liner building shall meet all the
                                                                                  requirements of any Overlay
                                                                                  District in which it is located.
                                                                                             Townhouse:
                                                                                             Two-way
                                                                                             traffic: 18
                                                                                  Single-    ft. width
                                                                                  family,    max.
                                                                                  two-       One-way
                                                                                  family:    traffic: 10  All other
                                                                                  10 ft.     ft. width    building
                                                                                  max.       max.; 20 ft. types:
                                                                                  width/lot  max.         Max. single
                                                                                             aggregate    opening
                                                                                             width per    width: 24
                                                                                             frontage     ft.
                                                                                                          Max.
                                                                                                          opening
                                                                                                          height for
                                                                                                          service
                                                                                                          access:
                                                                                                          14ft.
                                                                                                          Max.
                                                                                                          opening
                                                                                                          height for
   C.   Parking access, drives, garages, and service access                                         parking
                                                                                                          entrance:
Where a secondary street frontage or alley abuts the property, no access is                               10 ft.
permitted on a principal street frontage                                                                  Aggregate
                                                                                                          width of
                                                                                                          openings
                                                                                  Prohibited: Garage      per
                                                                                  doors facing a          development
                                                                                  principal street        phase shall
                                                                                  frontage                not exceed
                                                                                                          the number
                                                                                                          of street
                                                                                                          frontages
                                                                                                          of the
                                                                                                          development
                                                                                                          phase
                                                                                                          multiplied
                                                                                                          by 24 ft.







                                                                                  Alley: Unlimited
                                                                                  Shall not reduce existing sidewalk
   D.   Valet Zones                                                         width, or shall maintain 8' min.
                                                                                  through pedestrian sidewalk zone.
 
   (e)   For purposes of this section, "principal street frontage" means the
street line where the principal building entrance and address are located.
   (f)   The Commission may approve an application under this section with
design and dimensional elements that are in accordance with the following
standards when the site plans, color elevations, or other drawings demonstrate
the proposed building configuration, design, or garage better meet the purpose
of the Urban Core Overlay:
      (1)   Frontage build-out should not be less than sixty percent (60%) on
each of the principal and secondary street frontages;
      (2)   Active use on the first-story should not be less than fifty percent
(50%) on each of the principal and secondary street frontages;
      (3)   First-story non-residential glazing should not be less than fifty
percent (50%) on each of the principal and secondary street frontages;
      (4)   Garage doors facing a principal or secondary street frontage for
single-family, two-family and townhouse units should be no wider than ten (10)
feet.
(Ord. No. 364-16. Passed 5-2-16, eff. 5-4-16)
CHAPTER 349 – OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
349.01   Required Accessory Off-Street Parking
349.02   Existing Off-Street Parking Facilities
349.03   Change of Use or Enlargements of Premises
349.04   Required Parking Spaces
349.05   Location of Required Space
349.06   Mixed Use Facilities
349.07   Access and Maintenance of Off-Street Parking Spaces
349.08   Screening of Off-Street Parking Spaces
349.09   Lighting for Off-Street Parking Spaces
349.10   Planned Institutional Development Area
349.11   Exceptions
349.12   Off-Street Parking Committee; Authority
349.13   Permitted Garages and Parking Space in Residence Districts
349.14   Surface Parking Lots in Designated Downtown Area Districts
349.15   Bicycle Parking
349.16   Reserved
349.17   Off-Street Loading Required
Cross-reference:
   Off-street parking requirements in Residence-Office District, CO
337.11 et seq.
   Residential Parking District: Purpose, uses, maintenance, CO
Ch. 339
   Trucking terminal location restricted, CO
347.01
Statutory reference:
   Off-street parking facilities, RC 717.05 et seq.
§ 349.01 Required Accessory Off-Street Parking
   (a)   Except as provided in Sections
329.04(b),
337.13 and
349.10 to
349.12, every use or structure, instituted, constructed or erected after July
2, 1971, shall provide off-street parking facilities in accordance with the
requirements of Section
349.04 for the use of occupants, employees, visitors or patrons.
   (b)   Any building or structure may be modernized, altered, repaired or
substantially rebuilt for any reason, provided there is no increase in floor
area or capacity and there is no change of use without providing additional
off-street parking facilities.
   (c)   Whenever the existing use of a building or structure shall hereafter
be changed to a new use, parking facilities shall be provided as required for
such new use. However, if the building or structure was erected prior to July
2, 1971, additional parking facilities are mandatory only in the amount by
which the requirements for the new use exceed those for the existing use if the
latter were subject to the off-street parking requirements of this chapter.
(Ord No. 1236-A-67. Passed 6-28-71, eff. 7-2-71)
§ 349.02 Existing Off-Street Parking Facilities
   In all use districts, existing off-street parking facilities shall not
voluntarily be reduced below the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord No. 1236-A-67. Passed 6-28-71, eff. 7-2-71)
§ 349.03 Change of Use or Enlargements of Premises
   In all use districts, when any building, structure or premises has a change
of use, addition of dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity or other
units of measurement specified herein for required parking facilities, which
creates a need for an increase of more than fifteen percent (15%) in accessory
off-street parking, additional facilities as required herein shall be provided
only for such increase in use. However, the off-street parking spaces for such
addition or enlargement plus any off-street parking spaces in existence prior
to July 2, 1971, need not exceed the total amount of off-street parking spaces
which would be required for the entire use if constructed new.
(Ord No. 1236-A-67. Passed 6-28-71, eff. 7-2-71)
§ 349.04 Required Parking Spaces
   Accessory off-street parking spaces shall be provided and maintained in
accordance with the requirements set forth in the following table:
Uses Required Accessory Off-Street Parking Spaces
                                                                                  Required
Uses                                                                              Accessory Off-
                                                                                  Street Parking
                                                                                  Spaces
(a)Residential Uses
   One-family or two-family dwellings and Class A Multiple Dwellings           1 for each
                                                                                  dwelling unit.
                                                                                  1 for each 4
                                                                                  beds, plus 1
                                                                                  for the owner,
                                                                                  operator or
                                                                                  manager living
   Rooming houses, dormitories, fraternity and sorority houses, YMCA, YWCA     on the
                                                                                  premises, plus
                                                                                  1 for each
                                                                                  other
                                                                                  employee,
                                                                                  expected on
                                                                                  premises.
                                                                                  1 for each 3
   Housing for the elderly                                                     dwelling
                                                                                  units.
                                                                                  1 for each
                                                                                  dwelling unit,
                                                                                  plus 1 for
   Hotels                                                                      each 4 guest
                                                                                  rooms, plus 1
                                                                                  for each 3
                                                                                  employees.
                                                                                  1 for each
                                                                                  guest room,
   Motels and tourist homes                                                    plus 1 for
                                                                                  each 2
                                                                                  employees.
                                                                                  1 for each
                                                                                  family unit,
   Tourist parks or camps                                                      plus 1 for
                                                                                  each 2
                                                                                  employees.
   Trailer camps                                                               1 for each
                                                                                  trailer.
(b)Accessory Uses in Residence District
   Home occupations:
   (1)   Medical or dental offices                                          3 for each
                                                                                  establishment.
   (2)   Clergyman, architect, engineer, attorney or similar professional of2 for each
                                                                                  establishment.
                                                                                  Total parking
                                                                                  area equal to
   Farms, truck-gardens, nurseries, stables where sales are made on premises   25% of the lot
                                                                                  area devoted
                                                                                  to sales.
(c)Schools
                                                                                  1 for each 2
                                                                                  staff members
                                                                                  and other
                                                                                  employees. See
   Day nurseries, children’s boarding homes, kindergartens, elementary grade also
junior high schools                                                               requirements
                                                                                  for
                                                                                  auditoriums,
                                                                                  gymnasiums and
                                                                                  stadiums.
                                                                                  1 for each 2
                                                                                  staff members
                                                                                  and other
                                                                                  employees,
                                                                                  plus 1 for
                                                                                  each 12 seats
                                                                                  in a classroom
                                                                                  based on
   Senior high schools                                                         planned
                                                                                  classroom
                                                                                  capacity. See
                                                                                  also
                                                                                  requirements
                                                                                  for
                                                                                  auditoriums,
                                                                                  gymnasiums and
                                                                                  stadiums.
                                                                                  1 for each 2
                                                                                  employees,
                                                                                  plus 1 for
                                                                                  each 10 seats
                                                                                  in a classroom
                                                                                  based on
                                                                                  planned
   Trade, vocational business and dancing schools; colleges and universities   classroom
                                                                                  capacity. See
                                                                                  also
                                                                                  requirements
                                                                                  for
                                                                                  auditoriums,
                                                                                  gymnasiums and
                                                                                  stadiums.
(d)Institutional Uses
                                                                                  1 for each 4
                                                                                  beds, plus 1
   Hospitals and sanitariums                                                   for each 3
                                                                                  doctors, plus
                                                                                  1 for each 3
                                                                                  employees.
                                                                                  1 for each 200
   Clinics, health and medical centers                                         square feet of
                                                                                  gross floor
                                                                                  area.
                                                                                  1 for each
                                                                                  staff member,
                                                                                  including
                                                                                  doctors and
   Institutions for children and the aged, convalescent homes, rest homes,     nurses, plus 1
nursing homes, day nurseries, orphanages                                          for each 3
                                                                                  other
                                                                                  employees,
                                                                                  plus 1 for
                                                                                  each 6 beds.
                                                                                  1 for each 300
                                                                                  square feet of
   Penal and correctional institutions                                         gross floor
                                                                                  area.
                                                                                   
(e)Places of Public Assembly
                                                                                  1 for each 100
                                                                                  square feet of
   Airports and other aircraft landing and servicing facilities                gross floor
                                                                                  area, plus 1
                                                                                  for each 3
                                                                                  employees.
                                                                                  Total parking
                                                                                  area equal to
   Amusement parks, circuses, carnivals and other outdoor amusement or recreatitwice the
uses                                                                              total lot area
                                                                                  devoted to
                                                                                  such use.
                                                                                  1 for each 6
                                                                                  seats or total
                                                                                  parking area
                                                                                  equal to 3
                                                                                  times the
                                                                                  gross floor
                                                                                  area,
                                                                                  whichever is
                                                                                  greater. Where
                                                                                  there are no
                                                                                  fixed seats
   Arenas, armories, assembly halls, auditoriums, concert halls, convention    each 24 inches
halls, dance halls, exhibition halls, gymnasiums, indoor theaters, pool or        of bench or
billiard halls, stadiums and similar indoor amusement or recreation uses          pew shall be
                                                                                  considered 1
                                                                                  seat. Where
                                                                                  there are no
                                                                                  seats, benches
                                                                                  or pews, each
                                                                                  20 square feet
                                                                                  of ground or
                                                                                  floor area
                                                                                  usable for
                                                                                  seating shall
                                                                                  be considered
                                                                                  1 seat.
   Bowling alleys                                                              7 for each
                                                                                  lane.
                                                                                  1 for each 100
                                                                                  square feet of
   Bus depots                                                                  gross floor
                                                                                  area, plus 1
                                                                                  for each 2
                                                                                  employees.
                                                                                  Total parking
   Clubs and lodges including fraternity and sorority houses without sleeping  area equal to
accommodations                                                                    1/2 the gross
                                                                                  floor area.
                                                                                  1 for each
                                                                                  employee, plus
   Commercial swimming pools                                                   1 for each 40
                                                                                  square feet of
                                                                                  pool surface
                                                                                  and deck area.
   Golf courses                                                                8 for each
                                                                                  green.
                                                                                  2 for each
                                                                                  driving tee,
   Golf driving ranges                                                         plus 1 for
                                                                                  each 2
                                                                                  employees.
                                                                                  1 for each 4
                                                                                  employees,
                                                                                  plus 1 for
   Public libraries and museums                                                each 1,200
                                                                                  square feet of
                                                                                  gross floor
                                                                                  area.
   Municipal swimming pools, outdoor                                           1 for each
                                                                                  employee.
   Places of worship                                                           1 for each 6
                                                                                  seats.
                                                                                  1 for each 100
                                                                                  square feet of
   Railroad passenger stations                                                 gross floor
                                                                                  area, plus 1
                                                                                  for each 3
                                                                                  employees.
                                                                                  1 for each 2
                                                                                  employees
                                                                                  expected on
                                                                                  the premises
                                                                                  during the
   Rapid transit stations, except in the Central Business District, as defined largest work
Section                                                                           shift period,
325.12                                                                            plus 1 for
                                                                                  each 10
                                                                                  passengers
                                                                                  entering the
                                                                                  station during
                                                                                  the peak hour
                                                                                  of operation.
                                                                                  1 for each 150
                                                                                  square feet of
   Recreation and community centers                                            gross floor
                                                                                  area, plus 1
                                                                                  for each
                                                                                  employee.
                                                                                  Reservoir
                                                                                  parking area
                                                                                  with spaces
   Outdoor theaters                                                            equal in
                                                                                  number to 10%
                                                                                  of the
                                                                                  capacity in
                                                                                  vehicles.
(f)Retail Sales Uses
                                                                                  1 for each
                                                                                  employee, plus
                                                                                  1 for each 100
                                                                                  square feet of
                                                                                  floor area
                                                                                  devoted to
   Bars, taverns, restaurants, luncheonettes, cafeterias, boarding houses and  patron use or
other eating places                                                               1 for each 4
                                                                                  seats based on
                                                                                  maximum
                                                                                  seating
                                                                                  capacity,
                                                                                  whichever is
                                                                                  greater.
                                                                                  For
                                                                                  establishments
                                                                                  having less
                                                                                  than 2,000
                                                                                  square feet of
                                                                                  gross floor
                                                                                  area, 1 for
                                                                                  each 1,000
   Establishments for the sale of boats, farm implements, furniture, gymnasium square feet of
supplies, hospital supplies, office supplies, machinery, major appliances, new    gross floor
automobiles                                                                       area. For
                                                                                  establishments
                                                                                  having 2,000
                                                                                  square feet of
                                                                                  gross floor
                                                                                  area or more,
                                                                                  1 for each 700
                                                                                  square feet of
                                                                                  gross floor
                                                                                  area.
                                                                                  For
                                                                                  establishments
                                                                                  having less
                                                                                  than 2,000
                                                                                  square feet of
                                                                                  gross floor
                                                                                  area, 1 for
                                                                                  each 700
                                                                                  square feet of
   Establishments for the sale of china, floor covering, hardware, household   gross floor
equipment, paint, small appliances, wallpaper and other retail sales items        area. For
                                                                                  establishments
                                                                                  having 2,000
                                                                                  square feet of
                                                                                  gross floor
                                                                                  area or more,
                                                                                  1 for each 500
                                                                                  square feet of
                                                                                  gross floor
                                                                                  area.
                                                                                  For
                                                                                  establishments
                                                                                  having less
                                                                                  than 2,000
                                                                                  square feet of
                                                                                  gross floor
                                                                                  area, 1 for
                                                                                  each 500
                                                                                  square feet of
                                                                                  gross floor
                                                                                  area. For
                                                                                  establishments
                                                                                  having 2,000
                                                                                  square feet of
                                                                                  gross floor
                                                                                  area up to and
   Food stores, supermarkets                                                   including
                                                                                  4,000 square
                                                                                  feet of gross
                                                                                  floor area, 1
                                                                                  for each 300
                                                                                  square feet of
                                                                                  gross floor
                                                                                  area. For
                                                                                  establishments
                                                                                  having over
                                                                                  4,000 square
                                                                                  feet of gross
                                                                                  floor area, 1
                                                                                  for each 150
                                                                                  square feet of
                                                                                  gross floor
                                                                                  area.
                                                                                  For
                                                                                  establishments
                                                                                  having over
                                                                                  10,000 square
                                                                                  feet of gross
                                                                                  floor area,
                                                                                  self-service
   Discount department stores                                                  facilities and
                                                                                  4 or more
                                                                                  checkout
                                                                                  booths, 1 for
                                                                                  each 150
                                                                                  square feet of
                                                                                  gross floor
                                                                                  area.
                                                                                  For
                                                                                  establishments
                                                                                  having 200,000
                                                                                  square feet of
   Department stores                                                           gross floor
                                                                                  area or more,
                                                                                  1 for each 300
                                                                                  square feet of
                                                                                  gross floor
                                                                                  area.
                                                                                  Total parking
                                                                                  area equal to
   Nurseries or plant-husbandry, garden supplies, agricultural produce and othe25% of the
outdoor retail sales uses                                                         total lot
                                                                                  area, plus 1
                                                                                  for each 2
                                                                                  employees.
                                                                                  1 for each 100
   Gasoline service stations                                                   square feet of
                                                                                  gross floor
                                                                                  area.
                                                                                  Total parking
                                                                                  area
   Used motor vehicle sales lots                                               equivalent to
                                                                                  25% of the
                                                                                  gross lot
                                                                                  area.
                                                                                  1 for each
   Wholesale establishments                                                    1,000 square
                                                                                  feet of gross
                                                                                  floor area.
(g)Retail Service Uses
                                                                                  1 for each 500
   Banks, governmental, business and professional office buildings             square feet of
                                                                                  gross floor
                                                                                  area.
                                                                                  5 for each
                                                                                  doctor or
                                                                                  dentist, plus
                                                                                  1 for each 2
                                                                                  employees; or
   Medical or dental offices, and medical or dental laboratories               1 for each 150
                                                                                  square feet of
                                                                                  gross floor
                                                                                  area,
                                                                                  whichever is
                                                                                  greater.
                                                                                  1 for each 3
                                                                                  employees,
                                                                                  plus 1 for the
                                                                                  owner or
   Automobile laundries                                                        manager, and
                                                                                  reservoir
                                                                                  spaces equal
                                                                                  to 5 times the
                                                                                  capacity of
                                                                                  the laundry.
                                                                                  8 for each
                                                                                  slumber room,
                                                                                  chapel or
                                                                                  parlor or 1
                                                                                  for each 100
                                                                                  square feet of
   Mortuary and undertaking establishments                                     floor area of
                                                                                  assembly rooms
                                                                                  whichever is
                                                                                  greater, plus
                                                                                  1 for each
                                                                                  vehicle
                                                                                  maintained on
                                                                                  the premises.
                                                                                  1 for each 2
                                                                                  employees. See
   Radio or television stations                                                also
                                                                                  requirements
                                                                                  for
                                                                                  auditoriums.
                                                                                  1 for each 500
   Repair and service garages                                                  square feet of
                                                                                  gross floor
                                                                                  area.
                                                                                  1 for each 500
   Other retail service uses                                                   square feet of
                                                                                  gross floor
                                                                                  area.
(h)Public Service Uses
   Police and fire stations, sewage treatment plants, static transformer       2 for each 3
stations, telephone exchanges, water filtration plants, water reservoirs and      employees.
other public utilities
(i)All Uses Permitted and Developed in a Shopping Center District
                                                                                  8 for each
   Bowling alleys                                                              lane, plus 1
                                                                                  for each 2
                                                                                  employees.
   Indoor theaters                                                             1 for each 2
                                                                                  seats.
                                                                                  5 for each
                                                                                  physician or
                                                                                  dentist, plus
                                                                                  1 for each 2
                                                                                  other
   Medical and dental offices                                                  employees, or
                                                                                  1 for each 150
                                                                                  square feet of
                                                                                  gross floor
                                                                                  area,
                                                                                  whichever is
                                                                                  greater.
                                                                                  1 for each 2
                                                                                  seats based on
   Restaurants and other eating places                                         maximum
                                                                                  seating
                                                                                  capacity.
                                                                                  4.5 for each
   All other retail sales and services, uses.                                  1,000 square
                                                                                  feet of gross
                                                                                  floor area.
(j)All Uses Permitted in Industry Districts Only
                                                                                  1 for each 2
                                                                                  employees
                                                                                  expected to be
                                                                                  on the
                                                                                  premises
                                                                                  during the
                                                                                  largest work
   Storage or warehouse uses                                                   shift period
                                                                                  or total
                                                                                  parking area
                                                                                  equivalent to
                                                                                  10% of the
                                                                                  gross floor
                                                                                  area,
                                                                                  whichever is
                                                                                  greater.
                                                                                  1 for each
                                                                                  employee plus
   Junk, coal, lumber, contractors or other open storage uses                  space equal to
                                                                                  15% of the
                                                                                  gross lot
                                                                                  area.
                                                                                  1 for each 3
                                                                                  employees
                                                                                  expected to be
                                                                                  on the
                                                                                  premises
                                                                                  during the
                                                                                  largest work
   Other permitted industrial uses                                             shift period
                                                                                  or total
                                                                                  parking area
                                                                                  equivalent to
                                                                                  25% of the
                                                                                  gross floor
                                                                                  area,
                                                                                  whichever is
                                                                                  lesser.
                                                                                  Parking spaces
                                                                                  shall be
                                                                                  provided on
(k)Other Permitted Uses in All Districts                                          the same basis
                                                                                  as required
                                                                                  for the most
                                                                                  similar listed
                                                                                  use.
 
   As used in this chapter, “gross floor area” in the case of offices,
merchandising or service types of uses means the total floor area used or
intended to be used for service to the people as customers, patrons, clients or
patients, or as tenants, including areas occupied by fixtures used for display
or sale of merchandise.
   It shall not mean floors or parts of floors used principally for nonpublic
purposes, such as storage, incidental repair, processing or packaging of
merchandise, for show windows or for offices incidental to the management or
maintenance of stores or buildings when these areas are in separate rooms from
the main use of the building. Floors or parts of floors used principally for
toilet or rest-rooms or for utilities or fitting rooms, dressing rooms and
alteration rooms shall also be excluded from the definition of “gross floor
area”.
(Ord. No. 1045-89. Passed 3-26-90, eff. 5-4-90)
§ 349.05 Location of Required Space
   (a)   The required accessory off-street parking facility shall be located on
the same lot as the use for which it is provided or on a lot within four
hundred (400) feet of the nearest boundary of the lot upon which the use is
located measured by a straight line between the two (2) points; or, the Off-
Street Parking Committee may determine that the building or use in question is
served adequately by a Municipal or private parking facility. All such parking
spaces shall be located behind the setback building line. No such parking space
shall be located within ten (10) feet of any wall of a residential building or
structure if such wall contains a ground floor opening designed to provide
light or ventilation for such building or structure.
   (b)   The separate lot upon which such accessory parking facilities are
provided shall be in the same ownership or control as the building or use to
which the parking facilities are accessory.
   (c)   No required accessory off-street parking space shall be occupied by a
pay telephone or any other structure.
(Ord. No. 1989-01. Passed 10-22-01, eff. 11-1-01 without the signature of the
Mayor)
§ 349.06 Mixed Use Facilities
   Accessory off-street parking spaces required of two (2) or more uses located
on the same lot or parcel may be combined and used jointly by such uses,
provided that the parking spaces provided shall be equal to the total number of
accessory off-street parking spaces required by all such uses. Where a use is
accessory to the main use and is not primarily intended to serve additional
patrons or employees, or generate additional traffic, no additional off-street
parking spaces need be provided for such accessory use.
(Ord. No. 1236-A-67. Passed 6-28-71, eff. 7-2-71)
§ 349.07 Access and Maintenance of Off-Street Parking Spaces
   (a)   Accessory off-street parking spaces, driveways and maneuvering areas
shall be properly graded for drainage so that all water is drained within the
lot providing such parking spaces, surfaced with concrete, asphaltic concrete,
asphalt or other surfacing materials approved by the Director of Building and
Housing, maintained in good condition and free of debris and trash.
   (b)   Accessory off-street parking spaces shall be provided with wheel or
bumper guards that are so located that no part of a parked vehicle will extend
beyond such parking space.
   (c)   The driveway used to provide accessibility to accessory off-street
parking spaces shall be so located and arranged to minimize traffic congestion.
Therefore:
      (1)   Only one (1) such driveway shall be permitted for each one hundred
(100) feet of frontage of the lot providing such parking spaces;
      (2)   No driveway shall be so located that there would be less than
fifteen (15) feet between the point of tangency of the driveway apron radius
and the outside crosswalk line at the intersection when such driveway is on the
approach side of an intersection. In such cases as the driveway is on the
leaving side of the intersection, the requirement shall be five (5) feet
between the outside crosswalk line and the point of tangency of the driveway
apron radius;
      (3)   The maximum width of such driveway shall be thirty (30) feet
measured at right angles to the angle of the driveway entrance. Such driveway
shall have an apron radius at the curb of not less than six (6) feet or a curb
cut of not more than sixty (60) feet and shall provide a means for motor
vehicles to enter and leave the parking facilities without obstructing traffic.
(Ord. No. 1767-07. Passed 4-21-08, eff. 4-28-08)
§ 349.08 Screening of Off-Street Parking Spaces
   Where five (5) or more accessory off-street parking spaces are provided, and
are located on a lot that is adjacent to a Residence District or that adjoins a
building containing dwelling units, such parking spaces shall be screened from
all adjoining lots in the Residence District or a building containing dwelling
units, by an opaque wall, a uniformly painted fence of fire-resistant material
or a strip of land at least four (4) feet wide and densely planted with shrubs
that form a dense screen year-round. Such wall, fence or shrubs shall be at
least three (3) feet, but not more than six (6) feet six (6) inches in height.
However, such wall, fence or shrubs located within twenty-five (25) feet of the
intersection of two (2) or more streets or the intersection of an access
driveway and a street, shall have a maximum height of three (3) feet and a
minimum height of two (2) feet.
   The required screening shall be maintained in good condition at all times.
   No signs shall be permitted to be attached to or hung from the required
screening.
(Ord. No. 1236-A-67. Passed 6-28-71, eff. 7-2-71)
§ 349.09 Lighting for Off-Street Parking Spaces
   Where lighting is provided for accessory off-street parking spaces, it shall
be constructed and arranged so as to prevent the direct emission of light upon
adjoining lots or the public streets.
(Ord. No. 1236-A-67. Passed 6-28-71, eff. 7-2-71)
§ 349.10 Planned Institutional Development Area
   (a)   The off-street parking requirements set forth in subsection (c) hereof
shall apply to any one or combination of educational, religious, medical or
eleemosynary institutions for which a comprehensive plan for the development,
redevelopment or rehabilitation of existing or proposed facilities encompassed
within a contiguous area has been approved by the Planning Commission as
provided in subsection (b) hereof.
   (b)   Any such plan or amended plan as submitted to the Commission for its
approval shall set forth in detail:
      (1)   The boundaries of the development area;
      (2)   The type and location of all existing and proposed principal land
uses and buildings therein;
      (3)   The present and at least two (2) year projection of the number of
employees, residents, visitors, enrollment, patients or other measures of
persons likely to be accommodated in the development area;
      (4)   The present and at least two (2) year projection of the number of
parking spaces owned or controlled by the party or parties to the plan jointly;
      (5)   Drawings showing present and two (2) year projection of the
locations and general dimensions of all buildings, major pedestrian and
vehicular circulation systems, parking facilities and major open areas; and
      (6)   Any proposal for the joint use and sharing of off-street parking
facilities by parties to the plan, designating the location and capacity of the
facilities to be shared and indicating the periods and extent of usage by each
such party.
   Any plan or amended plan submitted to the Commission for its approval in
accordance with the Charter which complies with the standards set forth in
subsection (c) hereof shall be considered as having met the off-street parking
requirements of the City. However, each such plan, when approved, shall be
effective for at least a period of two (2) years, and a revised plan and
current data in accordance with this subsection (b) shall he or she submitted
to the Commission for reapproval in the same manner not later than sixty (60)
days prior to the date of the expiration of the plan last approved by the
Commission. So long as such an approved plan is in effect, and all subsequent
construction or subsequent change of use of any building is substantially in
accordance with the plan, the parties to such plan shall be deemed to be in
compliance with all accessory off- street parking requirements of the zoning
ordinances of the City.
   (c)   The Commission shall approve a development area parking plan that
complies with the following standards:
Use Required Off-Street Parking Spaces
                                                                           Required
                                                                           Off-
Use                                                                        Street
                                                                           Parking
                                                                           Spaces
Universities, colleges and other professional schools
   Faculty                                                              1 for
                                                                           each 2
   Employees                                                            1 for
                                                                           each 4
   Dormitories, single undergraduate students                           1 for
                                                                           each 25
   Fraternities or sororities, single students                          1 for
                                                                           each 8
   Single graduate student housing, including graduate fraternities and 1 for
sororities                                                                 each 2
                                                                           1 for
   Married student housing                                              each
                                                                           dwelling
                                                                           unit
   Commuting students                                                   1 for
                                                                           each 4
   Part-time students                                                   1 for
                                                                           each 5
                                                                           1 for
                                                                           each 10
                                                                           full-time
   Visitors                                                             faculty
                                                                           members,
                                                                           but not
                                                                           less than
                                                                           20 spaces
Hospitals and sanitariums
   Medical staff (M.D.)                                                 1 for
                                                                           each 3
   Other employees                                                      1 for
                                                                           each 4
                                                                           1 for
                                                                           each 3
                                                                           daily
                                                                           visitors
                                                                           computed
                                                                           on yearly
   Visitors, including in-patient, out-patient, emergency and ambulatoryaverages,
                                                                           or 1 for
                                                                           each 4
                                                                           beds,
                                                                           whichever
                                                                           is
                                                                           greater
                                                                           1 for
                                                                           each 6
Places of worship                                                          seats in
                                                                           the main
                                                                           sanctuary
Museums
   Staff                                                                1 for
                                                                           each 4
                                                                           1 for
                                                                           each
                                                                           1,200
   Visitors                                                             square
                                                                           feet of
                                                                           gross
                                                                           floor
                                                                           area
                                                                           1 for
                                                                           each 2
Institutions for children, the aged, and other medically oriented centers  employees
                                                                           plus 1
                                                                           for each
                                                                           6 beds
                                                                           1 for
                                                                           each 600
                                                                           square
Eleemosynary institutions and all other cultural organizations             feet of
                                                                           gross
                                                                           floor
                                                                           area.
 
   As used in this section, “gross floor area”, when applied to museums,
eleemosynary institutions and all other cultural organizations, means such
areas as are used or intended to be used by the public, including visitors,
students and patrons, and excludes nonpublic areas such as may be used or
intended to be used for staff, employees, storage, workshops, restrooms,
toilets, utilities, management or maintenance. In applying such standards, the
employment, enrollment, staff, visitors, buildings and other facilities
specifically hereinabove listed of all parties to the plan, and only the
parking spaces owned or controlled by one (1) or more of the parties to the
plan, shall be taken into consideration. The plan may include such parking
spaces owned or controlled by any party to the plan located in another
contiguous municipality, provided the buildings and institutions of each such
party located within such contiguous area in such other municipality are also
included within the plan. In applying the above standards: all parties to the
plan shall be considered as one (1) single unit; all parking spaces located
within the planned area and owned or controlled by all parties to the plan
shall be considered without the necessity of allocating any such spaces to any
particular use, building or institution; consideration shall be given to shared
use of parking spaces by the parties to the plan; all existing buildings of the
parties to the plan located within the planned area shall be taken into account
except when the required number of parking spaces for any institution in the
plan has been determined by reference to enrollment, employees, staff, patients
or visitors; and the Planning Commission shall also consider that it is the
declared policy of the City to provide greater flexibility in the development
of institutional lands through planned development, to locate such parking
spaces to provide maximum convenience consistent with the need to protect
pedestrian traffic and promote the efficient and safe movement of vehicular
traffic, to recognize that an institutional parking space may accommodate more
than one (1) vehicle during any given period of time, thus having a
considerable rate of turnover, and to promote a more efficient allocation of
land for buildings and open space by permitting the joint use of off-street
parking spaces by all parties to such a plan.
(Ord. No. 1236-A-67. Passed 6-28-71, eff. 7-2-71)
§ 349.11 Exceptions (effective until 3-15-24)
   (a)   In the Central Business District, as defined in Section
325.12 or as subsequently amended, the off- street parking requirements set
forth in Sections
349.04 and
349.10 shall not apply.
   (b)   Any person or group or combination of business, commercial or
industrial organizations which has a comprehensive plan for the development,
redevelopment or rehabilitation of existing or proposed facilities encompassed
within a contiguous area shall be considered as a unit for the purpose of the
application of the off-street parking requirements set forth herein.
   The group shall submit a plan to the Off-Street Parking Committee indicating
that the combined parking facilities by all of the components of the plan
substantially meet the intent of the minimum standards required herein. The
plan shall set forth in detail:
      (1)   The area which encompasses the rehabilitation, redevelopment or
development;
      (2)   The existing or proposed use of each existing or proposed
structure;
      (3)   The schedule of the rehabilitation or construction of the
structures;
      (4)   Any duplication of off-street parking requirements as applied to
the plan;
      (5)   A proposal for the joint use and sharing of off-street parking
facilities. The proposal shall designate the location of the facilities to be
shared and shall indicate the period of usage so as to show no conflict in
usage by those sharing the facilities.
   (c)   Any plan submitted to the Planning Commission for its approval in
accordance with the Charter, which outlines and complies with the standards set
forth in subsection (b) hereof, shall be considered as having met the off-
street parking requirements of the City.
(Ord. No. 1236-A-67. Passed 6-28-71, eff. 7-2-71)
§ 349.11 Exceptions (effective 3-15-24)
   (a)   In the Central Business District, as defined in Section
325.12, or the Transit Oriented Development Zone, as defined in Section
301.02, or as either section is subsequently amended or as subsequently
amended, the off-street parking requirements set forth in Sections
349.04 and
349.10 shall not apply.
   (b)   Any person or group or combination of business, commercial or
industrial organizations which has a comprehensive plan for the development,
redevelopment or rehabilitation of existing or proposed facilities encompassed
within a contiguous area shall be considered as a unit for the purpose of the
application of the off-street parking requirements set forth herein.
   The group shall submit a plan to the Off-Street Parking Committee indicating
that the combined parking facilities by all of the components of the plan
substantially meet the intent of the minimum standards required herein. The
plan shall set forth in detail:
      (1)   The area which encompasses the rehabilitation, redevelopment or
development;
      (2)   The existing or proposed use of each existing or proposed
structure;
      (3)   The schedule of the rehabilitation or construction of the
structures;
      (4)   Any duplication of off-street parking requirements as applied to
the plan;
      (5)   A proposal for the joint use and sharing of off-street parking
facilities. The proposal shall designate the location of the facilities to be
shared and shall indicate the period of usage so as to show no conflict in
usage by those sharing the facilities.
   (c)   Any plan submitted to the Planning Commission for its approval in
accordance with the Charter, which outlines and complies with the standards set
forth in division (b) of this section, shall be considered as having met the
off-street parking requirements of the City.
(Ord. No. 801-2023. Passed 8-16-23, eff. 3-15-24)
§ 349.12 Off-Street Parking Committee; Authority
   In order to expedite any appeals and to implement the provisions of these
sections pertaining to off-street parking requirements, there hereby is
established the Off-Street Parking Committee composed of the Chairman of the
Transportation and Traffic Committee of Council, the Commissioner of Traffic
Engineering and Parking and the Planning Director of the Planning Commission,
who shall serve as Chairman.
   (a)   The Committee shall assist the Board of Zoning Appeals by providing
technical information needed for a proper determination of any appeal taken
from a decision of the Commissioner of Building relative to application of off-
street parking requirements.
   In addition to the other requirements of the Board, an appeal relative to
the provisions of the off-street parking requirements shall be accompanied by
the following information:
      (1)   A written statement describing in detail the parking generating
characteristics of the particular enterprise or use;
      (2)   A plan, drawn to scale, showing the various uses within the
respective floor areas of the building or structure;
      (3)   Number of employees expected to be on the premises during the
greatest work shift period;
      (4)   Number of customers, patrons or other visitors expected to be
served;
      (5)   Any other statement which may tend to show the actual extent of
off-street parking space required or generated by the particular use.
   (b)   The Committee shall receive and may approve any plan submitted under
the provisions of Section
349.11(b) which complies with the standards set forth therein. The approval of
the Committee certifies that the plan is in compliance with the off- street
parking requirements.
(Ord. No. 1236-A-67. Passed 6-28-71, eff. 7-2-71)
§ 349.13 Permitted Garages and Parking Space in Residence Districts
   (a)   Commercial Vehicles. No commercial vehicle shall be stored on any
premises in a Limited One- Family District and not more than one (1) commercial
vehicle weighing unloaded not more than one and one- half (1-1/2) tons may be
stored on any premises in any other Residence District unless for farming,
truck gardening or a related and similar activity if a permitted accessory use
of the premises.
   (b)   Rented Space. In a Residence District, space for two (2) noncommercial
motor vehicles may be rented to persons not residents on the same lot, provided
such rented space is within the area in which accessory uses are permitted.
   (c)   Parking Lots. The Board of Zoning Appeals may permit, temporarily or
permanently, the use of land in a Residence District, other than a Limited One-
Family District, for a parking lot when the best interests of the community
will be served, and provided that:
      (1)   The lot is to be used only for the parking of passenger automobiles
of employees, customers or guests of the person or firm controlling and
operating the lot, who shall be responsible for its maintenance;
      (2)   No charge is to be made for parking on the lot;
      (3)   The lot is not to be used for sales, repair work or servicing of
any kind;
      (4)   Entrance to and exit from the lot are to be located so as to do the
least harm to the Residence District;
      (5)   No advertising sign or material is to be located on the lot;
      (6)   All parking is to be kept back of the setback building line by
barrier unless specifically authorized otherwise by the Board;
      (7)   The parking lot and that portion of the driveway back of the
building line are to be adequately screened from the street and from adjoining
property in a Residence District by a hedge, sightly fence or wall not less
than four (4) feet six (6) inches high and not more than five (5) feet high
located back of the setback building line. All lighting is to be arranged so
that there will be no glare that is annoying to the occupants of adjoining
property in a Residence District, and the surface of the parking lot is to be
smoothly graded, hard surfaced and adequately drained;
      (8)   The building permit number under which the lot is established is to
be posted;
      (9)   Such other and further conditions may be imposed as the Board may
deem necessary in any specific case to reduce the adverse effect of the
proximity of a parking lot upon the character, development and maintenance of
the Residence District in which the parking lot is to be located.
   (d)   Public Parking Lots and One (1) Story Garages. The Board may, after
public notice and hearing and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards,
permit the location of a public parking lot or one (1) story public garage in a
Residence District provided the Board finds there is need for such facility to
serve the permitted uses in the District.
(Ord. No. 2440-03. Passed 8-3-05, eff. 8-9-05)
§ 349.14 Surface Parking Lots in Designated Downtown Area Districts
   (a)   Purposes.
      (1)   The principal purpose of this section is to preserve the urban
architectural character of the most intensively developed portions of downtown
Cleveland by limiting the establishment and expansion of surface parking lots
within these districts.
      (2)   A secondary purpose is to reduce auto emissions and traffic
congestion in the downtown area by discouraging creation of additional parking.
      (3)   Furthermore, this section is intended to accomplish these purposes
without discouraging new development.
   (b)   Applicability. This section shall apply only to land or property
located within the districts hereafter described and thereafter referred to as
the “designated districts”:
      (1)   The Downtown Core Parking District, Warehouse Parking District,
Erieview Parking District, and Gateway Parking District, as established in
division (b) of Section
457.035 of the Codified Ordinances; and
      (2)   The Cleveland State University Parking District, described as
follows:
Beginning at the point of intersection of the center line of Payne Avenue N.E.
with the center line of East 18 Street; thence southerly along said center line
of East 18 Street to its intersection with the center line of Brownell Court,
S.E.; thence easterly along said center line of Brownell Court, S.E. to its
intersection with a line located one hundred thirty two (132) feet east of the
easterly line of East 18 Street; thence southerly along said line which is
parallel to and one hundred thirty two (132) feet east of said easterly line of
East 18 Street to its intersection with the center line of Prospect Avenue,
S.E.; thence westerly along said center line of Prospect Avenue, S.E. to its
intersection with the center line of East 18 Street; thence southerly along
said center line of East 18 Street to its intersection with the center line of
East 14 Street; thence southerly along said center line of East 14 Street to
the center line of the Inner Belt Freeway; thence Easterly and Northerly along
the center line of the Inner Belt Freeway to its intersection with the center
line of Payne Avenue N.E. thence westerly along the centerly line of Payne
Avenue NE; to the place of beginning.
   (c)   Definition. For purposes of this section, a “surface parking lot” is
an off-street parking area which is located at street-grade level and which is
not enclosed within a garage structure. The unenclosed roof surface of a garage
shall not be considered a “surface parking lot” if such surface is located at
least one (1) story above grade level on at least one (1) of its frontages.
   (d)   Prohibition. Notwithstanding other provisions of the Zoning Code, no
surface parking lot shall be established or expanded within the designated
districts except as approved by the City Planning Commission in accordance with
this section.
   (e)   Planning Commission Determination. The City Planning Commission shall
approve building permit applications for the establishment or expansion of
surface parking lots in the designated districts only in accordance with the
following provisions:
      (1)   Temporary Parking Lots. If the City Planning Commission or
Landmarks Commission, as applicable, has approved demolition of a building
within the designated district(s) and has approved, in accordance with the
regulations of Sections
341.04 and
341.05 or Section
161.05, as applicable, plans for a new building or other non-parking use to
replace such building, the subject property may be used as a surface parking
lot for a maximum period of one (1) year following the demolition of the
building. If all necessary redevelopment permits have not been obtained within
one (1) year of the commencement of surface parking use, the property shall be
landscaped as open space or shall be converted to another appropriate non-
parking use in accordance with a site plan approved by the Commission.
      The Commission may, however, approve a request by the owner to extend use
of the parking lot for a single period not greater than one (1) year in
duration if the Commission determines that the owner has made a “good faith
effort” to secure the approved redevelopment. During the time period of such
extension, the Commission and the owner shall undertake discussions regarding
efforts to facilitate appropriate redevelopment of the property. At the
conclusion of the extension period, the property either shall be landscaped as
open space or shall be converted to another appropriate non-parking use in
accordance with a site plan approved by the Commission or, alternatively, the
owner may seek a variance from the Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance with
the provisions of division (h) of this section.
      (2)   Accessory Parking. Establishment or expansion of a surface parking
lot within the designated districts shall be permitted if the City Planning
Commission determines that the lot will be used exclusively for accessory
parking spaces to serve a new use or uses proposed for a development, expansion
or redevelopment project which has been approved by the City Planning
Commission or Landmarks Commission, as applicable, but which has not yet been
completed. The number of parking spaces in such accessory lot shall not be
greater than one hundred twenty percent (120%) of the number of spaces which
would be required for such use by the City’s Zoning Code.
      (3)   Action Areas. The City Planning Commission shall approve an
application for a surface parking lot if the subject property has been
designated for surface parking as part of an “action area” (as defined in
Section
315.03) of a community development plan adopted by Council in the manner set
forth in Title V of the Codified Ordinances.
      (4)   Vacant Lots. On any vacant lot which was vacant on the initial
effective date of this section, a surface parking lot shall be permitted, in
accordance with all applicable City regulations.
   (f)   Existing Surface Lots. Within the designated districts, surface
parking lots legally established or approved prior to the initial effective
date of this section shall be considered legal nonconforming uses and may be
maintained, repaired and improved in accordance with otherwise applicable City
regulations. No such lot shall be expanded without approval of the City
Planning Commission, in accordance with the provisions of this section.
   (g)   Variances for Establishment of Parking Lots. In the case of a request
for a variance to permit establishment of a surface parking lot which is
prohibited by regulations of this section, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall
grant such variance only if it determines that denial of the variance would
deprive the owner of all reasonable economic use of the subject property. In
making this determination, the Board may seek the advice of experts in relevant
fields and shall consider the potential for long-term as well as short term
economic gain.
   (h)   Variances for Temporary Lots. In the case of a request for a variance
to extend the use of a parking lot approved under division (e)(1) of this
section, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall grant such extension only if it
determines that redevelopment of the subject property has been delayed by
circumstances which are beyond the control of the owner and which would be
present regardless of the particular ownership of the property. In such cases,
the Board shall not grant an extension for a period greater than one (1) year
in duration. The property owner may return to the Board for consideration of
further extensions if said circumstances persist.
(Ord. No. 1465-97. Passed 12-15-97, eff. 12-22-97)
§ 349.15 Bicycle Parking
   (a)   Purpose. The requirements for bicycle parking are established for the
purpose of ensuring adequate and safe facilities to accommodate bicycle parking
and to encourage use of bicycles for travel as an alternative to use of
automobiles.
   (b)   Applicability. Bicycle parking facilities shall be provided in every
new automobile parking lot or garage, and for every expansion of an automobile
parking lot or garage when the expansion includes the provision of ten (10) or
more additional automobile parking spaces.
   (c)   Number of Bicycle Parking Spaces. Unless otherwise expressly stated,
bicycle parking spaces shall be provided at a rate of one (1) bicycle parking
space for each twenty (20) automobile spaces provided.
      (1)   Maximum. No automobile parking lot or garage shall be required to
provide more than twenty- four (24) bicycle parking spaces.
      (2)   Variances. When the number of required automobile parking spaces
for a new or expanded use is reduced by means of a zoning variance, the number
of required bicycle spaces shall be calculated on the basis of the number of
automobile parking spaces required had the variance not been granted, unless a
variance also is granted to reduce the number of required bicycle parking
spaces.
   (d)   Substitution for Automobile Spaces. The total number of required
automobile off-street parking spaces required under this Zoning Code shall be
reduced at the ratio of one (1) automobile off-street parking space for each
six (6) bicycle spaces provided. The total number of required automobile off-
street parking spaces, however, shall not be reduced by more than five percent
(5%) for any parking lot or garage.
   (e)   Bicycle Parking Space Size. Required bicycle parking spaces for
nonresidential uses must have minimum dimensions of two (2) feet in width by
six (6) feet in length.
   (f)   Bicycle Parking Space Location. Required bicycle parking spaces shall
be located at least as close to the entrance of the building as the nearest
non- handicapped automobile parking space. Where automobile parking is provided
in an enclosed area, bicycle parking shall be provided within the enclosure or
in such a way as to provide comparable protection from the elements. Bicycle
parking spaces shall be located on the property of the use that it serves
unless it is determined by either the Director of Building and Housing or the
Director of City Planning that a location on another property or in the public
right-of way represents the only feasible means of meeting the requirement for
bicycle parking spaces. A location in the public right-of-way shall be
permitted only if such location meets all requirements for issuance of an
Encroachment Permit.
   (g)   Bicycle Racks and Lockers. Each required bicycle parking space shall
be equipped with a bicycle rack or “bicycle locker,” as defined in this
section.
      (1)   Design. Bicycle racks and lockers must be securely anchored to the
ground or a building. Bicycle racks must provide a stable frame to which the
bicycle may be conveniently secured, such as the inverted-U, post and loop, or
another type of rack that meets these standards. Bicycle racks that support the
wheel but not the frame of the bike may not be used to fulfill a bicycle
parking requirement. In parking lots and parking garages, physical barriers,
such as posts or bollards, shall be provided so as to prevent a motor vehicle
from striking a parked bicycle.
      (2)   Residential Uses. Neither bicycle racks nor bicycle lockers are
required for bicycle parking associated with residential uses. Required bicycle
parking for residential uses may be provided in garages, storage rooms, or any
other resident-accessible, secure areas.
   (h)   Exemptions. No bicycle parking shall be required for single-family
residences, two (2) family residences, townhouses, funeral parlors, automobile
repair or body shops, gas stations, car washes, or motor vehicle sales lots.
   (i)   Central Business District. In the Central Business District, as
defined in Section
325.12 or as subsequently amended, regardless of exemptions for automobile
parking, if automobile parking is provided, then bicycle parking facilities
shall be provided as required in this section.
   (h)   Bike Locker. As used in this section, “bike locker” means a locker or
storage space large enough to house a single bicycle and which may be secured
and accessed by a single user.
(Ord. No. 522-08. Passed 6-9-08, eff. 6-16-08)
§ 349.16 Reserved
§ 349.17 Off-Street Loading Required
   In all use districts adequate loading or unloading docks or platforms shall
be provided in or on all nonresidential buildings hereafter erected or
converted to such use which contain a gross floor area of twenty- five thousand
(25,000) square feet or more or occupy lots which abut an alley or have a
frontage of one hundred (100) feet or more; provided that the Board of Zoning
Appeals may modify the requirements of this section for buildings which contain
a gross floor area of twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet or more but
occupy lots which do not abut any alley and have less than one hundred (100)
feet frontage, or for buildings which contain a gross floor area of less than
twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet, when the Board deems such
modification to be in the public interest and not detrimental to adjoining
property. Such docks or platforms shall be not less than fifty (50) feet back
from the building line along the street or alley on which they face and not
less than eighty (80) feet from the center line of the street. Any truck
entrance or exit doorway or gateway less than five (5) feet from the street
line shall be at least twelve (12) feet wide and twelve (12) feet high and the
curb cut shall extend for at least fifteen (15) feet on either side of the
driveway. For buildings which abut alleys, other than warehouses, freight
depots or freight terminals, no unloading space shall be provided with access
directly from a street unless permitted by the Board.
(Ord. No. 2204-A-48. Passed 12-19-49, eff. 1-29-50)
CHAPTER 350 – SIGN REGULATIONS
350.01   Intent
350.02   Establishing Regulations
350.03   Definitions
350.04   Application for Permits
350.05   Measurement Standards
350.06   Prohibited Signs
350.07   Illumination of Signs
350.08   General Location Standards
350.09   Freeway Interchange Signs
350.10   Billboards
350.11   Political Signs
350.12   Temporary Signs
350.121   Window Sign Coverage Limitation
350.13   Signs for Residential Districts
350.14   Signs for Retail Districts
350.15   Signs for Industrial Districts
350.16   Signs in Design Review Districts
350.161   Wall Murals
350.162   When Valid Permit, Approval Is Presumed
350.17   Signs for Parking Facilities
350.18   Maintenance and Removal of Signs
350.19   Nonconforming Signs and Uses
350.20   Supplemental Regulations
350.21   Exempt Signs
350.22   Appeal
§ 350.01 Intent
   Sign regulations, including provisions to control the type, design, size,
location and maintenance of signs, are hereby established to achieve the
following purposes:
   (a)   To enable the public to locate goods, services and facilities without
difficulty or confusion;
   (b)   To protect property values, public investment and overall neighborhood
character by preventing conditions which have undesirable impacts on
surrounding properties;
   (c)   To promote the development of attractive and harmonious residential
districts, viable commercial districts and approximately identified industrial
uses;
   (d)   To provide a safe environment through the regulation of private signs
and lighting which may distract attention from or obstruct the visibility of
traffic information devices; and
   (e)   To protect scenic views and the visual environment along city streets
and limited access highways;
   (f)   To improve the aesthetic appearance of exterior walls of buildings in
a manner consistent with a district’s role as a lively civic center and a
vibrant hub for business and consumer trade and commercial activity and without
materially changing significant and distinct architectural or historical
features of such buildings.
(Ord. No. 1282-06. Passed 11-27-06, eff. 1-6-07)
§ 350.02 Establishing Regulations
   Signs shall be designed, erected, altered, moved, displayed and maintained
in accordance with the regulations set forth in this chapter. The provisions of
this chapter shall not amend or in any way interfere with the other codes,
rules or regulations governing traffic signs within the City.
(Ord. No. 3076-A-89. Passed 12-10-90, eff. 12-20-90)
§ 350.03 Definitions
   As used in this chapter, the terms listed below shall be interpreted
according to the following definitions:
   (a)   Sign. Any device, structure, fixture, painting or visual image
designed to be seen from an outdoor location and using graphics, symbols,
letters or numbers for the purpose of conveying a message or advertising or
identifying any establishment, product, goods or service. (A searchlight is not
classified as a sign).
   (b)   Sign Panel. A structural object or portion of a structural object
designed to form a distinct background area or frame for the display of a
sign’s information – including all non-opaque surface area of an internally
illuminated canopy or wall panel displaying signage.
   (c)   Unit of a Building. A space occupying a portion of the ground floor of
a building, containing an entrance from the building exterior, and separated
from other such spaces by a party wall or walls.
   (d)   Freeway. A limited-access or controlled- access public highway
characterized by entrance and exit ramps and an absence of traffic signals and
stop signs along the main roadway.
   (e)   Signs by Use Type. For the purpose of identifying permitted signs, all
signs are classified by use type and defined as follows:
      (1)   Billboard. A sign directing attention to a specific business,
product, service, entertainment activity or other commercial activity sold,
offered or conducted elsewhere than upon the lot on which the sign is located.
      (2)   Bulletin Board. A sign for the display of announcements of a public
or semi-public institution and located on the grounds of that institution.
      (3)   Business Sign. An “identification sign” (as defined below) which
also may display such detailed information about the operation of a business as
brand names of goods or services offered on the premises, prices or special
“sale” information, forms of payment accepted, hours of operation, telephone
number or other similar information.
      (4)   Development Sign. A temporary sign announcing a development to be
located on the subject property and identifying firms or individuals
participating in the development process.
      (5)   Directional Sign. A sign indicating a direction or a location to
which pedestrian or vehicular traffic is requested to move.
      (6)   Identification Sign. A sign identifying or naming a building,
business, institution, residential development or other use and displaying such
other information as the owner, manager and address of the use or building.
      (7)   Information Sign. A sign which presents miscellaneous information
or instructions intended to serve the public rather than to promote a business,
product or issue and not containing information included in the definition of
any other sign.
      (8)   Nameplate. A sign indicating the name, address and/or profession of
a person or persons occupying a residence.
      (9)   Political Sign. A temporary sign advocating action on a public
issue, indicating a candidate for public office, or expressing an opinion or
belief.
      (10)   Real Estate Sign. A temporary sign promoting the rental, sale or
lease of property.
      (11)   Temporary Sign. A sign announcing special events or sales, the
sale or rental of property, political positions or other matters and intended
for use for a limited period of time.
      (12)   Wall Mural. A sign that displays high resolution static or
electronic graphic or photographic images, including decorative art and art
used in commerce, placed on an unsightly wall of a building, or unsightly roof
surface generally parallel to the building wall surface. A wall mural may
display words in accordance with Section
350.161 and otherwise shall comply with Section
350.161. A wall mural may depict or direct attention to a specific business,
product, service, entertainment activity, or other activity. Wall murals shall
not be deemed billboards or wall signs for purposes of Chapters
350 and
341 of this Zoning Code and Chapters
161,
303,
3113, and
317 of the Codified Ordinances.
   (f)   Signs by Structural Type. For the purpose of identifying permitted
signs, all signs and particular related objects are classified by structural
type and defined as follows:
      (1)   Banner. A temporary sign of lightweight fabric or similar material
that is mounted to a pole or a building (excluding flags and pennants as
defined herein).
      (2)   Changeable Copy Sign (Automatic). A sign or portion thereof on
which the copy changes automatically or animation is displayed through
electrical or electronic means (e.g., time and temperature units and message
centers).
      (3)   Changeable Copy Sign (Manual). A sign or portion thereof on which
copy is changed manually through placement of letters or symbols on a sign
panel.
      (4)   Canopy Sign. A sign attached to or printed on the fascia or valence
of a canopy, awning or marquee or hanging from the soffit (underside) of such
structure.
      (5)   Flag. An object, typically of lightweight fabric material, used as
a symbol of a government, political entity or nationality group.
      (6)   Flashing Sign. A sign illuminated by intermittent light in a manner
designed to attract attention.
      (7)   Free-Standing Sign. A sign which is not attached to a building and
which is either attached directly to the ground, placed directly on the ground,
displayed on a natural or man-made object (other than a building), or elevated
on a pole or other supporting structure attached to the ground.
      (8)   Pennant. An object or sign of lightweight fabric or similar
material, suspended from a rope, wire or string, usually in series, and
designed to move in the wind, also including streamers, pinwheels, balloons and
similar small objects.
      (9)   Portable (Mobile) Sign. A temporary sign which is designed to be
moved and is not permanently attached to any part of a building or to the
ground.
      (10)   Projecting Sign. A sign erected on the outside wall of a building
and projecting out at an angle therefrom.
      (11)   Roof Sign. A sign created upon and completely over the roof of any
building.
      (12)   Wall Sign. A sign attached to or displayed or painted on an
exterior wall in a manner parallel with the wall surface and not projecting
more than sixteen (16) inches from such surface. (A sign mounted on a roof
surface which is generally parallel to the wall surface shall also be
considered a “wall sign.”)
      (13)   Window Sign. A sign painted on, attached to, or suspended directly
behind or in front of a window or the glass portion of a door.
(Ord. No. 1282-06. Passed 11-27-06, eff. 1-6-07)
§ 350.04 Application for Permits
   Application for permits to erect, structurally alter, move or display a sign
shall be made to the Department of Building and Housing by the owner (or
owner’s agent) of the property for which a sign is proposed, on forms provided
by the City, in accordance with the following regulations:
   (a)   Exemptions from Permit Requirement. City permits shall be required for
all permanent and temporary signs except as listed below:
      (1)   Normal maintenance, repainting or change of message or sign face
which does not alter the size, placement or structure of a sign, except for on-
premises signs located in a Design Review District, a Landmark District or on a
designated Landmark property, for which a permit shall be required for such
repainting or change of sign face;
      (2)   Nameplates and information signs for residential uses;
      (3)   Temporary window signs mounted on the inside window surface;
      (4)   Temporary real estate and development signs not exceeding forty-
eight (48) square feet in area;
      (5)   Political signs not exceeding forty-eight (48) square feet in area;
      (6)   Garage sale and real estate open house signs as regulated in
division (c) of Section
350.13.
   (b)   Applicability. Regardless of exemptions from the requirement for a
permit, all permanent and temporary signs shall be subject to applicable
regulations of this Code except for signs listed in Section
350.21.
   (c)   Submission Requirements. With the exception of any requirements
determined to be inapplicable in a particular instance by the Director of
Building and Housing, the applicant shall submit accurately-scaled elevation
drawings and a site plan at a minimum scale of one (1) inch - fifty (50) feet,
indicating, in narrative or plan form, the following information:
      (1)   All sign dimensions and sign height;
      (2)   Placement of signs in relation to building edges, roof lines,
tenant party walls, windows, doors and other building features as well as in
relation to all lot lines, street lines, sidewalks and drives;
      (3)   Construction materials for the signs and sign structure, as well as
method of attachment; and
      (4)   Type, intensity, placement and shielding of illumination.
   (d)   Billboards. For billboard applications requiring approval by the State
of Ohio, no permit shall be issued by the City prior to submission by the
applicant of the approved State permit. In addition, an application for a
billboard shall indicate all existing billboards located within a distance of
one thousand (1,000) feet or, for a billboard to be placed along a freeway, all
existing billboards within a distance of two thousand (2,000) feet. Any
application for placement of a billboard along a freeway shall include the
name, address and phone number of the company that owns the billboard,
including the owners of said company, the name of the company that owns the
land where the billboard is located and the name and phone number of a contact
person responsible for maintenance of the sign and its site. This information
shall be updated and sent to the Clerk of Council by January 31 and July 31 of
every year.
   (e)   Temporary Signs. Where required, a permit for a temporary sign shall
be issued for a period not exceeding six (6) months unless another display
period is specified in Section
350.12 or in other applicable sections of the Codified Ordinances. Permits for
real estate and development signs shall be issued for a period not exceeding
one (1) year but may be renewed while construction or marketing is pursued
diligently. Development signs shall be removed immediately upon placement of a
permanent identification sign.
(Ord. No. 846-12. Passed 9-23-13, eff. 9-27-13)
§ 350.05 Measurement Standards
   Sign face area, sign height and sign location, as regulated in this chapter,
shall be measured according to the following standards:
   (a)   Sign Face Area. Standards to compute the amount of sign face area
permitted by these regulations are established as follows:
      (1)   Measurement of Sign Face Area.
         A.   Panel Signs. Sign face area shall be measured to include the
entire surface of the smallest single rectangle enclosing the sign panel. For
double- sided projecting or free-standing signs, only one (1) side of the panel
shall be included in the measurement if the two (2) sign faces are in parallel
arrangement and are separated by no more than three (3) feet. Measurement of a
“V-shaped” temporary sign shall also include only one (1) of the two (2) sign
faces.
         B.   Non-Panel Signs. Sign face area shall be measured to include the
entire area within a single, continuous perimeter composed of not more than
three (3) rectangles which enclose the letters or characters of a sign.
      (2)   Measurement of Building and Lot Frontage. The frontage of a
building shall be the width of the facade(s) of the building (excluding any
roof overhang or non-bearing decorative walls) which faces the principal street
or contains the main entrance. If a building is divided into units, the
building unit frontage shall be the width of that unit, as measured from the
party wall center-lines, on the frontage of the building. The frontage of a lot
shall be the width of the lot along the principal street serving a use located
on the lot.
      (3)   Measurement of Temporary Window Sign Coverage. In determining the
percentage of window area covered by temporary signs (as defined in divisions
(e)(11) and (f)(13) of Section
350.03), each facade or side of the building shall be considered separately.
Window area shall be measured to include all windows and the glass portions of
doors but shall exclude all such area covered by permanent signs or other
opaque material.
   (b)   Sign Height. The height of free-standing signs shall be measured from
the base of the sign at its point of attachment to the ground to its topmost
element. However, if the support of a free-standing sign is attached to a wall
or other man-made base, including a graded earth mound, the sign height shall
be measured from the grade of the nearest street, drive or parking area, as
determined by the Building Commissioner.
   (c)   Sign Location. In determining the location of signs in relation to lot
lines (including setback, district and street right-of-way lines), distances
shall be measured from the vertical projection of the lot line to the closest
point on the sign. For corner lots, two (2) lot lines shall be considered
street right-of-way lines.
(Ord. No. 3076-A-89. Passed 12-10-90, eff. 12-20-90)
§ 350.06 Prohibited Signs
   The following types of signs are prohibited in all zoning districts:
   (a)   Strips of pennants, propellers, pinwheels, streamers, balloons and
similar small objects except as temporary displays specifically authorized for
carnivals and open-air festivals under Section
329.07 and for new businesses under division (c) of Section
350.20;
   (b)   Signs imitating or resembling official traffic or government signs and
signals;
   (c)   Signs attached to trees, rocks or natural formations or public
property including but not limited to utility poles, benches, trash containers
and parking meters, except as specifically authorized by the City;
   (d)   Moving, revolving or flashing signs except as provided in Section
350.10(1)(5), Section
350.16, and Section
350.161 governing wall murals;
   (e)   Signs attached to any condemned structure, as defined in Section
363.29 or any structure condemned or declared a nuisance structure pursuant to
Section
3103.09.
(Ord. No. 1282-06. Passed 11-27-06, eff. 1-6-07)
§ 350.07 Illumination of Signs
   Signs may be illuminated only in accordance with the following regulations:
   (a)   Controls. Sign illumination shall be designed and placed so as not to
cause glare which may result in traffic hazards or which may interfere with the
customary use of nearby residences.
   (b)   Prohibitions. Flashing or intermittent illumination shall not be
permitted except as provided in Section
350.10(1)(5), Section
350.16, and Section
350.161 governing wall murals using electronic media.
   (c)   Districts. In Residential Districts, only nameplates and bulletin
boards may be illuminated. All signs in non-residential districts may be
illuminated.
   (d)   Electronic Message Centers. Signs displaying electronically-changing
or animated messages (as defined in division (f)(2) of Section
350.03) are permitted as specified in the “schedules” referenced in division
(b) of Section
350.14 and division (b) of Section
350.15 and as permitted in Section
350.161 governing wall murals.
(Ord. No. 1282-06. Passed 11-27-06, eff. 1-6-07)
§ 350.08 General Location Standards
   The following regulations regarding the location and placement of signs are
generally applicable to all zoning districts:
   (a)   Vertical Clearance. The lowest element of any sign which occupies the
vertical space above a pedestrian or vehicular way and is designed to permit
traffic thereunder shall be at least ten (10) feet above the finished grade of
a sidewalk or other pedestrian way and at least sixteen (16) feet above the
finished grade of a pavement used for vehicular traffic if such sign is located
within eighteen (18) inches of the vertical projection of the pavement edge.
Awnings or canopies displaying signs shall meet the clearance standards of
Chapter
3113 of the Building Code.
   (b)   Visibility at Intersections. Signs shall be located and designed so as
to maintain a substantially clear view between two and one-half (2.5) feet and
eight (8) feet above grade in a triangle formed by intersecting street right-
of-way lines and a line thirty (30) feet from the point where the street lines
intersect. At the intersection of a driveway and a public street, such triangle
shall be defined by the street right-of-way line, the driveway pavement edge
and a line ten (10) feet from the point of intersection.
   (c)   Relation to Specific or Setback Building Lines. A free-standing
identification or business sign located in front of a “Specific or Setback
Building Line” or in a front yard area shall be set within a curbed, planted
island or area a minimum of one hundred (100) square feet in area. (See also
divisions 350.13(b),
350.14(c) and
350.15(c)).
   (d)   Relation to Traffic Devices. Unless regulated otherwise in the Traffic
Code of the City, signs shall not be erected so as to obstruct sight lines
along any public way or so as to obstruct sight lines to traffic control
lights, street name signs at intersections or signals at railroad grade
crossings. Signs visible from the sight lines along a street shall not contain
symbols or words such as “stop”, “go”, “slow”, etc., or red, yellow or green
lights that resemble highway traffic control devices.
   (e)   Projecting Signs. A projecting sign shall not extend above the wall to
which it is attached, shall extend horizontally no more than four (4) feet from
the wall surface, shall not extend closer than two (2) feet to a curb, and
shall not be located within four (4) feet of an interior side lot line or party
wall. The two (2) sign faces of a projecting sign shall be separated by no more
than two (2) feet.
   (f)   Wall Signs. A wall sign shall not extend above the wall to which it is
attached, and such sign shall be set back from the ends of the building or
party wall lines a minimum distance of six (6) inches. A wall sign mounted on a
vertically-oriented roof surface (as defined in division (f)(12) of Section
350.03) shall not extend above the top of such surface.
   (g)   Canopy Signs. A sign which is attached to the fascia of a canopy shall
not extend beyond the edges of that surface.
   (h)   Roof Signs. A roof sign shall be set back from the ends of the
building or party wall lines a minimum distance of two (2) feet.
(Ord. No. 3076-A-89. Passed 12-10-90, eff. 12-20-90)
§ 350.09 Freeway Interchange Signs
   In order to provide information to the highway traveler, a retail business
located in proximity to a freeway interchange shall be permitted one (1)
additional free-standing identification sign in accordance with the following
regulations:
   (a)   Distance from Interchange. The use to which the sign refers shall be
located within six hundred sixty (660) feet (one-eighth (1/8) mile) of the
nearest freeway exit ramp, measured from the intersection of the center lines
of the exit ramp and the public street to the nearest property line of the use.
   (b)   Height. The height of such sign shall not exceed eighty (80) feet
above grade level at the base of the sign structure.
   (c)   Size. Sign face area shall not exceed two hundred and twenty-five
(225) square feet and shall be permitted in addition to sign face area
otherwise permitted for the property.
   (d)   Sign Location. Signs shall be located on the business premises and
shall be set back a minimum of five (5) feet from the freeway right-of-way, ten
(10) feet from other street right-of-way lines, twenty-five (25) feet from
interior lot lines and fifty (50) feet from Residential District lines. Such
sign shall be oriented for readability principally from the freeway.
   (e)   Retail Business. For purposes of this section “retail businesses”
shall include all non-residential uses permitted in the General Retail zoning
district.
(Ord. No. 3076-A-89. Passed 12-10-90, eff. 12-20-90)
§ 350.10 Billboards
   Billboards, as defined in division (e)(1) of Section
350.03, shall be permitted only in accordance with the following regulations
and other applicable regulations of this chapter:
   (a)   Zoning Districts. Billboards shall be permitted only in General
Industry and Unrestricted Industry Districts, except that billboards directed
at any angle toward a freeway may be permitted in Semi- Industry Districts.
Billboards shall not be permitted in Cleveland Landmark Districts, Public Land
Protective Districts. Business Revitalization Districts or on the opposite side
of any street bordering such districts. No billboards shall be permitted on the
cast side of State Route 176 (the Jennings Freeway) and only one (1) billboard
shall be permitted on the west side of State Route 176 (the Jennings Freeway).
   (b)   Sign Types. Billboards shall be permitted as either free-standing or
wall signs, unless otherwise restricted in these Codified Ordinances. In
General Industry and Unrestricted Industry districts, billboards shall also be
permitted as roof signs not exceeding permitted building height and meeting the
standards of division (h) of Section
350.08.
   (c)   Size. Billboard sign panels shall not exceed eight hundred and twenty
(820) square feet in area and shall be further limited in size by the setback
regulations in divisions (g) and (h) of this section. For purposes of
determining required setbacks, the measurement of sign panel area shall exclude
“extensions” projecting beyond the otherwise rectangular or standard geometric
panel dimensions, provided that these extensions do not exceed twenty- one
percent (21%) of such standard panel area.
   (d)   Height. The maximum height of a billboard above the roadway surface to
which it is oriented shall be fifty (50) feet. However, in no case shall the
height of the billboard as measured from the grade of the lot on which it is
placed exceed the maximum permitted height for main buildings.
   (e)   Spacing. Along freeways, the minimum distance between billboards
located on one (1) side of the road shall be fourteen hundred (1,400) feet.
Along freeways, the minimum distance between billboards located on opposite
sides of the road and visible to approaching traffic shall have a minimum
spacing of five hundred (500) feet. Along other roads, such distance shall be
seven hundred fifty (750) feet between two (2) billboards which are each less
than one hundred (100) square feet in area and shall be one thousand (1,000)
feet in all other instances. Except for double-sided (“back-to-back”) billboard
panels, not more than one (1) billboard panel may be located on a single
structure.
   (f)   Distance from Street Lines. Billboards shall be located behind the
required building setback lines of the lots on which they are located. In
addition, billboards shall be located a minimum distance of twenty-five (25)
feet measured in any direction from the point of intersection of the right-of-
way lines of two (2) intersecting streets.
   (g)   Distance from Zoning District Lines. Billboards located along streets
other than freeways shall be set back at least two hundred (200) feet from
Residential, Local Retail and General Retail District lines. For such billboard
panels exceeding three hundred eighty (380) square feet in area, all minimum
setbacks from zoning district lines shall be increased one (1) foot for each
one (1) additional square foot of sign panel area. Billboards along freeways
shall be set back at least fifty (50) feet from Residential, Local Retail, and
General Retail District lines.
   (h)   Distance from Bridges Not on Freeways and from Parkways. A billboard
directed at any angle toward a bridge, not on a freeway or toward a bridge not
on a freeway or toward a parkway shall be set back from the outer pavement edge
a minimum of one (1) foot for each one (1) square foot of sign panel area.
However, the minimum such setback shall be three hundred thirty (330) feet.
Furthermore, as required by State regulations, no billboard may be located
within five hundred (500) feet of the interchange of a freeway, as measured
along the right edge of the main traveled roadway in the direction of travel
from the beginning or ending of pavement widening at the exit or entrance to
the freeway.
   (i)   Distance from Freeways. A billboard directed at any angle toward a
freeway shall be located outside of the freeway right-of-way, but in no case
closer than fifty (50) feet from the freeway pavement edge.
   (j)   Illumination. Billboards shall be illuminated only by means of
continuous reflected light. Internally- illuminated or back-lit billboards
shall not be permitted. Billboards shall not include automatic changeable copy
signs (i.e., electronic message centers) as defined in division (f)(2) of
Section
350.03.
   (k)   Referral to City Planning Department. Any Building Permit application
for installation of a new billboard shall be referred to the Director of the
City Planning Department for a determination of compliance with the location,
spacing and setback regulations of this section. In making this determination,
the Director and staff of the Department shall utilize a map maintained by the
Department showing locations of existing billboards, zoning districts and other
information necessary to make such determination.
   (l)   Nonconforming Billboards. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section
350.19, a legal nonconforming billboard may be replaced or may be reconstructed
to an extent greater than otherwise permitted if the City Planning Commission
determines that such replacement or reconstruction will satisfy the following
conditions:
      (1)   Site and Design Improvements. The site of the new or reconstructed
billboard shall be landscaped and otherwise improved, through use of an
ornamental base or frame, a streamlined support structure, or similar features
effective in improving the appearance of the site. At a minimum, evergreen
shrubs, at least three (3) feet in height at the time of planting and four (4)
feet in height after two (2) growing seasons, shall be planted at maximum
intervals of four (4) feet along any side of the base of the billboard oriented
toward a public street. Such planting shall extend at least the full width of
the billboard panel. In addition, all portions of the parcel(s) of land on
which the billboard site is located shall be planted with grass or other
suitable vegetative ground cover between the billboard and all public streets
abutting the parcel(s).
      (2)   Degree of Nonconformity. The new or reconstructed billboard shall
be no greater in size, height, number of panels, or any panel dimension than is
the existing billboard, nor shall the new or reconstructed billboard be less
conforming to any zoning regulation than is the existing billboard, except that
a panel or sign face may be added to the back of a billboard where previously
there had been no panel or sign face.
      (3)   Location. The new or reconstructed billboard shall be placed in
precisely the same location as the existing billboard unless the City Planning
Commission determines that a different location on the same parcel of land
would be more effective in meeting the intent of the sign regulations, as
stated in Section
350.01.
      (4)   Sign Type. With respect to the “sign types” defined in division (f)
of Section
350.03, the new or reconstructed billboard shall be the same type as the
existing billboard unless the City Planning Commission determines that a
different sign type would be more compatible with the subject property or
nearby properties.
      (5)   Changeable Copy. The new or reconstructed billboard may incorporate
automatic changeable copy only if such copy is limited to a single billboard
panel or two (2) back-to-back billboard panels and only if each such panel
replaces two (2) or more billboard panels on a single parcel of property or two
(2) or more billboard panels on adjacent properties. The replacement billboard
panel shall not be larger than any of the billboard panels it is replacing. In
the case of a sign utilizing changeable copy, each message shall remain fixed
for at least eight (8) seconds.
(Ord. No. 1233-15. Passed 11-9-15, eff. 11-11-15)
§ 350.11 Political Signs
   Political signs, as defined in division (e)(9) of Section
350.03, shall be permitted in addition to otherwise permitted signs and sign
area and only in accordance with the following regulations and other applicable
regulations of this chapter:
   (a)   Location. Political signs shall not be placed on any public property,
public right-of-way, utility pole, bridge or bridge abutment. The location of
political signs on private property is further prescribed in this chapter by
the regulations for each zoning district.
   (b)   Number and Area. The maximum size of any political sign shall be eight
(8) square feet if located in a Residential District and sixty-four (64) square
feet if located in a non-residential district. In no case shall the total area
of all free-standing political signs on a lot exceed sixty-four (64) square
feet, except for a lot on which billboards are permitted. In such a case,
political signs may be displayed in accordance with the regulations for
billboards in Section
350.10.
   (c)   Substitution. In addition to the specifically authorized political
signs, political messages may be displayed in place of commercial messages on
any permitted billboard or other permitted permanent sign.
(Ord. No. 3076-A-89. Passed 12-10-90, eff. 12-20-90)
§ 350.12 Temporary Signs
   Temporary signs, as defined in division (e)(11) of Section
350.03, shall be permitted in addition to otherwise permitted signs and sign
area in accordance with the following regulations and other applicable
regulations of the Building Code and other City ordinances.
   (a)   Banners. The area of all banners displayed for a business or other
non-residential use shall be limited to twenty-five percent (25%) of the
permitted permanent sign area. Each business or use shall display banners for
no more than four (4) months during any calendar year. Banners shall be
displayed only as wall, window, canopy or projecting signs in accordance with
the applicable regulations pertaining to each sign type. (NOTE: Regulations of
this chapter do not apply to banners displayed in the public right-of-way).
   (b)   Portable Signs. Portable signs shall be permitted only for community
facility uses as listed in division (a) of Section
337.01 of the Zoning Code and for businesses located in Retail or Industrial
Districts, and shall be displayed for no more than one (1) period of not more
than thirty (30) consecutive days per calendar year. Portable signs shall be
limited to one (1) per lot, forty (40) square feet in sign face area, and six
(6) feet in height. Such sign shall be set back a minimum of one (1) foot from
the street right-of-way lines and twenty (20) feet from side lot lines.
   (c)   Inflatable Signs. An inflatable sign shall be displayed no more than
fourteen (14) days during a calendar year on any lot in a General Retail,
Shopping Center or Industrial District. Inflatable signs shall be permitted in
no other circumstances. Inflatable signs shall be limited to one (1) per lot,
forty (40) feet in any dimension, and for display as either a free-standing or
roof sign. The height of such sign above ground level shall not exceed
permitted building height by more than twenty (20) feet.
   (d)   Window Signs. Temporary window signs, as permitted in Retail and
Industrial Districts, shall cover no more than twenty-five percent (25%) of
window area, as defined in division (a)(3) of Section
350.05.
   (e)   Pennants. The display of strings of pennants streamers, pinwheels,
balloons and similar objects, as defined in division (f)(8) of Section
350.03, shall be prohibited except as permitted for carnivals and open- air
festivals in accordance with the regulations of Section
329.07 and for new businesses under division (c) of Section
350.20.
   (f)   Other Temporary Signs. Real estate, development and political signs
and signs for new businesses shall be permitted as temporary signs in
accordance with other regulations of this chapter.
   (g)   Illumination. Temporary signs shall be illuminated only in accordance
with the regulations of Section
350.07.
   (h)   Carnivals and Festivals. Notwithstanding the regulations of this
chapter, temporary signs may be permitted for carnivals and open-air festivals
in accordance with the regulations of Section
329.07.
   (i)   Safety Standards. Temporary signs shall meet regulations of the
Building Code, National Electrical Code and other applicable codes.
   (j)   Nonconforming Temporary Signs. See division (d) of Section
350.19.
(Ord. No. 3076-A-89. Passed 12-10-90, eff. 12-20-90)
§ 350.121 Window Sign Coverage Limitation
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, window signage
regardless of use type, in all zoning districts except for Residential and
Residence-Office Districts, shall cover no more than twenty-five percent (25%)
of window area. In determining the percentage of window area covered, each
facade or side of the building shall be considered separately. Window area
shall be measured to include all windows and the glass portions of doors, and
it shall include all area covered regardless of material, including by
temporary signs or permanent signs. Any material that covers window area and
that has empty or transparent portions shall be measured as an entire material,
including those empty or transparent portions.
(Ord. No. 189-2025. Passed 4-14-25, eff. 4-16-25)
§ 350.13 Signs for Residential Districts
   Signs in Residential Districts and Residence- Office Districts, as well as
signs for community facility uses permitted in these districts, shall be
permitted as regulated below:
   (a)   Permitted Types, Number, Area and Height (Residential). Signs by use
and structural type are permitted only in accordance with regulations presented
in the schedule of Permitted Types, Number, Area and Height (Residential). Sign
types not listed are prohibited except for political signs which are permitted
as regulated in Section
350.11. Automatic changeable copy signs are prohibited in all Residence
Districts. (All signs are permanent unless listed as temporary).
   Schedule of Permitted Types, Number, Area, & Height
   (Residential)
                  Land Use Categories
Signs by Use Type 1-2 Family Townhouses    Multi-family Community Facility3
                  Dwellings  (Row Houses)2 Apartments
Signs by Use     Land Use Categories
Type             1-2 Family     Townhouses        Multi-family  Community
                 Dwellings      (Row Houses)2     Apartments    Facility3
                 TYPES: wall or TYPES: wall
                 free standing
Nameplate        #: 2 per       #: 1 per dwelling Not Permitted Not Permitted
                 dwelling unit  unit
                 SF: 2          SF: 2
                 Ht: 3 ft.
                 TYPES: wall or free standing
Information      #: minimum necessary as approved by Building Commissioner
                 SF: 1          SF: 4             SF: 4         SF: 4
                 Ht: 2 ft.      Ht: 3 ft.         Ht: 3 ft.     Ht: 3 ft.
                 TYPES: wall, free-standing or canopy
                 #: 1 per       #: 1 per          #: 1 per      #: 1 per
                 vehicular      vehicular         vehicular 1   vehicular
Identification 2 entrance to a  entrance          entrance      entrance
                 subdivision
                 SF: 20         SF: 20            SF: 20        SF: 40
                 Ht: 5 ft.      Ht: 5 ft.         Ht: 5 ft.     Ht: 5 ft.
                                TYPES: wall or free standing
                                #: minimum necessary as approved by Building
Directional      Not Permitted  Commissioner
                                SF: 4             SF: 4         SF: 4
                                Ht: 3 ft.         Ht: 3 ft.     Ht: 3 ft.
                 TYPES: free-   TYPES: free-      TYPES: wall, window or free-
                 standing or    standing or       standing
Real Estate      window         window
(Temporary)      #: 1 per lot   #: 1 per unit     #: 1 per vehicular entrance
                 SF: 6          SF: 6             SF: 32        SF: 32
                 Ht: 6 ft.      Ht: 6 ft.         Ht: 8 ft.     Ht: 8 ft.
                 TYPES: free-   TYPES: wall, window or free-standing
                 standing
                 #: 1 per
Development      vehicular      #: 1 per vehicular entrance
(Temporary)      entrance to a
                 subdivision
                 SF: 48         SF: 64            SF: 64        SF: 64
                 Ht: 10 ft.     Ht: 10 ft.        Ht: 10 ft.    Ht: 10 ft.
                                                                TYPES: wall or
                                                                free- standing
Bulletin Board   Not Permitted  Not Permitted     Not Permitted #: 1 per lot
                                                                SF: 40
                                                                Ht. 8 ft.
TYPE: Permitted signs by structural type
#: Maximum number of signs
SF: Maximum sign face area (in square ft.) per side of each sign
Ht: Maximum height for free-standing signs
   1   1 additional identification sign not exceeding 10 square feet in area
shall be permitted for each apartment building in a complex of 2 or more such
buildings.
   2   In any One-Family or Two-Family Residential District, such signs are
permitted only for subdivisions of at least 10 lots.
   3   Identification or Bulletin Board signs using electronically changeable
copy may be permitted for Community Facility Uses only in accordance with the
regulations of division (g) of this section.
 
   (b)   Location (Residential). Signs as permitted for residential and
community facility uses shall conform with the location regulations presented
in the Schedule of Location Regulations (Residential) in addition to the
regulations of Section
350.08.
   Schedule of Location Regulations (Residential)
   Free-Standing Sign Types
 
Minimum Distance Nameplate Political & Identification Real Estate* & Bulletin
From             Information                          Development    Board
All Lot Lines    5 ft.                 20 ft.         20 ft.         25 ft.
Occupied 1-2     –                   35 ft.         75 ft.         –
Family Dwelling
   *   Real estate signs for individual 1-family, 2-family and townhouse
units shall be located a minimum distance of 2 feet from every lot line and
dwelling.
 
   (c)   Garage Sale and Open House Sign Regulations. Signs directing attention
to a real estate open house or a sale of household items from a garage or house
shall be permitted for one (1) and two (2) family dwellings and townhouses
(rowhouses) in accordance with the following regulations:
      (1)   Maximum Number of Signs: One (1) per lot or townhouse unit;
      (2)   Permitted Sign Types: Window or free- standing;
      (3)   Maximum Sign Area: Four (4) square feet per sign;
      (4)   Maximum Height: Four (4) feet for free- standing signs;
      (5)   Location: Five (5) feet minimum setback from every lot line;
      (6)   Display Period: No more than three (3) four (4) day periods per
year.
   (d)   Temporary Directional Signs. Signs directing attention to a real
estate open house, garage sale or house auction, for a single-family, two (2)
family or townhouse unit, may be displayed as free-standing signs on “tree
lawn” areas in accordance with the following regulations:
      (1)   Maximum Number of Signs: Four (4) per event, with no more than two
(2) per block for any single event;
      (2)   Maximum Sign Area: Two (2) square feet per sign;
      (3)   Maximum Heights: Three (3) feet;
      (4)   Location: At least one (1) foot from curbs and sidewalks and only
on corner lots or at street intersections;
      (5)   Display Period: Only on the days of the event and not more than
three (3) three (3) day periods per year for garage sales and house auctions
and not more than two (2) days per week for open house events;
      (6)   Consent: Temporary directional signs shall be displayed only with
the consent of the owner of the property that immediately adjoins the tree lawn
on which the sign is to be placed.
   (e)   Signs or Accessory Business Uses. In any Multi-Family Residential
District, a business or home occupation permitted as an accessory use may be
identified by means of a permitted nameplate sign. Such sign may be displayed
as either a wall or window sign not exceeding two (2) square feet in area and
illuminated, if at all, by reflected light from a light source which is not
visible from beyond the subject lot. No such signs, however, shall be permitted
in an One- Family or Two-Family Residential District.
   (f)   Office Buildings. Signs for office buildings in Residence-Office
Districts shall be permitted in accordance with the regulations for retail uses
as provided in Section
350.14.
   (g)   Community Facility Uses. A variance shall be required and may be
granted for Identification or Bulletin Board signs using electronically
changeable copy to display information pertinent to a Community Facility use on
the premises of such Community Facility use only if the Board of Zoning Appeals
determines that the sign will provide community information without adversely
affecting the character of nearby residential properties, in accordance with
the following provisions.
      (1)   Community Facility Uses, for purposes of these provisions, shall
include schools, places of worship, libraries, museums, hospitals, municipal
recreation centers, parks, playgrounds, police stations, fire stations and
other principal uses determined to be similar uses by the Board of Zoning
Appeals.
      (2)   Information displayed on the sign shall be limited to information
that pertains to the community facility use on which property the sign is
located. Each display of information shall remain static or fixed for a minimum
of twenty (20) seconds, thereby prohibiting flashing, scrolling, animated or
other copy that gives the appearance of motion.
      (3)   The sign using electronically changeable copy shall be either a
wall sign or a freestanding sign or portion of such sign and shall be a maximum
of thirty (30) square feet in area.
      (4)   The placement and design of the sign using electronically
changeable copy shall be approved by the City Planning Commission and Landmarks
Commission, as applicable, in accordance with the design review guidelines
established in this Zoning Code for signs and, specifically, with the intent of
ensuring compatibility with the character of nearby residential properties.
      (5)   The Board of Zoning Appeals may approve a sign that varies from
these provisions if both the Board and the City Planning Commission or
Landmarks Commission, as applicable, determine that the sign will meet a
community need without adversely impacting the character of nearby residential
properties.
(Ord. No. 934-10. Passed 5-16-11, eff. 5-20-11)
§ 350.14 Signs for Retail Districts
   Signs for uses in University Retail, Local Retail, General Retail and
Shopping Center Districts shall be permitted as regulated below:
   (a)   Maximum Sign Face Area (Retail). The maximum sign face area of all
permanent building- mounted signs for each building or unit thereof shall be
related to the width of the building or unit. (For lots without buildings or
with unusually small buildings, see division (d) of Section
350.20.) Maximum sign face area, excluding the area of free-standing signs,
shall be determined according to the measurement standards of Section
350.05 and the following formula where “W” is the width of frontage (in feet)
of the building or unit thereof: (W × 1.5) + 25 = Square Feet of Signage.
   (b)   Permitted Types, Number, Area and Height (Retail). Signs by use and
structural type are permitted only in accordance with the regulations presented
in the schedule of Permitted Types, Number, Area and Height (Retail). Sign
types not listed are prohibited except for political signs which are permitted
as regulated in Section
350.11. (All signs are permanent unless listed as temporary).
Schedule of Permitted Types, Number, Area, & Height
(Retail)
Signs by Use Type Signs by Structural Type
                  Free-Standing Wall Window Canopy Projecting
Signs by Use   Signs by Structural Type
Type           Free-        Wall        Window      Canopy        Projecting
               Standing
               #: 1 per lot SF: As regulated by     #: 1 per      #: 1 per
               4            formula                 building unit building unit
                                                    SF: 6 if
               SF: 50 1                             hanging from  SF: 12
Identification                                      soffit
or Business 2, Ht: 12 ft. -
3              Local Retail
               Districts
               25 ft. -
               Other Retail
               Districts
               #: Minimum necessary as approved by Building
Directional &  Commissioner                                       Not Permitted
Information 5  SF: 4        SF: 4       SF: 4       SF: 4
               Ht: 3 ft.
               #: 1 per     #: 1 per    #: 1 per
Real Estate    street       building    building
(Temporary)    frontage     side        unit        Not Permitted Not Permitted
               SF: 48       SF: 48      SF: 12
               Ht: 10 ft.
Development 6  #: 2 per lot (total)
(Temporary)    SF: 96       SF: 96      SF: 12      Not Permitted Not Permitted
               Ht: 12 ft.
Temporary
(Excluding     As permitted in Section  SF: 25% of  As permitted in Section
Real Estate    350.12                   window area 350.12
and
Development)
#: Maximum number of signs
SF: Maximum sign area (in square ft.) per side of each sign
Ht: Maximum height for free-standing signs and roof signs
Sign Area Formula: (W × 1.5) + 25 = square feet
   1   Except 75 sq. ft. maximum for establishments with a building frontage of
100-200 ft. and 100 sq. ft. maximum for establishments with a building frontage
exceeding 200 ft. For shopping centers, see Section
350.14(d).
   2   Identification or business signs using animation, electronically-
changeable copy or flashing lights are specifically prohibited for “adult
entertainment uses,” as defined in Section
347.07(b).
   3   Identification and business signs using animation or electronically-
changeable copy are permitted in Local Retail Districts subject to the
provisions of division (h) of this section, General Retail Districts and
Shopping Center districts as free-standing, wall or window signs and, for
theatres, also as canopy signs.
   4   See division (b) of Section
350.20.
   5   For hospitals, colleges and other public facilities and institutions,
directional and information signs may be permitted to a maximum area of 12 sq.
ft. and a maximum height of 6 ft. as necessary in the determination of the
Building Commissioner.
   6   In Local Retail Districts, wall and free-standing development signs
shall be limited to 48 sq. ft. and 10 ft. in height (for free-standing signs).
 
   (c)   Location (Retail). Free-standing signs as permitted for retail uses
shall conform with the location regulations presented in the Schedule of
Location Regulations (Retail) in addition to the regulations of Section
350.08.
Schedule of Location Regulations (Retail)
Free-Standing Sign Types
 
Minimum Distance From Identification/ Real Estate & Information & Directional
                      Business        Development   Political
Residential           25 ft.          25 ft.        5 ft.         5 ft.
District Line
Street R.O.W.         3 ft.           3 ft.         3 ft.         1 ft.
Line(s)
Side & Rear           5 ft.           5 ft.         5 ft.         5 ft.
Lot Lines
 
   (d)   Shopping Centers. For purposes of this chapter, three (3) or more
retail businesses located on a single lot and served by common parking or
common vehicular entrances shall be classified as a “shopping center” and shall
be permitted one (1) free-standing identification sign and one (1) wall
identification sign in addition to other permitted signs and in accordance with
the following regulations:
      (1)   Display of Information. Each shopping center identification sign
shall display only the name of the center and the name of not more than one (1)
business located within the center, except that, with approval of the council
member whose ward is affected as expressed by an ordinance or resolution of
Council, for any shopping center with retail floor area exceeding one hundred
fifty thousand (150,000) square feet, excluding “outlots” with separate free-
standing signs, such sign may display the names of not more than two (2)
businesses located within the center.
      (2)   Size. The maximum sign face area of a shopping center
identification sign shall equal twenty (20) square feet for each ten thousand
(10,000) square feet of gross floor area but shall not exceed one hundred
twenty-five (125) square feet. All shopping centers, however, shall be
permitted a sign of at least fifty (50) square feet.
      (3)   Other Regulations. All other regulations of this chapter applicable
to identification signs shall apply to a shopping center identification sign.
      (4)   Other Signs. A lot displaying a shopping center identification sign
may display no other free- standing identification or business signs.
      (5)   Secondary Frontages and Entrances. One (1) additional shopping
center identification freestanding sign and one (1) additional shopping center
identification wall sign shall be permitted for a shopping center with more
than one (1) vehicular entrance, provided that such signs meet the requirements
of division (b) of Section
350.20.
      (6)   Outlots. If a vehicular entrance or parking lot of a shopping
center also serves a use located on a separate lot (i.e., “out lot”), the free-
standing identification or business sign permitted for such lot shall be
limited to a maximum of twenty-five (25) square feet in area and seven (7) feet
in height.
      (7)   Design Review. No sign identifying a shopping center or identifying
two (2) or more businesses within a shopping center and no permanent
identification sign of any type located within a designated Shopping Center
District shall be erected or altered in appearance without the approval of the
City Planning Commission or its Director. In considering such approval, the
Commission shall seek to ensure that the signs demonstrate a high degree of
graphic and architectural quality, legibility, and design compatibility with
the shopping center, its signage and nearby development.
      (8)   Consolidation of Free-Standing Signs. In the case of a shopping
center with more than the number of signs allowed under this chapter, which
signs were legally established prior to the effective date of this ordinance, a
new free-standing sign identifying two (2) or more businesses may be erected if
the following conditions are met:
         A.   The new multi-tenant sign shall display the name of the shopping
center and tenant names no greater in number than the tenant names currently
displayed on free-standing signs in the shopping center, but in no case shall
more than six (6) tenant names be displayed on such sign;
         B.   All other free-standing business identification signs on the
shopping center property shall be removed prior to erection of the new sign,
except that conforming signs permitted for outlots may be retained;
         C.   The sign does not exceed twelve (12) feet in height;
         D.   The council member whose ward is affected approves, as expressed
by an ordinance or resolution of Council.
   (e)   Gasoline Service Stations. Signs for gasoline service stations shall
conform with all regulations of this chapter except for the maximum sign area
regulations of division (a) of Section
350.14 and any regulations which directly conflict with the regulations stated
below:
      (1)   Free-Standing Business Sign. Each station shall be permitted one
(1) permanent free- standing business signs, with total sign face area of the
panel or panels not exceeding one hundred (100) square feet. Such sign shall be
limited to identifying the company name, management, fuel prices, and services
offered.
      (2)   Signs at Service Islands. Stations shall be permitted information
signs at fuel or other service islands which display information regarding type
of service or are necessary in directing or instructing the motorist who has
entered the station area. Signs not extending beyond the edges of fuel pumps
are permitted and shall not be counted as business identification signs.
      (3)   Wall and Canopy Signs. Each station shall be permitted permanent
identifications, business, directional and information signs displayed as wall
or canopy signs and not exceeding one hundred (100) square feet in combined
area. Non-opaque internally- illuminated canopy surfaces (“fascia”) shall be
considered as sign panels for purposes of sign area measurement.
      (4)   Temporary Signs. Temporary signs shall be permitted in accordance
with the regulations of Section
350.12.
   (f)   Drive-Through Restaurants. For restaurants providing direct service to
customers in motor vehicles, one (1) free-standing or wall-mounted “menu board”
sign (limited to information regarding the restaurant’s menu and related
instructions) shall be permitted for each drive-through lane in addition to
signs and sign area otherwise permitted. Such sign shall not exceed forty (40)
square feet in area and six (6) feet in height and shall meet setback
regulations applicable to free- standing identification signs (as specified in
division (c) of this section).
   (g)   Regulations for Larger Projecting Signs. A projecting sign may exceed
the otherwise maximum permitted size of twelve (12) square feet and the
otherwise maximum permitted projection of four (4) feet from a building wall if
such sign meets the following standards:
      (1)   Such sign shall be set back from the closest interior side lot line
and the closest tenant party wall line at least one (1) foot for each one (1)
square foot of sign area;
      (2)   Such sign shall in no case exceed thirty- six (36) square feet in
area nor eight (8) feet in projection from the building wall and shall be set
back at least two (2) feet from the outer edge of any street curb;
      (3)   No Building Permit shall be issued for such sign without approval
of the City Planning Commission, which shall consider the design quality of the
sign and its compatibility with the design character of the subject property
and surrounding properties. In addition to considering such general design
factors as placement, proportions, color, materials, and consistency with signs
to be seen as a series, the City Planning Commission may specifically require
use of non-rectangular, custom-shaped panels, exposed neon or reflected
lighting, unobtrusive support structures, narrow-profile sign cabinets, or
other design features necessary to ensure that a larger projecting sign will
enhance the appearance of the building on which it is placed and the district
in which it is located;
      (4)   At least five (5) working days prior to the City Planning
Commission meeting at which approval under the regulations of this division
will be considered, written notice shall be provided to the City Council member
in whose ward the proposed sign is to be located.
   (h)   Automatic Changeable Copy Signs in Local Retail Districts. Automatic
changeable copy signs shall be permitted in a Local Retail District only if the
Board of Zoning Appeals grants a Variance in accordance with the following
standards.
      (1)   The Board of Zoning Appeals determines that the proposed sign will
not adversely impact the character of nearby properties and will not cause
disturbances to users of those properties.
      (2)   The design and placement of the sign has been approved by the City
Planning Commission or Landmarks Commission, as applicable, in accordance with
the general design guidelines established for use by each Commission.
      (3)   Each display of information shall remain static or fixed for a
minimum of twenty (20) seconds, thereby prohibiting flashing, scrolling,
animated or other copy that gives the appearance of motion, unless the City
Planning Commission or Landmarks Commission, as applicable, determines that
animated or more frequently changing displays can be accommodated in a
particular location without causing disturbances to nearby properties.
   (i)   Supplemental Regulations. Signs in Retail Districts shall also conform
to regulations of Section
350.20.
(Ord. No. 934-10. Passed 5-16-11, eff. 5-20-11)
§ 350.15 Signs for Industrial Districts
   Signs for uses in Residence-Industry, Semi- Industry, General Industry and
Unrestricted Industry Districts shall be permitted as regulated below:
   (a)   Maximum Sign Face Area (Industrial). The maximum sign face area of all
building-mounted permanent signs for each building or unit thereof shall be
related to the width of the building or unit. (For lots without buildings or
with unusually small buildings, see division (d) of Section
350.20). Maximum sign face area, excluding the area of free-standing signs,
shall be determined according to the measurement standards of Section
350.05 and the following formula where “W” is the width of frontage (in feet)
of the building or unit thereof: (W × 1.5) + 25 = Square Feet of Signage.
   (b)   Permitted Types, Number, Area and Height (Industrial). Signs by use
and structural type are permitted only in accordance with the regulations
presented in the Schedule of Permitted Types, Number, Area and Height
(Industrial). Sign types not listed are prohibited except for billboards and
political signs which are permitted as regulated in Sections
350.10 and
350.11 respectively. (All signs are permanent unless listed as temporary).
   Schedule of Permitted Types, Number, Area, & Height
   (Industrial)
Signs by  Signs by Structural Type
Use Type  Free-Standing Wall Window Canopy Roof 2
Signs by       Signs by Structural Type
Use Type       Free-        Wall        Window      Canopy        Roof 2
               Standing
               #: 1 per lot SF: As regulated by     #: 1 per      #: 1 per
               4            formula                 building unit building unit
Identification                                      SF: 6 if
or Business 2, SF: 50 1                             hanging from
3                                                   soffit
                                                                  Ht: permitted
               Ht: 25 ft.                                         building
                                                                  height
               #: Minimum necessary as approved by Building
Directional &  Commissioner                                       Not Permitted
Information 5  SF: 4        SF: 4       SF: 4       SF: 4
               Ht: 3 ft.
               #: 1 per     #: 1 per    #: 1 per
Real Estate    street       building    building
(Temporary)    frontage     side        unit        Not Permitted Not Permitted
               SF: 48       SF: 48      SF: 12
               Ht: 10 ft.
Development 6  #: 2 per lot (total)
(Temporary)    SF: 96       SF: 96      SF: 12      Not Permitted Not Permitted
               Ht: 12 ft.
Temporary
(Excluding     As permitted in Section  SF: 25% of  As permitted in Section
Real Estate    350.12                   window area 350.12
and
Development)
#: Maximum number of signs
SF: Maximum sign area (in square ft.) per side of each sign
Ht: Maximum height for free-standing signs and roof signs
Sign Area Formula: (W × 1.5) + 25 = square feet
   1   Free-standing identification or business sign may exceed 50 square feet
in area by an amount equal to 5 square feet for each 1-foot reduction in height
below 25 feet. However, no such sign shall exceed 125 square feet in area.
   2   Roof signs are permitted only in General and Unrestricted Industrial
Districts. The height and placement of roof signs is further regulated in
chapter 3113 of the Building Code.
   3   Identification and business signs using animation or electronically-
changeable copy are permitted as free-standing, wall or window signs in all
industrial districts.
   4   See division (b) of Section
350.20.
   5   For hospitals, colleges and other public facilities and institutions,
directional and information signs may be permitted to a maximum area of 12 sq.
ft. and a maximum height of 6 ft. as necessary in the determination of the
Building Commissioner.
   6   In Local Retail Districts, wall and free-standing development signs
shall be limited to 48 sq. ft. and 10 ft. in height (for free-standing signs).
 
   (c)   Location (Industrial). Free-standing signs as permitted for Industrial
Districts shall conform to the location regulations presented in the Schedule
of Location Regulations (Industrial) in addition to the regulations of Section
350.08.
   Schedule of Location Regulations (Industrial)
   Free-standing Sign Types
 
Minimum Distance From Identification/ Real Estate & Information & Directional
                      Business        Development   Political
Residential           25 ft.          25 ft.        5 ft.         5 ft.
District Line
Street R.O.W.         3 ft.           3 ft.         3 ft.         1 ft.
Line(s)
Side & Rear           5 ft.           5 ft.         5 ft.         5 ft.
Lot Lines
 
   (d)   Industrial Parks. In addition to signs otherwise permitted, a free-
standing industrial park identification sign shall be permitted for a unified
development of three (3) or more industrial firms and buildings served by a
common local access road. Such sign shall conform to the following regulations:
      (1)   Permitted Information: Name and address of the industrial park and
names of firms located in the park;
      (2)   Maximum Number: One (1) for each street frontage containing a
vehicular entrance to the industrial park;
      (3)   Maximum Sign Face Area: Sixty (60) square feet plus an additional
twenty (20) square feet for each additional tenant above three (3), to a
maximum of one hundred twenty (120) square feet;
      (4)   Maximum Height: Twelve (12) feet;
      (5)   Location. Such sign shall be located at a vehicular entrance to the
industrial park and shall conform to the location regulations for other
identification or business signs stated in division (c) above. If, however, an
industrial park identification sign is displayed, no other free-standing
identification or business sign in the development shall be located within
fifty (50) feet of the industrial park identification sign.
   (e)   Supplemental Regulations. Signs in Industrial Districts shall also
conform to regulations of Section
350.20.
(Ord. No. 934-10. Passed 5-16-11, eff. 5-20-11)
§ 350.16 Signs in Design Review Districts
   For permit applications within Landmark Districts, Public Land Protective
Districts or Business Revitalization Districts, the Landmarks Commission or
City Planning Commission, as applicable, may authorize the Commissioner of
Building and Housing to issue a permit which requires adherence to standards
which are either less strict or more strict than the standards otherwise
required by this chapter, if such action by the applicable Commission is in
accordance with the following standards:
   (a)   Design Compatibility. Regulations of this chapter may be varied only
if such variation will result in signage which is better suited to the design
of the subject property or nearby properties of architectural or historic
significance.
   (b)   Design Guidelines. Any variation from the regulations of this chapter
shall be approved only in accordance with applicable design guidelines adopted
by City Council or adopted by the applicable Commission pursuant to an
ordinance of City Council.
   (c)   Minimum Variation. Any variation from the regulations of this chapter
shall be the minimum necessary to ensure design compatibility.
   (d)   Written Record. In the record of its proceedings, the applicable
Commission shall specifically identify any regulation of this chapter which is
not met by an approved application and shall explain the necessity for granting
such variation from the regulations.
   (e)   Final Action. An application which fails to meet any regulation of
this chapter shall be approved only by direct action of the applicable
Commission. The administrative approval provision of division (f) of Section
303.07 shall not be applicable in such cases.
(Ord. No. 3076-A-89. Passed 12-10-90, eff. 12-20-90)
§ 350.161 Wall Murals
   (a)   Districts Where Permitted. Wall murals shall be permitted within the
Central Business District and the portion of the Flats-Oxbow Business
Revitalization District that is north of the Detroit-Superior Bridge and east
of the Cuyahoga River. Within those districts, wall murals may be permitted in
any community development plan area public land protective district, land mark
district, business revitalization district, urban renewal district, and any
overlay district subject to the provisions of this section. Notwithstanding the
provisions of Chapters
161,
303,
317, and
341 of the Codified Ordinances, this section shall constitute design and all
other guidelines and requirements for all wall murals located within all
community development plan areas, public land protective districts, landmark
districts, business revitalization districts, urban renewal districts, and
every overlay district within the Central Business District as well as any
other area and district in which wall murals may be authorized.
   (b)   Definitions.
      (1)   As used in this section “agency or official of the City” means
Mayor, director, commissioner, commission, board, bureau, department, advisory
committee, or any other body or official exercising the powers vested by
Section
67 of the Charter or to whom such powers have been delegated.
      (2)   As used in this section, “architectural” means a style of building
recognized in the art and science of architecture as characterized by
peculiarities of structure, ornamentation, or motif.
      (3)   As used in this section, “the display” means the displayed images
and words together with the art or pictorial background on which the images and
words appear, excluding any nameplate that identifies the permit holder or its
assignee.
      (4)   As used in this section, “historic” means recognized as distinctly
important in the social science of history that records, studies, and explains
the character and significance of past human activities, including the use made
of buildings.
   (c)   Design Requirements.
      (1)   Primarily Pictorial. The sign shall display non-verbal graphic or
non-verbal photographic images, and may display words. The aggregate area of
all words on a static display exclusive of the sign nameplate and trademarks,
service marks or other distinct product or company logos shall comprise no more
than twenty percent (20%) of the area of the display.
      (2)   Type of Medium. The medium for the display shall be electronic as a
static or moving image or a combination of each, or as a static image upon a
single sheet of vinyl or other material that presents a high-resolution image
(“other high-resolution material”). A display is “electronic” if its images,
while being displayed on the wall mural, are generated by computer or otherwise
by the controlled conduction of electrons or other charge carriers.
      (3)   Vinyl or other High-Resolution Medium. If the medium is vinyl or
other high-resolution material, it shall comply with all of the following:
         A.   The resolution of the display shall be a minimum of three hundred
(300) dots-per-inch (“DPI”);
         B.   If vinyl, the grade of vinyl shall be a minimum twelve (12) ounce
flex vinyl, twelve (12) ounce mesh vinyl, or twelve (12) ounce sailcloth vinyl;
         C.   The display may be changed or replaced up to six (6) times within
any twelve (12) month period in addition to any change necessary to repair or
restore the sign if the structure or medium is defaced, damaged or destroyed;
         D.   The sign panel or other structure to which the vinyl or other
high-resolution material is attached shall not appear from line-of-sight in
front of the display as a distinct frame surrounding the exterior of the
display.
   (d)   Size of Display. The total area of the display shall be no less than
eighty percent (80%) of the total area of the wall on which the sign is located
except where:
      (1)   A smaller sign is required to avoid covering a distinctive
architectural or historic feature of the building; or
      (2)   A smaller sign is required to avoid interference by structures,
other buildings, trees, or other obstacles with line-of-sight visibility of the
display by the vehicular traffic to which the sign is oriented; or
      (3)   A smaller sign is required to ensure safety in erecting, changing,
or maintaining the display or sign structure; or
      (4)   A smaller sign is required because the structure of the building or
wall will not support or otherwise accommodate the sign structure necessary for
the display to cover eighty percent (80%) of the wall area.
   (e)   Maximum Number of Wall Murals. Exclusive of legal nonconforming wall
murals or wall signs, no more than six (6) wall murals authorized by this
section may be displayed simultaneously within the Central Business District or
the portion of the Flats-Oxbow Business Revitalization District that is north
of the Detroit-Superior Bridge and east of the Cuyahoga River.
   (f)   Standards for Wall Placement and Removal.
      (1)   The wall mural shall be displayed on an exterior wall in a manner
parallel with the wall surface.
      (2)   The wall mural shall not project more than sixteen (16) inches from
the wall surface if the medium is vinyl or other high-resolution material, and
not more than twenty-eight (28) inches if the medium is electronic.
      (3)   The wall mural shall be set back from each vertical and horizontal
end of the wall a minimum distance of six (6) inches.
      (4)   Illumination. Except for displays that are electronic, the displays
of wall murals shall be illuminated by continuous reflected light directed from
an external light source onto the display.
      (5)   Repair and Removal. Each wall mural shall be secured in a manner
that will require minimal repair after removal. The person in control of a wall
mural or the owner of the wall shall repair all damage caused to the wall by
securing or removing the wall mural. Upon removal, if required by the City
Planning Commission or the Landmarks Commission, the entire wall face shall be
painted by the owners or person in possession of the wall with a high quality
exterior paint guaranteed by the manufacturer to last at least 10 years before
weather causes the paint to deteriorate. The paint shall be a solid color that
is consistent with the color of the building.
      (6)   A wall mural shall not cover, destroy, or materially alter an
architectural feature distinct from a generally flat, unornamented wall surface
unless the City Planning Commission or Landmarks Commission permits the wall
mural to cover the architectural feature.
      (7)   A wall mural shall not cover, destroy, or materially alter a
distinctive historic feature of the building unless the City Planning
Commission or Landmarks Commission permits the wall mural to cover the historic
feature.
      (8)   Finishes, textures, construction techniques, designs, colors,
craftsmanship, and building materials that characterize a distinctive historic
or architectural feature of a building shall be preserved. To prevent material
alteration:
         A.   Wall murals adjacent to a distinctive historic or architectural
feature of a building shall be secured in a manner that, if removed in the
future, would not impair the form and integrity of the feature;
         B.   Chemical or physical treatments, such as sandblasting, that may
cause damage to any distinctive historic or architectural feature shall not be
used;
         C.   All surface cleaning of the portion of a wall mural or underlying
wall adjacent to a distinctive historic or architectural feature shall use a
means that will not disturb the feature’s color, texture, or other visual
qualities, accelerate deterioration or otherwise impair the structure of the
feature.
   (g)   Permit for Erection of Wall Murals.
      (1)   No wall mural may be erected or replaced unless and until the
person in control of the display applies for and obtains the following:
         A.   A permit under Section
3113.03 of the Building Code and Section
350.04 of the Zoning Code; and
         B.   If the proposed location falls within a landmark district, or is
located on a landmark, approval by the Landmarks Commission applying the
provisions of this section; or
         C.   If the proposed location falls within any other district or plan
area, but not a landmark district, approval by the Planning Commission applying
the provisions of this section, or by the City Planning Director pursuant to
the rules of the Planning Commission for administrative approval, applying the
provisions of this section.
      (2)   All approvals required for the erection or replacement of wall
murals shall be documented by notation on the permit application during its
evaluation, or by issuance of a separate legal instrument reciting the
approval. No permit shall be issued if the approvals required by this section
have not been obtained.
      (3)   A permit issued in accordance with this section shall be construed
to be a license to proceed during the life of the permit with the erection or
replacement of the wall mural as described in the approved permit application
so long as fewer than six (6) wall murals are on display simultaneously within
the Central Business District or the portion of the Flats- Oxbow Business
Revitalization District that is north of the Detroit-Superior Bridge and east
of the Cuyahoga River and shall be construed as signifying all approvals
required by this section. All permits and applications for permits authorized
by this section shall be in the name of the person in control of the display.
Such permits shall convey to such person all rights and privileges prescribed
by this section, which may be assigned, and impose upon such person all duties
prescribed by this section, which may be delegated. The person in control of
the display, including all assignees and delegees, shall place a nameplate on
the wall mural when erected or replaced that identifies that person, and shall
notify the City Planning Director of the identity and current postal address of
that person.
      Nothing in this section shall be construed as authorizing the erection or
placement of a wall mural without the consent of the owner or person in
possession of the wall where the wall mural would be located.
      (4)   Expiration. A permit to erect or replace a wall mural shall expire
if the wall mural is not erected and bearing a display within one (1) year
after the date of the issuance of the permit.
      (5)   Holders of permits authorizing the erection or replacement of wall
murals shall have priority over all other holders based on the date and time of
issuance of each permit, with the earlier date and time having priority.
      (6)   A wall mural shall be removed if it has no display for a continuous
period of six (6) months. It shall not be re-erected or replaced without
obtaining a new permit pursuant to this section.
      (7)   The City shall keep a permanent record of all permits issued for
wall murals including dates and times of issuance, which shall be available for
public inspection and copying.
      (8)   Change or Replacement of Display. A change or replacement of a
display shall not require a permit or any other approval by the City. However,
a change of material or method of attachment to the building or wall surface
shall be deemed a replacement of the wall mural, requiring a new permit, unless
such change is authorized by Section
350.19 of this Zoning Code.
   (h)   Standards for Determining Whether to Issue Permit for Wall Murals. An
application for a permit to erect or replace a wall mural shall be granted if
the wall mural as proposed satisfies the criteria of this section. Such
criteria are in lieu of the standards and guidelines prescribed and authorized
elsewhere in the Codified Ordinances for a permit, certificate of
appropriateness, or other approval by any agency or official of the City except
those set forth in the Building Code addressing structures and materials for
signs.
   For those geographic areas where the City Planning Commission has
jurisdiction as set out in the Codified Ordinances, a permit shall not be
issued unless the City Planning Commission determines that all of the following
are satisfied. For those areas where the Landmarks Commission has jurisdiction
as set out in the Codified Ordinances, a permit shall not be issued unless the
City Planning Commission determines that all of the following are satisfied:
      (1)   Walls Eligible for Wall Murals. The proposed location of a wall
mural shall be on an exterior building wall that qualifies as unsightly at the
time that the application for a permit is pending. A wall shall be deemed
unsightly if its facade is a generally flat surface, lacking distinctive
external architectural ornamentation, is constructed of poor quality or
inappropriate construction materials, or is in disrepair.
      (2)   No Interference with Distinctive Architectural and Historic
Features. Placement of a wall mural at the proposed location shall not be
clearly incongruous with – or obscure or compromise the design integrity of –
distinctive architectural or historic features of the building and of the
architectural or scenic character of surrounding properties within two hundred
fifty (250) lineal feet from the wall. A personal preference of any agency or
official that wall murals as a class are incongruous with the Central Business
District or the portion of the Flats-Oxbow Business Revitalization District
that is north of the Detroit-Superior Bridge and east of the Cuyahoga River as
a whole shall not be considered.
      (3)   Findings of Clear Incongruity/Material Alteration of Distinctive
Architectural, Historic Features. If the agency or official of the City
responsible for evaluating an application for a permit decides to deny the
application because the proposed wall mural would be clearly incongruous with,
or would materially alter, a distinctive historic or architectural feature,
that agency or official shall state the grounds for such finding in writing
delivered to the applicant. On the applicant’s appeal of such finding and
denial, the agency hearing the appeal shall find for the applicant unless the
agency or official demonstrates clear incongruity or material alteration. As to
that finding, such an appeal shall be heard de novo.
      (4)   No Pending Notices of Violation. No permit to erect or replace a
wall mural shall be issued if, while the permit application is pending, a
notice issued pursuant to Section
3101.10 of the Building Code is unresolved as to the building on which the
proposed wall mural would be placed. A permit may be issued upon resolution of
the alleged violation that is the subject of the notice.
      (5)   Content of Display Not Subject To Approval. No agency or official
of the City shall prescribe or otherwise require approval of the color, graphic
design, words, message, or any other element of the content of any display, nor
shall any agency or official of the City require advance submission of the
content of a display before granting a permit or other approval required or
authorized by the Codified Ordinances.
      (6)   Administrative Authority To Establish Other Criteria. No agency or
official of the City is authorized to establish criteria, standards, or
guidelines that add restrictions, conditions, or requirements to those set
forth in this section. However, each reviewing agency or official shall be
allowed to follow its procedural rules and regulations, unless those rules and
regulations conflict with this section. In that case, this section shall
govern.
      (7)   The wall mural’s size and placement is appropriate to achieve the
objective of beautifying the unsightly wall.
   (i)   Application for Permit.
      (1)   Each application shall address one (1) wall mural proposed for one
(1) wall.
      (2)   Completed and satisfactory applications for permits to erect or
replace wall murals filed first in accordance with this section shall be given
priority over all other completed and satisfactory applications. The Building
Commissioner shall record on the application the time and date upon which each
application is filed, and maintain all filed applications or copies for at
least ten (10) years from the date of filing.
      (3)   The applicant for a permit prescribed by this section shall file
such application with the Building Commissioner, who shall forward the
application to the appropriate agency or official responsible for evaluating it
within seven (7) days of receiving it.
      (4)   The application shall be accompanied by a color photographic or
digital image of the proposed wall location in the context of adjoining
properties, and the same color image shall also depict the proposed wall mural
to represent with general accuracy the appearance of the wall with the addition
of the mural. The agency or official of the City responsible for evaluating the
application may require additional photographic or digital images to be
submitted with the application relevant to the criteria prescribed by this
section.
      (5)   The application shall also be accompanied by:
         A.   The materials and information required by Section
350.04(c) of this Zoning Code and
3113.03(g) of the Building Code;
         B.   The street address of the building upon which the proposed wall
mural would be located;
         C.   A list of streets and other vehicular rights of way to which the
proposed mural principally would be oriented;
         D.   A calculation of the area of the wall upon which the wall mural
would be located and a calculation of the area of the expected display;
         E.   If the area of the expected display would be less than eighty
percent (80%) of the wall area, the reasons for the smaller display;
         F.   A description of the medium to be used for the display, and if
vinyl or other high- resolution material, a description of its grade and a
calibration of the dots-per-inch of the resolution of the display;
         G.   A list of buildings within the Central Business District and the
portion of the Flats- Oxbow Business Revitalization District that is north of
the Detroit-Superior Bridge and east of the Cuyahoga River where existing wall
murals are on display at the time of filing the application;
         H.   The telephone number and postal address of the applicant and the
name, telephone number, and postal address of the owner of the building to
which the wall mural would be secured and a statement as to whether the owner
or person in possession of the wall has consented to erection of the proposed
wall mural.
   (j)   Time for Granting or Denying Application for Permit.
      (1)   Within sixty (60) days after receiving an application for a permit
or up to an additional sixty (60) days if requested by the applicant or needed
by the agency or official responsible for evaluating the application, the
agency or official of the City responsible for evaluating the application shall
grant or deny the application and shall notify the applicant, the Building
Commissioner, and the Planning Director in writing of the decision.
      (2)   An application shall be deemed denied only by written notification
to the applicant identifying each ordinal provision that was not satisfied and
the reason that it was not satisfied.
      (3)   The application shall be deemed granted if not denied in accordance
with this section.
   (k)   Enforcement. Whenever the Building Commissioner finds that a wall
mural does not conform to the requirements of this section, exclusive of
subsections
350.161(h)(1) and
350.161(h)(2), or that the structure of the wall mural or its attachment to the
building is in a hazardous condition, he or she shall forward by certified mail
to the person in control of the display a written notice of violation, stating
the defects and requiring that person to correct or abate the defects within
thirty (30) days. The Commissioner shall otherwise follow the procedures set
forth in Chapter
3103.
(Ord. No. 1282-06, § 5. Passed 11-27-06, eff. 1-6-07)
§ 350.162 When Valid Permit, Approval Is Presumed
   Where for twelve (12) consecutive years beginning at any time prior to
January 1, 2006 a sign with a face of at least three hundred (300) square feet
has remained at the same location continuously with no change in height
setback, number of panels, size, or dimensions, other than changes allowed by
division (1) of Section
350.10, it shall be conclusively presumed for purposes of Section
350.18 of this Zoning Code and Section
3113.04 of the Building Code that the sign was erected initially pursuant to
valid permits, certificates, and all other approvals required by the City at
the time of erection.
(Ord. No. 1282-06, § 5. Passed 11-27-06, eff. 1-6-07)
§ 350.17 Signs for Parking Facilities
   The following regulations shall apply in non-residential zoning districts to
parking garages accommodating more than ten (10) vehicles and to open parking
lots which are not accessory to a main use:
   (a)   Exemptions. Regulations of this zoning code do not restrict
directional and informational signs not readable from a public street.
   (b)   Sign Types. Parking garages and lots regulated by this section shall
be permitted identification, business, directional and information signs
displayed as either free-standing, projecting, wall or window signs.
   (c)   Number and Area. No more than two (2) permitted signs shall be
displayed at each vehicular entrance to the garage or lot. Except for
directional and information signs not exceeding four (4) square feet each in
area, no other signs shall be permitted on the property. Combined area of all
signage displayed at each entrance shall not exceed seventy-five (75) square
feet and no single sign shall exceed fifty (50) square feet in area.
   (d)   Supplemental Regulations. Individual signs permitted for parking
garages and lots shall conform to all regulations of this chapter not in
conflict with regulations of this section. With regard to the location of free-
standing signs, the regulations for retail zoning districts shall apply.
(Ord. No. 3076-A-89. Passed 12-10-90, eff. 12-20-90)
§ 350.18 Maintenance and Removal of Signs
   All signs and sign structures shall be maintained in a safe condition and
shall not exhibit evidence of significant wear, deterioration or damage.
Whenever the Commissioner of Building and Housing has ordered the repair or
removal of a permanent or temporary sign due to its hazardous condition or due
to the lack of an appropriate required permit and such action has not been
taken within forty-eight (48) hours of delivery of such notice to the person or
entity which owns the sign or on whose property it is displayed, the
Commissioner may cause the repair or removal of the sign at the expense of such
person or entity. If in the opinion of the Commissioner, the sign is so
hazardous as to constitute an immediate danger to human life, the Commissioner
shall promptly cause the repair or removal of the sign at the expense of such
person or entity, in accordance with division (i) of Section
3103.09, without the necessity of waiting forty-eight (48) hours.
(Ord. No. 3076-A-89. Passed 12-10-90, eff. 12-20-90)
§ 350.19 Nonconforming Signs and Uses
   A sign which is displayed pursuant to a Building Permit issued by the City,
but does not conform to current regulations, shall be deemed a legal
nonconforming sign (hereinafter referred to as a “nonconforming” sign) and
shall be governed by the following regulations:
   (a)   Permitted Repair and Alterations. A nonconforming sign may be painted,
cleaned or repaired as required in Section
350.18 but shall not be otherwise altered, moved or replaced unless made to
conform to current regulations. Such sign, however, may be altered to permit a
change of message or change of face if such change does not structurally alter
the sign casing or support.
   (b)   Limitation on Reconstruction. A nonconforming sign or part thereof
damaged or deteriorated to an extent exceeding fifty percent (50%) of its
replacement cost shall not be reconstructed or replaced unless made to conform
to regulations of this Code. For a nonconforming sign damaged by a single
incident (such as a storm), to an extent less than fifty percent (50%) of its
replacement cost, reconstruction is permitted only if such work is begun within
six (6) months of the incident and is completed within twelve (12) months of
the incident.
   (c)   Discontinuance of Use. A nonconforming sign shall be removed or made
to conform to regulations of this Code if the use to which the sign refers has
been discontinued for a continuous and immediately preceding period of at least
six (6) months, except as provided in division (f) of this section. In the case
of a nonconforming billboard, as defined in this chapter, such sign shall be
removed or made to conform to regulations of this Code if, for a continuous and
immediately preceding period of at least twelve (12) months, the billboard has
been blank or has displayed copy which is faded or damaged so as to render it
illegible or has referred to an event or activity which has ended or to a
business or product or service which has been discontinued.
   (d)   Temporary Signs. All nonconforming temporary signs, including portable
signs, shall be removed or made to comply with the regulations of this Code
within thirty (30) days after issuance of a violation notice by the City.
   (e)   Signs for Nonconforming Uses. For legal nonconforming uses, such as a
retail use in a residential zoning district, the applicable signage regulations
shall be those most appropriate to the nature of the nonconforming use.
   (f)   Landmark Signs. A landmark sign is one which is determined to be
historically or architecturally significant by the Landmarks Commission in
accordance with the standards of division (a) of Section
161.04 of the Codified Ordinances. A sign so identified by the Commission shall
be exempt from the prohibitions regarding reconstruction or retention as stated
in divisions (a) and (b) of Section
350.19. Any proposed reconstruction of such sign shall be permitted only if
approved by the Landmarks Commission in accordance with its customary standards
for review.
(Ord. No. 1435-99. Passed 2-28-00, eff. 3-6-00)
§ 350.20 Supplemental Regulations
   The following supplemental regulations shall apply to permitted signs in
non-residential zoning districts:
   (a)   Non-Ground Floor Uses. For uses not located on the ground floor and
for ground floor uses which lack direct access from the building exterior, the
following signs shall be permitted in addition to signs otherwise permitted for
the building. Regardless of the number of such uses in a building, not more
than one (1) wall or projecting identification sign, a maximum of twelve (12)
square feet in area, shall be placed at each ground floor entrance providing
access to the uses in question. In addition, for each such use, window signs
not exceeding twenty (20) square feet in total area shall be permitted for
display on the inside surface of windows within the subject space.
   (b)   Secondary Frontages and Entrances.
      (1)   Secondary Frontages. A building or building unit with frontage on a
second street or with a customer building entrance from a rear or side parking
lot shall be permitted total additional wall, window, projecting and canopy
sign area not to exceed fifty percent (50%) of the sign area otherwise
permitted. Such signs shall be displayed so that the total sign area placed on
any facade does not exceed the maximum sign area permitted for the building’s
primary frontage. This provision shall also apply to buildings or building
units with secondary frontage along the Cuyahoga River or Lake Erie and to
buildings adjoining a freeway right-of-way.
      (2)   Secondary Entrances. For lots served by more than one (1) vehicular
entrance, one (1) additional freestanding identification sign shall be
permitted at each additional vehicular entrance if the minimum distance between
any two (2) such signs is five hundred (500) feet as measured along street
lines. Where such distance is less than five hundred (500) feet but more than
three hundred (300) feet, a second free-standing identification sign shall be
permitted if the height of each such sign is no greater than twelve (12) feet
and the combined sign area of the two (2) signs is no greater than one hundred
fifty percent (150%) of the maximum sign area permitted for a single free-
standing identification sign on the subject property.
   (c)   New Businesses. Upon its initial opening, a new business establishment
may display a temporary identification sign for a maximum period of sixty-two
(62) days prior to installation of a permanent identification sign. Such
temporary sign may be a wall, window or portable sign which shall conform with
all regulations applicable to permanent signs (except clearly inapplicable
structural requirements) and shall be counted as part of the maximum permitted
permanent sign area. In addition, temporary window signs for such new
businesses may cover up to seventy- five percent (75%) of window area. Strings
of pennants, streamers, pinwheels, balloons and similar small lightweight
objects shall be permitted for “grand openings” for a single period not
exceeding seven (7) days within the first six (6) months after issuance of the
initial Occupancy Certificate for a new business.
   (d)   Open Lots. For uses without buildings, and for uses on lots where
building frontage in less than twenty percent (20%) of lot frontage, maximum
sign face area for the use, including free-standing signs, shall be the greater
of fifty (50) square feet or the figure resulting from the following formula
where “LW” equals the width of the lot frontage, as defined in division (a)(2)
of Section
350.05: LW x 1.0 = SQUARE FEET OF SIGNAGE. The area of a free- standing sign
shall in no instance exceed one hundred (100) square feet.
   (e)   Major Public Assembly Facilities. For public assembly facilities
located within the Central Business District and providing a minimum seating or
attendance capacity of five thousand (5,000) persons, signage shall be
permitted in accordance with the following standards contained in this division
(e) which recognize the unique nature of these large-scale public assembly
facilities. Except as provided in these standards, all other regulations of
this Zoning Code shall apply to such signage.
      (1)   Type, Number, Height and Location of Signs. The City Planning
Commission may authorize variations in otherwise applicable regulations of this
chapter to the extent necessary to provide adequate information to the public.
      (2)   Electronic Changeable Copy Signs. Information displayed through
electronically changeable copy on signs located on the premises of a qualifying
public assembly facility or on property located within five hundred (500) feet
of the qualifying public assembly facility and owned or leased by the owners of
said public assembly facility shall be limited to the following:
         A.   Identification of the facility or events held at the facility;
         B.   Identification of the events held at other local public assembly
facilities and identification of festivals and other special events held in the
City;
         C.   Identification of products or services offered for sale on the
premises of the qualifying public assembly facility;
         D.   Public service messages, such as time, temperature and
information of a civil nature, including welcoming of visitors to the City;
         E.   Acknowledgement of organizations or individuals sponsoring events
held at the facility or contributing to the construction or operation of the
facility as sponsors or patrons.
(Ord. No. 1435-99. Passed 2-28-00, eff. 3-6-00)
§ 350.21 Exempt Signs
   The provisions of this chapter shall not govern the display of the following
signs and objects:
   (a)   The American, Ohio and Cleveland flags and flags of other nations or
nationality groups (except where used as part of a sign advertising a product
or service);
   (b)   Governmental signs providing traffic control information and similar
public information;
   (c)   Signs which are part of the original construction of a vending
machine, fuel pump or similar device;
   (d)   Any monument within a cemetery;
   (e)   Cornerstones and permanent building plaques displaying the date of
construction, architect’s name, building name, historical information, etc.,
and not exceeding eight (8) square feet in area;
   (f)   Signs in non-residential districts displaying only a street address
and not exceeding two (2) square feet in area;
   (g)   Holiday decorations, excluding advertising, displayed for reasonable
and customary durations of time;
   (h)   Vehicles regularly and customarily used to transport persons or
property for a business;
   (i)   Works of art that do not include a commercial message; and
   (j)   Signs identifying the name and sponsoring agency of a children’s day
care center, provided that no more than one (1) such sign is displayed at each
such facility and that such sign does not exceed ten (10) square feet in
surface area.
(Ord. No. 689-93. Passed 4-5-93, eff. 4-8-93)
§ 350.22 Appeal
   The Board of Zoning Appeals may, in specific cases, vary or permit
exceptions to any of the provisions of this chapter if it finds that such
variance or exception will not violate the spirit or intent of this chapter and
is in accordance with the general criteria for the granting of Variances as
stated in Chapter
329.
(Ord. No. 3076-A-89. Passed 12-10-90, eff. 12-20-90)
CHAPTER 351 – RIPARIAN SETBACKS AND WETLANDS SETBACKS
351.01   Purpose
351.02   Scope, Applicability, and Activities Requiring a Permit
351.03   Consultation and Coordination with Other Regulatory Agencies
351.04   Definitions
351.05   Establishment of Designated Watercourses and Riparian Setbacks
351.06   Establishment of Wetland Setbacks
351.07   Procedure for Wetland Setbacks
351.08   Uses Permitted in Riparian and Wetland Setbacks
351.09   Uses Prohibited in Riparian and Wetland Setbacks
351.10   Non-conforming Structures or Uses in Riparian and Wetland Setbacks
351.11   Variances Within Riparian and Wetland Setbacks
351.12   Mitigation
351.13   Monitoring Program
351.14   Financial Guarantees
351.15   Boundary Interpretation and Appeals Procedure
351.16   Inspection of Riparian and Wetland Setback
351.17   Disclaimer of Liability
351.18   Conflicts, Severability, Nuisances and Responsibility
351.19   Authority to Stop Work
   Note: Former Chapter 351, Signs Along Highways, was repealed by Ord. No.
3076-A-89, passed 12-10-90, eff. 12-20-90, as amended by Ord. No. 729-91,
passed 3-28-91, eff. 4-2-91.
§ 351.01 Purpose
   (a)   It is determined that the system of wetlands, riparian areas, rivers,
streams, and other natural watercourses within the City contributes to the
health, safety, and general welfare of the residents. The specific purpose and
intent of this chapter is to regulate uses and developments within riparian and
wetland areas for the benefit of the City for the following reasons:
      (1)   To establish consistent, technically feasible and operationally
practical standards to achieve a level of storm water quantity and quality
control to minimize damage to public and private property and degradation of
water resources from the impacts of flooding, erosion and storm water
pollution.
      (2)   To reduce flood impacts by absorbing peak flows, slowing the
velocity of floodwaters, and regulating base flow.
      (3)   To reduce urban storm water pollutants, including pollutants
already present in watercourses, especially during periods of high flows,
through filtration, settlement, and absorption and transformation of those
pollutants in the riparian and wetland setback, before the pollutants enter
watercourses.
      (4)   To reduce sediment pollution, especially from erosion, by
preventing unnecessary stripping of vegetation and loss of soil, especially
adjacent to water resources and wetlands.
      (5)   To assist in stabilizing the banks of watercourses to reduce bank
erosion and the downstream transport of sediments eroded from watercourse
banks.
      (6)   To preserve to the maximum extent practicable the value of the
natural drainage characteristics in the City, including on building sites,
minimizing the need for costly engineering solutions to flooding and erosion
problems such as the construction, repair, and replacement of enclosed storm
drain systems.
      (7)   To minimize encroachment on wetlands and watercourse channels and
the need for costly engineering solutions such as dams, retention basins, and
rip rap armoring, to protect structures and reduce property damage and threats
to the safety of residents; and contribute to the scenic beauty and environment
of the City preserving the character of the City, the quality of life of the
residents of the City, and corresponding property values.
      (8)   To reduce the need for costly maintenance and repairs to roads,
embankments, sewage systems, ditches, water resources, and wetlands, resulting
from inadequate storm water management due to the loss of riparian areas and
wetlands.
      (9)   To protect and maintain the receiving water's or wetland's
physical, chemical, and biological characteristics and, in turn, to maintain
its riparian or wetland functions, benefits and values.
      (10)   Provide habitat to a wide array of aquatic organisms and wildlife,
including but not limited to many that are on Ohio's Endangered and/or
Threatened Species listings, by maintaining diverse and connected riparian and
wetland vegetation.
      (11)   To reduce the long-term expense of remedial projects and
maintenance projects needed to address problems caused by inadequate storm
water management and control.
   (b)   The following regulations have been enacted to protect the values,
services and benefits riparian and wetland areas provide by establishing
reasonable management and controls governing structures and uses within a
wetland setback and a riparian setback along designated watercourses in the
City.
(Ord. No. 1555-13. Passed 10-17-16, eff. 10-19-16)
§ 351.02 Scope, Applicability, and Activities Requiring a Permit
   (a)   Applicability and Compliance.
      (1)   These regulations shall apply to:
         A.   All activities, uses and structures on lands and waters that are
within the jurisdiction of the City and that contain or are adjacent to
designated watercourses or wetlands as defined in these regulations, excepting
from all the portion of the Cuyahoga River and the Old River Bed & Ship Channel
extending from Lake Erie southerly as shown in the City of Cleveland, Division
of Engineering and Construction, Cuyahoga River Dock Line Maps (C32) sheets 1
through 3 to its intersection with the centerline of the Denison Harvard Bridge
right of way as shown on sheet number 3 of the aforesaid Cuyahoga River Dock
Line Maps and the Lake Erie Waterfront or as otherwise exempted in this
chapter.
         B.   These regulations shall apply to property subdivision/property/
parcel split plan approvals, site plan approvals, and land development plan
approvals in regulated areas under this chapter.
         C.   These regulations shall apply to all building permits, which
involve activities regulated under this chapter.
      (2)   Activities Regulated by Permit. All activities in regulated
riparian or wetland areas in this chapter including: filling; excavating;
dredging; clear-cutting; grading; construction; removal of peat, sand or
gravel; alteration of the water level or water table; disturbance of any
surface drainage characteristics, sediment patterns or flood retention
characteristics; or any other alteration or use of a riparian or wetland area
that is not exempted from the permit requirement under this chapter. Any such
activity shall require a permit from the Department of Building and Housing.
The Department of Building and Housing will issue no approvals or permits for
activities that do not meet the standards and criteria in this chapter or
without the applicant's full compliance with the terms of this chapter.
      (3)   Before any permit or certificate of occupancy is issued, the
Director of Building and Housing, or the Director's designated representative,
shall examine or cause to be examined the application, and any plans and plot
plan accompanying the application, to ascertain whether the proposed work and
use will conform to the provisions of this chapter, and all other applicable
Codified Ordinances. At least four (4) copies of site, construction, and
topography plans and elevations drawn to a measurable scale to the
specifications, required to determine compliance, are required to be submitted
with the application. No permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued
unless the proposed work and use conform to the provisions of all applicable
sections of this chapter and the Cleveland Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 1555-13. Passed 10-17-16, eff. 10-19-16)
§ 351.03 Consultation and Coordination with Other Regulatory Agencies
   (a)   In implementing these regulations, the Director of Building and
Housing or other City officials may consult with the local county Soil and
Water Conservation District (SWCD), state and federal agencies and any other
technical experts the Director deems necessary. Any costs associated with such
consultations may be assessed to the applicant or his or her designated
representative.
   (b)   The Director may require that a permit applicant obtain any other
applicable federal, state, or local regulatory permits needed for a proposed
activity before applying for a permit under this chapter.
(Ord. No. 1555-13. Passed 10-17-16, eff. 10-19-16)
§ 351.04 Definitions
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   "Approving Authority" means the official responsible for administering
the applicable program(s).
   (b)   "Best Management Practice (BMP)". With regard to this chapter, BMP
means any practice or combination of practices that is determined to be the
most effective, practicable (including technological, economic, and
institutional considerations) means of preventing or reducing the amount of
pollution generated by nonpoint sources of pollution to a level compatible with
water quality goals. BMPs may include structural practices, conservation
practices and operation and maintenance procedures.
   (c)   "Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control (CPESC)" means
a person that has subscribed to the Code of Ethics and has met the requirements
established by the CPESC Council of Certified Professional in Erosion and
Sediment Control, Inc. to be a Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment
Control.
   (d)   "Channel" means a natural stream that conveys water, or a ditch or
channel excavated for the natural flow of water.
   (e)   "Concentrated Storm Water Runoff" means surface water runoff which
converges and flows primarily through water conveyance features such as swales,
gullies, waterways, channels, or storm sewers, and which exceeds the maximum
specified flow rates of filters or perimeter controls intended to control sheet
flow.
   (f)   "Conservation" means the wise use and management of natural resources.
   (g)   "Damaged or Diseased Trees" means trees that have split trunks, broken
tops, heart rot, or insect or fungus problems, that will lead to imminent death
or undercut root systems that put the tree in imminent danger of falling or
leaning as a result of root failure that puts the tree in imminent danger of
falling, or any other condition that puts the tree in imminent danger of being
uprooted or falling.
   (h)   "Designated Watercourse" means a watercourse that is contained within,
flows through, or borders the City and meets the criteria set forth in these
regulations.
   (i)   "Deteriorated Structure" means a structure which has sustained
substantial damage from any origin and which the cost of restoring the
structure to its before-damaged condition would be equal to or greater than
fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
   (j)   "Development Area" means any tract, lot, or parcel of land, or
combination of tracts, lots or parcels of land, which are in one ownership, or
are contiguous and in diverse ownership, where earth disturbing activity is to
be performed.
   (k)   "Ditch" means an excavation, either dug or natural, for the purpose of
drainage or irrigation, and having intermittent flow.
   (l)   "Dumping" means the grading, pushing, piling, throwing, unloading or
placing of soil or other material.
   (m)   "Earth Disturbing Activity" means any grading, excavating, filling, or
other alteration of the earth's surface where natural or human-made ground
cover is destroyed.
   (n)   "Erosion" means the process by which the land surface is worn away by
the action of water, wind, ice, or gravity.
   (o)   "Existing" means in existence at the time of the passage of this
chapter and these regulations.
   (p)   "Federal Emergency Management Agency ("FEMA)" means the agency with
overall responsibility for administering the National Flood Insurance Program.
   (q)   "Grading" means earth disturbing activity such as excavation,
stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling, or any combination thereof.
   (r)   "Impervious Cover" means any surface that cannot effectively absorb or
infiltrate water. This includes, but is not limited to, roads, streets, parking
lots, rooftops, and sidewalks.
   (s)   "Intermittent Stream" means a natural channel that may have some water
in pools, but where surface flows are non-existent or interstitial (flowing
through sand and gravel in stream beds) for periods of one (1) week or more
during typical summer months.
   (t)   "Larger Common Plan of Development or Sale" means a contiguous area
where multiple separate and distinct construction activities may be taking
place at different times on different schedules under one (1) plan.
   (u)   "Landslide" means the rapid mass movement of soil and rock material
downhill under the influence of gravity in which the movement of the soil mass
occurs along an interior surface of sliding.
   (v)   "Local County SWCD" means the Cuyahoga County Soil and Water
Conservation District.
   (w)   "National Wetlands Inventory Map" means wetland maps that were created
by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and the U.S. Department of Interior.
   (x)   "Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)" means an agency of the
United States Department of Agriculture, formerly known as the Soil
Conservation Service (SCS).
   (y)   "NPDES Permit" means a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
Permit issued by Ohio EPA under the authority of the USEPA, and derived from
the Federal Clean Water Act.
   (z)   "Noxious Weed" means any plant species defined by the Ohio Department
of Agriculture as a "noxious weed" and listed as such by the Department. For
the purposes of this regulation, the most recent version of this list at the
time of application of these regulations shall prevail.
   (aa)   "Ohio EPA" means the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency.
   (bb)   "Ohio Wetlands Inventory Map" means wetland maps that were created by
the Natural Resources Conservation Service, USDA, and the Ohio Department of
Natural Resources.
   (cc)   "Ordinary High Water Mark" means the point of the bank or shore up to
which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to leave a
distinctive mark by erosion, destruction or prevention of woody terrestrial
vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other easily recognized
characteristic.
   (dd)   "Outfall" means an area where water flows from a structure such as a
conduit, storm sewer, improved channel or drain, and the area immediately
beyond the structure which is impacted by the velocity of flow in the
structure.
   (ee)   "Person" means any individual, corporation, partnership, joint
venture, agency, unincorporated association, municipal corporation, township,
county, state agency, the federal government, or any combination thereof.
   (ff)   "Perennial Stream" means a natural channel that contains water
throughout the year, except possibly during periods of extreme drought.
   (gg)   "Professional Engineer" means a person registered in the State of
Ohio as a Professional Engineer, with specific education and experience in
water resources engineering, acting in strict conformance with the Code of
Ethics of the Ohio Board of Registration for Engineers and Surveyors.
   (hh)   "Qualified Forester" means any forester employed by the Ohio
Department of Natural Resources, Division of Forestry, or any person attaining
the credential of Certified Forester as conferred by the Society of American
Foresters.
   (ii)   "Qualified Wetland Professional" means an individual qualified and
competent in the areas of botany, hydric soils, and wetland hydrology, and is
acceptable to the Director of Building and Housing as meeting these
qualifications.
   (jj)   "Redevelopment" means the demolition or removal of existing
structures or land uses and construction of new ones.
   (kk)   "Retention Basin" means a storm water management pond that maintains
a permanent pool of water. These storm water management ponds include a
properly engineered/designed volume dedicated to the temporary storage and slow
release of runoff waters.
   (ll)   "Riparian Area" means the area adjacent to watercourses that if
naturally vegetated and/or appropriately revegetated and appropriately sized,
limits erosion, reduces flood flows, and/or filters and settles out runoff
pollutants, or which performs other functions consistent with the purposes of
these regulations.
   (mm)   "Riparian Setback" means those lands within the City that are
alongside streams, and which fall within the area defined by the criteria set
forth in these regulations.
   (nn)   "Sediment" means solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in
suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by
wind, water, gravity or ice, and has come to rest on the earth's surface either
on dry land or in a body of water.
   (oo)   "Sediment Control" means the limiting of sediment being transported,
by controlling erosion or detaining sediment-laden water, and allowing the
sediment to settle out.
   (pp)   "Sediment Pollution" means failure to use management or conservation
practices to control wind or water erosion of the soil and to minimize the
degradation of water resources by soil sediment in conjunction with land
grading, excavating, filling, or other soil disturbing activities on land used
or being developed for commercial, industrial, residential, or other purposes.
   (qq)   "Sensitive Area" means an area or water resource that requires
special management because of its susceptibility to sediment pollution or
because of its importance to the well-being of the surrounding communities,
region, or the state and includes, but is not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Ponds, wetlands or small lakes with less than five (5) acres of
surface area;
      (2)   Small streams with gradients less than ten (10) feet per mile with
average annual flows of less than three and one-half (3.5) feet per second
containing sand or gravel bottoms.
      (3)   Drainage areas of a locally designated or an Ohio designated Scenic
River.
      (4)   Riparian and wetland areas.
   (rr)   "Sheet Flow" means water runoff in a thin uniform layer or rills and
which is of a small enough quantity to be treated by sediment barriers.
   (ss)   "Silviculture" means the theory and practice of controlling forest
establishment, composition and growth.
   (tt)   "Slip" means a landslide as defined under "Landslides".
   (uu)   "Sloughing" means a slip or downward movement of an extended layer of
soil resulting from the undermining action of water or the earth disturbing
activity of humans.
   (vv)   "Soil" means unconsolidated erodible earth material consisting of
minerals and/or organics.
   (ww)   "Soil Conservation Service, USDA" means the federal agency now titled
the "Natural Resources Conservation Service," which is an agency of the United
States Department of Agriculture.
   (xx)   "Soil Disturbing Activity" means clearing, grading, excavating,
filling, or other alteration of the earth's surface where natural or human made
ground cover is destroyed and which may result in, or contribute to, soil
erosion and sediment pollution.
   (yy)   "Soil Erosion and Sediment Control" means a written and/or drawn soil
erosion and sediment pollution control plan to minimize erosion and prevent
off-site sedimentation throughout all earth disturbing activities on a
development area.
   (zz)   "Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Practices" means conservation
measures used to control sediment pollution and includes structural practices,
vegetative practices and management techniques.
   (aaa)   "Soil Survey" means the official soil survey produced by the Natural
Resources Conservation Service, USDA in cooperation with the Division of Soil
and Water Conservation, ODNR and the local Board of County Commissioners.
   (bbb)   "Storm Water Conveyance System" means all storm sewers, channels,
streams, ponds, lakes, etc., used for conveying concentrated storm water
runoff, or for storing storm water runoff.
   (ccc)   "Stream" means a body of water running or flowing on the earth's
surface, or a channel in which such flow occurs. Flow may be seasonally
intermittent.
   (ddd)   "Substantial Damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a
structure and the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged
condition would be equal to or greater than fifty percent (50%) of the market
value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   (eee)   "USEPA" means the United States Environmental Protection Agency.
   (fff)   "100-Year Floodplain" means any land susceptible to being inundated
by water from a base flood. The base flood is the flood that has a one percent
(1%) or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. For the
purposes of this regulation, the one hundred (100) year floodplain shall be
defined by FEMA or a site-specific Floodplain Delineation in conformance with
standard engineering practices and the standards and criteria in the City's
Floodplain Management Ordinance at
Chapter 3167.
   (ggg)   "Watercourse" means any natural, perennial, or intermittent lake,
pond, channel, stream, river, creek or brook with a defined bed and bank or
shore.
   (hhh)   "Water Resources" means all streams, lakes, ponds, wetlands, water
courses, waterways, drainage systems, and all other bodies or accumulations of
surface water, either natural or artificial, which are situated wholly or
partly within, or border upon this state, or are within its jurisdiction,
except those private waters that do not combine or affect a junction with
natural surface waters.
   (iii)   "Wetland" means those areas that are inundated or saturated by
surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and
that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally
includes, but are not limited to lands and waters meeting this definition and
otherwise often referred to as swamps, marshes, bogs, wetland meadows,
ephemeral and tributary streams, vernal pools, reservoirs, ponds, lakes and the
land under water bodies.
   (jjj)   "Wetland, Ohio EPA Category 2 Wetlands" means those wetlands
classified by the Ohio EPA as Category 2 wetlands under OAC 3745-1-54(C)(2), or
current equivalent Ohio EPA classification, under generally accepted wetland
functional assessment methods acceptable to the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
and Ohio EPA at the time of application of this regulation.
   (kkk)   "Wetland, Ohio EPA Category 3 Wetlands" means those wetlands
classified by the Ohio EPA as Category 3 wetlands under OAC 3745-1-54(C)(3), or
current equivalent Ohio EPA classification, under generally accepted wetland
functional assessment methods acceptable to the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
and Ohio EPA at the time of application of this regulation.
   (lll)   "Wetland Setback" means those lands within the City that fall within
the area defined by the criteria set forth in these regulations.
   (mmm)   "Winter" means October 1st to April 1st of each year.
(Ord. No. 1555-13. Passed 10-17-16, eff. 10-19-16)
§ 351.05 Establishment of Designated Watercourses and Riparian Setbacks
   (a)   Designated watercourses shall include those watercourses meeting any
one of the following criteria:
      (1)   All watercourses draining an area greater than one-half (1/2)
square mile, or
      (2)   All watercourses draining an area less than one-half (1/2) square
mile and having a defined bed and bank.
      (3)   In determining if watercourses have a defined bed and bank, the
City may consult with a representative of the local county SWCD or other
technical experts as necessary.
   (b)   Riparian setbacks on designated watercourses are established as
follows:
      (1)   A minimum of three hundred (300) feet on each side of all
watercourses draining an area greater than three hundred (300) square miles.
      (2)   A minimum of one hundred twenty (120) feet on each side of all
watercourses draining an area greater than twenty (20) square miles and up to
and including three hundred (300) square miles.
      (3)   A minimum of seventy-five (75) feet on each side of all
watercourses draining an area greater than one-half (1/2) square mile and up to
and including twenty (20) square miles.
      (4)   A minimum of twenty-five (25) feet on each side of all watercourses
draining an area less than one-half (1/2) square mile and having a defined bed
and bank as determined above.
   (c)   Riparian Setback Map.
      (1)   The City shall use the map "Water Features of the City of
Cleveland" produced by the City Planning Commission as the map identifying
designated watercourses and their riparian setbacks. Nothing in this chapter
shall prohibit the City from amending the map from time to time as may be
necessary.
      (2)   At the time of application of this regulation, if any discrepancy
is found between the map "Water Features of the City of Cleveland" and the
criteria for designated watercourses, riparian setbacks, or wetland setbacks as
set forth in these regulations, the criteria set forth in these regulations
shall prevail.
      (3)   In reviewing and interpreting the maps, the City may consult with a
representative of the local county SWCD and other technical experts as
necessary.
   (d)   The following conditions shall apply in riparian and wetland setbacks:
      (1)   Riparian and wetland setbacks shall be measured in a perpendicular
and horizontal direction outward from the ordinary high water mark of each
designated watercourse and defined wetland boundary.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this regulation, riparian and
wetland setbacks shall be preserved in their natural state, except that non-
conforming structures and non-conforming uses existing at the time of passage
of this regulation may be continued in their existing state as determined in
the these regulations. Riparian setbacks shall be established and marked in the
field prior to any soil disturbing or land clearing activities.
      (3)   Where the one hundred (100) year floodplain is wider than a
riparian setback on either or both sides of a designated watercourse, the
minimum riparian setback shall be extended to the outer edge of the one hundred
(100) year floodplain. The one hundred (100) year floodplain shall be defined
by FEMA and federal floodplain regulations and the City's Flood Plain
Management Ordinances at
Chapter 3167.
      (4)   Where a wetland is identified within a minimum riparian setback,
the minimum riparian setback width shall be extended to the outermost boundary
of the wetland. In addition, wetlands shall be protected to the extent detailed
in these regulations.
      (5)   Wetlands shall be delineated by a site survey approved by the City
using delineation protocols accepted by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and
the Ohio EPA at the time an application is made under this regulation. If a
conflict exists between the delineation protocols of these two (2) agencies,
the delineation protocol that results in the most inclusive area of wetland
shall apply. Any costs associated with reviewing these delineations may be
assessed by the City to the applicant.
   (e)   The applicant or his or her designated representative shall be
responsible for delineating riparian and wetland setbacks, including any
expansions or modifications as required by these regulations, and identifying
these setbacks on all property subdivision/property/parcel splits, commercial
development or other land development plans, and/or building permit
applications submitted to the City. This delineation may be done by a metes and
bounds, or higher level survey and shall be subject to review and approval by
the City. As a result of this review, the City may consult with a
representative of the local county SWCD or other technical experts as
necessary.
   (f)   Prior to any land clearing or soil disturbing activity, riparian and
wetland setbacks shall be clearly delineated on site by the applicant or his or
her designated representative, and the delineation shall be maintained
throughout soil disturbing activities.
   (g)   No approvals or subdivision plan approval, site plan approval, nor
land development plan approval shall be issued by the City prior to on-site
delineation of riparian and wetland setbacks in conformance with these
regulations. No building permits that include land clearing or soil disturbing
activities shall be issued by the City prior to delineation of riparian and
wetland setbacks in conformance with these regulations.
   (h)   Upon completion of an approved property subdivision/property/parcel
split, land development, or other improvement, riparian and wetland setbacks
shall be permanently recorded on the plat records of the City.
(Ord. No. 1555-13. Passed 10-17-16, eff. 10-19-16)
§ 351.06 Establishment of Wetland Setbacks
   Wetland setbacks are established as follows:
   (a)   A minimum of one hundred twenty (120) feet surrounding and including
all Ohio EPA Category 3 Wetlands, or current equivalent Ohio EPA
classification.
   (b)   A minimum of seventy-five (75) feet surrounding and including all Ohio
EPA Category 2 Wetlands, or current equivalent Ohio EPA classification.
(Ord. No. 1555-13. Passed 10-17-16, eff. 10-19-16)
§ 351.07 Procedure for Wetland Setbacks
   (a)   No change to parcel boundaries or land use change:
      (1)   Upon filing a request for a building permit that does not involve
changing of any parcel boundaries or changes in land use, the applicant will
check for indicators of wetlands on the National Wetlands Inventory maps, and
Ohio Wetlands Inventory map, and the Cuyahoga County Wetlands Inventory (if
applicable). A photocopy of the applicable section of each map will be attached
to the permit application.
      (2)   If a potential wetland is shown on any of the maps or if there is
reason for the City to believe that an unmapped wetland exists on or within one
hundred twenty (120) feet of the project site, the applicant will retain a
qualified wetland professional to evaluate the proposed project site for
wetlands or wetland buffer areas under this chapter. If no wetland or wetland
buffer areas are found, the applicant shall submit a letter from the qualified
wetland professional with the preliminary plat or permit application verifying
his or her negative findings.
   (b)   New residential or commercial or other type development and projects
involving a change to parcel boundaries or a land use change: upon filing a
request for approval of a preliminary plat or building permit for new
representative shall ensure that all wetlands are identified and wetland
setbacks are delineated. The applicant shall check for indicators of wetland on
the National Wetlands Inventory maps, and Ohio Wetlands Inventory map, and the
Cuyahoga County Wetlands Inventory (if applicable). If a potential wetland is
shown on any of the maps or if there is any other reason for the City to
believe that an unmapped wetland exists on or within one hundred twenty (120)
feet of the project site, the applicant shall retain a qualified wetland
professional to survey the proposed development site for wetlands or wetland
buffer areas under this chapter. If no wetlands are found, the applicant or his
or her representative shall retain a qualified wetland professional to survey
the proposed development site for wetlands. If no wetlands are found, the
applicant or his or her designated representative shall submit a letter with
the preliminary plat or permit application verifying that a qualified wetland
professional has surveyed the site and found no wetlands. If wetlands are
found, the following procedures shall be followed:
      (1)   A qualified wetland professional, acceptable to the Director of
Building and Housing, shall determine the presence of Ohio EPA Category 2 or 3
wetlands (or current equivalent Ohio EPA classification) on the proposed
development site using the latest version of the Ohio Rapid Assessment Method
for wetland evaluation approved at the time of application of this regulation.
Acceptance of this determination shall be subject to approval by the Director
of Building and Housing.
      (2)   If Ohio EPA Category 2 or 3 wetlands (or current equivalent Ohio
EPA classification) are located on the proposed development site, the applicant
or his or her designated representative shall delineate these wetlands and the
wetland setback in conformance with these regulations. The applicant or his or
her designated representative shall identify all delineated wetlands and their
associated setbacks on all property subdivision/property/parcel split plans,
land development plans, and/or permit applications submitted to the City.
   (c)   Wetlands shall be delineated by a site survey, approved by the City,
using delineation protocols accepted by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and
the Ohio EPA at the time of application of this regulation. If conflict exists
between the delineation protocols of these two (2) agencies, the delineation
protocol that results in the most inclusive area of wetland shall apply.
   (d)   Wetland setbacks shall be delineated through a metes and bounds, or
higher level, survey subject to approval by the City.
   (e)   Prior to any soil or vegetation disturbing activity, the applicant or
his or her designated representative shall delineate wetland setbacks on the
development site in such a way that they can be clearly viewed, and such
delineation shall be maintained throughout construction.
   (f)   No approvals or permits shall be issued by the City prior to
delineation of wetland setbacks in conformance with this regulation.
   (g)   Upon completion of an approved property subdivision/property/parcel
split, commercial development or other land development or improvement,
riparian and wetland setbacks shall be permanently recorded on the plat records
for the City and shall be maintained as open space thereafter through a
permanent conservation easement. A third party, not the landowner or permittee
or the City, which is allowed by state law, shall be given the conservation
easement. If no third party will accept the conservation easement, the City
shall accept it and protect it in perpetuity.
(Ord. No. 1555-13. Passed 10-17-16, eff. 10-19-16)
§ 351.08 Uses Permitted in Riparian and Wetland Setbacks
   (a)   By-Right Uses Without a Permit. No use permitted under these
regulations shall be construed as allowing public trespass on privately held
lands. Open space uses that are passive in character shall be permitted in
riparian and wetland setbacks, including the following:
      (1)   Recreational Activity. Passive recreational use activity, as
otherwise legally permitted by federal, state, and local laws, such as hiking,
swimming, fishing, hunting, picnicking, and similar uses.
      (2)   Removal of damaged or diseased trees and control of noxious weeds
if the control does not involve drainage or fill.
      (3)   Revegetation and/or Reforestation. Riparian and wetland setbacks
may be revegetated, enhanced or restored. Any revegetation must be performed
with non-invasive plant species. Refer to the Ohio Invasive Plant Species list
created by the Ohio Department of Natural Resources to determine invasive plant
species undesirable for revegetation, reforestation, or restoration of riparian
areas.
      (4)   Conservation of soil, vegetation, water, fish, and wildlife
consistent with the purposes of this chapter that does not involve hydrologic
modification or fill.
      (5)   Maintenance of Lawns, Gardens and Landscaping. Lawns, gardens and
landscaping that existed at the time this chapter was enacted may be maintained
as long as they are not increased in size to further encroach onto the riparian
area, wetland or watercourse. In that case, trees, shrubbery and other non-lawn
wood vegetation in the riparian or wetland setback must be maintained to the
extent practicable to reduce the impact to the riparian area, wetland or
watercourse.
   (b)   By-Right Uses With A Permit.
      (1)   Streambank Stabilization and Erosion Control Measures. Any activity
not prohibited by the regulations that also involves streambank stabilization
and erosion control measures may be performed in regulated areas as long as it
is conducted under the standards and specifications in the current edition of
Ohio's Rainwater and Land Development manual or other standards acceptable to
Ohio EPA.
      (2)   Crossings. Crossings of designated watercourses and through
riparian setbacks or wetland setbacks by publicly and privately owned roads,
drives, sewer and/or water lines and public and private utility transmission
lines shall only be allowed upon approval of a Crossing Plan by the Manager of
Engineering and Construction. Such crossings shall minimize disturbance in
riparian setbacks, wetland setbacks, and watercourse substrate and shall
mitigate any necessary disturbances. Soil erosive materials will not be used in
making stream crossings.
      (3)   Construction of Fencing. Construction of fencing shall be allowed
with the condition that reasonable efforts be taken to minimize the destruction
of existing vegetation, provided that the fence does not impede stream or flood
flow, and the disturbed area is replanted to the natural or preexisting
conditions before the addition of the fence, as approved by the Director of
Building and Housing.
(Ord. No. 1555-13. Passed 10-17-16, eff. 10-19-16)
§ 351.09 Uses Prohibited in Riparian and Wetland Setbacks
   Any use not authorized under this chapter shall be prohibited in riparian
and wetland setbacks. By way of example, the following uses are specifically
prohibited; however, prohibited uses are not limited to those examples listed
here:
   (a)   Construction. There shall be no structures of any kind.
   (b)   Dredging or Dumping. There shall be no drilling, filling, dredging, or
dumping of soil, spoils, liquid, or solid materials, except for non-commercial
composting of uncontaminated natural materials, and except as permitted under
this chapter.
   (c)   Roads or Driveways. There shall be no roads or driveways permitted in
riparian and/or wetland setback area, except as permitted under this chapter.
   (d)   Motorized Vehicles. There shall be no use of motorized vehicles,
except as permitted under this chapter.
   (e)   Disturbance of Natural Vegetation. There shall be no disturbance,
including mowing, of the natural vegetation, except for conservation
maintenance necessary to control noxious weeds; for plantings that are
consistent with this regulation; for disturbances that are approved under this
chapter; and for the passive enjoyment, access, and maintenance of landscaping
or lawns existing at the time of passage of this regulation as provided in the
chapter.
   (f)   Parking Lots. There shall be no parking lots or other human-made
impervious cover, except as permitted under this chapter.
   (g)   New Surface and/or Subsurface Sewage Disposal or Treatment Areas.
Riparian and wetland setbacks shall not be used for the disposal or treatment
of sewage except under local county Board of Health regulations in effect at
the time of application of this regulation.
   (h)   Crossings. Crossings of designated riparian and wetland setbacks by
publicly and privately owned sewer and/or water lines and small public and
small private utility transmission lines in accordance with a permit or
regulatory exemption issued by, or under the regulations of, the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers and the Ohio EPA.
   (i)   Other Permits and Approvals. Nothing in this chapter shall be
construed as exempting any person from obtaining other permits by other
agencies that may be required, including permits from the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers and/or the Ohio EPA under the federal and state Clean Water Acts.
(Ord. No. 1555-13. Passed 10-17-16, eff. 10-19-16)
§ 351.10 Non-conforming Structures or Uses in Riparian and Wetland Setbacks
   (a)   A non-conforming use within a riparian and wetland setback that is in
existence at the time of passage of this regulation and that is not otherwise
permitted under these regulations, may be continued. However, the use shall not
be changed or enlarged unless it is changed to a use permitted under these
regulations.
   (b)   A non-conforming structure within a riparian or wetland setback that
is in existence at the time of passage of this regulation and that is not
otherwise permitted under these regulations, may be continued, but shall not
have the existing building footprint or roofline expanded or enlarged.
   (c)   A non-conforming structure or use or deteriorated structure within a
riparian and wetland setback that is in existence at the time of passage of
this regulation and that is discontinued, terminated, or abandoned for a period
of six (6) months or more, may not be revived, restored, or re-established.
This section shall not apply to a structure that is vacant and that is not
subject to condemnation orders by the Director of Building and Housing unless
the vacant structure has been destroyed or damaged for more than fifty percent
(50%) of its value by flooding, wind, fire, or other natural or human-made
force. This section shall also not prohibit ordinary repairs to a residence or
residential accessory building that are not in conflict with other provisions
of this chapter.
   (d)   In the case of a non-conforming structure within a riparian or wetland
setback, the City will allow a ten (10) foot maintenance access zone measured
perpendicular to the structure, to temporarily extend further into the setback
as long as disturbance to existing vegetation is minimized and vegetation is
restored to the pre-existing state, as near as practical, upon completion. If
any soil disturbance in a wetland will occur as part of any such maintenance
activity, a permit from the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers or the Ohio EPA, as
appropriate, must be submitted prior to the onset of the soil disturbing
activity.
   (e)   In the case of a non-conforming residential structure, the Director of
Building and Housing may allow minor upgrades to the structure that extend
further into the riparian setback, such as awnings and pervious decks/patios,
provided the modifications do not extend more than ten (10) feet further toward
the watercourse than the original foundation of the structure existing at the
time of passage of this regulation, and further provided that the modification
will not impair the function of the riparian zone or wetland nor destabilize
any slope nor stream bank, as determined by the Director of Building and
Housing.
(Ord. No. 1555-13. Passed 10-17-16, eff. 10-19-16)
§ 351.11 Variances Within Riparian and Wetland Setbacks
   (a)   The Board of Zoning Appeals may grant a variance from this regulation
as provided in these Codified Ordinances. In determining whether there is
unnecessary hardship or practical difficulty to justify the granting of a
variance, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall consider the potential harm to, or
reduction in the functions of, the riparian area or wetland area that may be
caused by a proposed structure or use.
   (b)   In making a variance determination, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall
consider the following:
      (1)   Varying the front, rear and side yard setback before the riparian
and wetland setbacks are varied.
      (2)   Variances should not be granted for asphalt or concrete paving in
the riparian and wetland setbacks in any situation where gravel or porous
pavement (i.e., porous pavers, and similar products) will do the job.
   (c)   In making a variance determination, the Board of Zoning Appeals may
consider the following:
      (1)   A parcel existing at the time of enactment of this chapter is made
unbuildable.
      (2)   The soil type and natural vegetation of the parcel, as well as the
percentage of the parcel that is in the one hundred (100) year floodplain. The
standards and criteria for granting variances in the City's Flood Plain
Management Ordinances at
Chapter 3167 may be used as guidance.
      (3)   The extent to which the requested variance impairs the flood
control, soil erosion control, sediment control, water quality protection,
ecological functions, or other functions of the riparian area or wetland area.
This determination shall be based on sufficient technical and scientific data.
      (4)   The degree of hardship with respect to the use of the property or
the degree of practical difficulty with respect to maintaining the setback as
established in this chapter placed on the landowner, and the availability of
alternatives to the proposed structure or use.
      (5)   Soil disturbing activities permitted in a riparian setback areas or
wetland setback areas through variances should be controlled in order to
minimize clearing to the maximum extent possible, and must include Best
Management Practices necessary to minimize soil erosion and maximize sediment
control.
      (6)   The presence of significant impervious cover, or smooth vegetation
such as maintained lawns, in or near the riparian setback areas or wetland
setback areas that compromises the benefits of the riparian setback areas or
wetland setbacks areas received by the City.
      (7)   Whether the benefit of reduction of storm water infiltration into
the soil in wetland areas will be lost.
      (8)   If the request is for an above-ground fence, whether it increases
the existing area of mowed grass or lawn.
      (9)   Whether parking needs can be modified before varying the riparian
setback.
      (10)   Whether the building shape, size or design can be modified to
avoid or minimize intrusion into the riparian setback.
      (11)   In the case of a lot made unbuildable by this regulation, the
minimum variance needed to make it buildable for an appropriately-sized and
compatibly-designed structure, while following the guidance provided in this
section.
      (12)   Whether the variance will increase the likelihood of flood or
erosion damage to either the applicant's property or to other properties.
      (13)   Culverting of watercourses should be avoided.
      (14)   Whether the variance will result in the need for artificial slope
or bank stabilization measures that could interfere with the function of the
riparian or wetland zone.
(Ord. No. 1555-13. Passed 10-17-16, eff. 10-19-16)
§ 351.12 Mitigation
   All riparian or wetland restoration, creation and/or enhancement projects
required under this chapter either as a permit condition or as a result of an
enforcement action shall follow a mitigation plan prepared by a qualified
professional and approved by the Director of Building and Housing. The
applicant or violator shall receive written approval of the mitigation plan by
the Director of Building and Housing prior to commencement of any wetland area
restoration, creation or enhancement activity. To realize preservation goals,
the City will use the following methods of riparian or wetland impact
mitigation in order of preference:
   (a)   The applicant shall avoid all impacts that degrade the functions and
value of the wetland. Unless otherwise provided in this chapter if alteration
to the area is unavoidable, all adverse impacts to the area and associated
buffer resulting from a development proposal shall be mitigated under an
approved wetland report and an approved mitigation plan.
   (b)   Mitigation shall be in-kind and onsite, when possible, and sufficient
to maintain the functions and values of the riparian/wetland area.
   (c)   Mitigation shall not be implemented until after the Director of
Building and Housing or his or her designated authority has approved the
appropriate wetland report and mitigation plan.
   (d)   Mitigation Measures. Mitigation shall achieve equivalent or greater
biological and habitat functions as existed in wetland prior to mitigation.
Applicants shall demonstrate that all reasonable efforts have been examined
with the intent to avoid and minimize impacts to these areas. When an
alteration is proposed, such alteration shall be avoided, minimized, or
compensated for in the following order of preference:
      (1)   Avoid impact altogether by not taking a certain action or parts of
an action;
      (2)   Minimize impact by limiting the degree or magnitude of the action
by project redesign, relocation, timing changes, or technological applications;
      (3)   Rectifying the impacts to wetlands, frequently flooded areas, and
habitat conservation areas by repairing, rehabilitating, or restoring the
affected environment to conditions equal to or higher quality than at the time
of initiation of the project;
      (4)   Restoring, replacing, or enhancing the wetland on site of the
project;
      (5)   Restoring, replacing, or enhancing degraded riparian corridors/
wetlands in the same sub-basin;
      (6)   Preserving high quality wetlands that are under eminent threat;
      (7)   Reduce or eliminate the impact over time by prevention and
maintenance operations during the life of the actions;
      (8)   Compensate for the impact by replacing, enhancing or providing
substitute resources or environments;
      (9)   All mitigation efforts will be monitored and remedial action taken
if necessary
      (10)   Mitigation actions shall be conducted within the same sub-drainage
basin and on the impacted site.
(Ord. No. 1555-13. Passed 10-17-16, eff. 10-19-16)
§ 351.13 Monitoring Program
   The mitigation plan shall include a program for monitoring construction, and
for assessing a completed project by a riparian corridor/wetland specialist. A
protocol for the schedule of monitoring and reporting shall be implemented that
verify the performance standards are being met. The period of monitoring shall
be adequate to verify that the performance goals and objectives are being met
and will vary at the discretion of the Director of Building and Housing, or his
or her designated authority. Monitoring would never be less than three (3)
years.
(Ord. No. 1555-13. Passed 10-17-16, eff. 10-19-16)
§ 351.14 Financial Guarantees
   The mitigation plan shall include financial guarantees, if necessary, to
ensure that the mitigation plan is fully implemented. The requirement of
financial guarantees is at the discretion of the Director of Building and
Housing based on the size, complexity, and cost of the mitigation project. If
financial guarantees are required they shall be of sufficient funding to ensure
mitigation, maintenance, and monitoring.
(Ord. No. 1555-13. Passed 10-17-16, eff. 10-19-16)
§ 351.15 Boundary Interpretation and Appeals Procedure
   Any applicant seeking a variance to the regulations or criteria under this
chapter or any appeal of an administrative order made under this chapter may
request the variance or make an appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals. The
following procedures shall apply:
   (a)   Before filing the request or appeal, when an applicant or his or her
designated representative disputes the boundary of a riparian or wetland
setback or the ordinary high water mark of a watercourse, the applicant or his
or her designated representative shall submit documentation to the Director of
Building and Housing which describes the boundary, the applicant's proposed
boundary, and justification for the proposed boundary change.
   (b)   The Department of Building and Housing shall evaluate this
documentation and shall make a determination within sixty (60) days. If during
this evaluation the Department of Building and Housing requires further
information, it may be required of the applicant. In the event that the
Department of Building and Housing requests such additional information, the
sixty (60) day period for determination shall be postponed until the applicant
provides the information.
   (c)   If the applicant does not receive the determination regarding the
boundary dispute within sixty (60) days, the applicant's submission shall be
considered denied and the denial may be appealed to the Board of Zoning Appeals
within thirty (30) days. In the event the applicant receives an adverse
determination, that determination may be appealed to the Board of Zoning
Appeals within thirty (30) days.
(Ord. No. 1555-13. Passed 10-17-16, eff. 10-19-16)
§ 351.16 Inspection of Riparian and Wetland Setback
   The delineation of riparian setbacks or wetland setbacks may be inspected by
the City, as follows:
   (a)   Prior to any soil disturbing activities authorized by the City for a
property subdivision/property/parcel split, land development plan, and/or
building permit. The applicant or his or her designated representative shall
provide the Department of Building and Housing with at least five (5) working
days' notice under this chapter prior to starting soil disturbing or land
clearing activities.
   (b)   Prior to starting any of the activities authorized by this chapter,
the applicant or his or her designated representative shall provide the
Department of Building and Housing with at least five (5) working days' notice
prior to starting the activities.
   (c)   Any time evidence is brought to the attention of the City that uses or
structures are occurring that may reasonably be expected to violate the
provisions of these regulations.
(Ord. No. 1555-13. Passed 10-17-16, eff. 10-19-16)
§ 351.17 Disclaimer of Liability
   Neither submission of a plan under the provisions of this chapter, nor
compliance with the provisions of these regulations, shall relieve any person
or entity from responsibility for damage to any person or property that is
otherwise imposed by law.
(Ord. No. 1555-13. Passed 10-17-16, eff. 10-19-16)
§ 351.18 Conflicts, Severability, Nuisances and Responsibility
   (a)   Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon land than is
imposed or required by other City provisions of law, ordinance, contract or
deed, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail.
   (b)   If a court of competent jurisdiction declares any clause, section, or
provision of these regulations invalid or unconstitutional, the validity of the
remainder shall not be affected.
   (c)   These regulations shall not be construed as authorizing any person to
maintain a private or public nuisance on his or her property. Compliance with
the provisions of this regulation shall not be a defense in any action to abate
the nuisance.
   (d)   Failure of the City to observe or recognize hazardous or unsightly
conditions or to recommend corrective measures shall not relieve the owner from
the responsibility for the condition or damage resulting there from, and shall
not result in the City, its officers, employees, or agents being responsible
for any condition or damage resulting there from.
(Ord. No. 1555-13. Passed 10-17-16, eff. 10-19-16)
§ 351.19 Authority to Stop Work
   Upon notice from the Director of Building and Housing, or designated
representative, that work is being performed contrary to this regulation, such
work shall immediately stop. The notice shall be in writing and shall be given
to the owner or person responsible for the development area, or person
performing the work, and shall state the conditions under which the work may be
resumed; provided, however, in instances where immediate action is deemed
necessary for public safety or the public interest, the Director of Building
and Housing may require that work be stopped upon verbal order pending issuance
of the written order.
(Ord. No. 1555-13. Passed 10-17-16, eff. 10-19-16)
CHAPTER 352 – LANDSCAPING, SCREENING, AND PARKING LOT AND PUBLIC GARAGE
LIGHTING
Note: Ord. No. 639-2024, passed 11-4-24, eff. 11-6-24, renamed this chapter,
which was formerly “Landscaping and Screening”. Subsequently, Ord. No. 726-
2025, passed 8-13-25, eff. 8-18-25, renamed this chapter, which was formerly
“Landscaping, Screening, and Outdoor Parking Lot Lighting”.
352.01   Purpose
352.02   Types
352.03   Where Required
352.04   Landscape Plan
352.05   Requirements for All Landscaped Areas
352.06   Installation and Maintenance
352.07   Other Provisions
352.08   Table Containing Zoning District Compatibility Index Numbers
352.09   Table Containing Uses Requiring Transition Strip
352.10   Table Containing Uses Requiring Other Screening or Landscaping
352.11   Table Containing Screening Intensity
352.12   Table Containing Required Contents of Landscaping Plan
352.13   Lighting Requirements for Parking Lots and Public Garages
§ 352.01 Purpose
   The purpose of the requirements in this chapter is to provide for
appropriate landscaping, screening, and parking lot and public garage lighting
that will:
   (a)   Protect residential and all other environments from adverse effects,
such as noise, odors and dust, of more intensive adjacent uses;
   (b)   Protect users of parking areas from excessive wind, glare, and
temperature extremes;
   (c)   Mitigate the adverse effects on public streets and adjacent properties
of noise, blowing dust and debris, water runoff, and glare from motor vehicle
headlights and parking area lighting;
   (d)   Provide adequate lighting in parking lots and public garages for the
safety of residents, pedestrians, and motorists;
   (e)   Discourage unsafe access to and circulation within off-street parking
areas;
   (f)   Contribute to improved community appearance and property values and
preserve and enhance the mature “established” character of City neighborhoods;
   (g)   Preserve privacy in residential areas next to non-residential uses and
discourage trespass thereupon;
   (h)   Provide trees that improve the urban environment by cooling the air
and land, reducing carbon dioxide in the air, and producing oxygen; and
   (i)   Compensate for the inability in an older, densely developed city like
Cleveland to buffer incompatible uses by use of wide yards and open spaces.
(Ord. No. 726-2025. Passed 8-13-25, eff. 8-18-25)
§ 352.02 Types
   (a)   Transition Strip. A Transition Strip is a landscaped screening strip
of an intensity specified in the table contained in Section
352.09 located along the length of all lot lines that abut an adjacent lot
having zoning of a different intensity.
   (b)   Frontage Strip. A Frontage Strip is a landscaped screening strip
located along the length of front and corner side lot lines in actual front or
corner side yards that accommodate parking or other areas specified in the
table contained in Section
352.10 requiring screening from public streets.
   (c)   Island Strip. An Island Strip is a landscaped area located within an
off-street parking area as required by the table contained in Section
352.10 to guide traffic circulation, reduce glare and temperature extremes, and
improve the appearance of the parking area.
   (d)   Screen Barrier. A Screen Barrier is a fence, wall, or evergreen
landscape screening concealing uses specified in the table contained in Section
352.10 from view from the ground floor level adjoining properties and from the
street.
(Ord. No. 3077-A-89. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 7-27-91)
§ 352.03 Where Required
   (a)   Transition Strips. Any use located on a lot having a rear or interior
side lot line abutting or across a court or alley right-of-way from a zoning
district with a lower index number as provided in the table contained in
Section
352.08 shall install a Transition Strip along such lot line as required by the
table contained in Section
352.09.
   (b)   Other. Frontage Strips, Island Strips, and Screen Barriers shall be
required as provided in the table contained in Section
352.10.
   (c)   Uses Approved by Board of Zoning Appeals. Because certain uses require
approval by the Board of Zoning Appeals under this chapter because of their
potential to create land use conflicts, in order to reduce such conflicts such
uses may be required by the Board to provide landscaping or screening that
exceeds the requirements herein.
   (d)   Exceptions.
      (1)   Screening on Abutting Lot. No screening shall be required along a
lot line if screening meeting all other requirements therefor exists along such
lot line on the abutting lot or lots. If such existing screening is lawfully
discontinued, screening on the subject lot meeting the requirements herein
shall be installed within sixty (60) days of the discontinuation.
      (2)   Below-Grade Areas. The height of a Frontage Strip or Screen Barrier
along a lot line which adjoins a below-grade parking or loading area may be
reduced by an amount which reflects the difference in grade between the parking
or loading area and the area along the lot line. Specifically, such difference
in grade shall be determined by comparing the highest point of the finished
grade of the parking or loading area and the average grade of the strip of lot
area within four (4) feet of the lot line.
      (3)   Shared Driveway. No screening shall be required along that portion
of a lot line along which there is a driveway or vehicular circulation aisle
that is shared with an abutting lot.
      (4)   Building Walls. A building wall meeting the requirements herein
shall qualify as wall screening under the table contained in Section
352.11 if its location along the lot line is legally nonconforming or is
permitted under yard and setback requirements of this chapter.
      (5)   Temporary Uses. A temporary use shall not be subject to the
provisions of this chapter if it has been issued a permit by the Commissioner
of Building and Housing limiting its duration to two hundred seventy (270) days
or less, or such a permit and no more than one (1) renewal thereof for no more
than ninety (90) additional days. Temporary “for hire” parking lots, however,
shall be subject to the applicable requirements contained in Chapter
457 of the Codified Ordinances.
      (6)   Downtown. No Transition Strip or Screen Barrier shall be required
in the Central Business District as defined in Section
325.12 except as a condition to a use requiring either approval under this
chapter by the Board of Zoning Appeals or design review approval under Chapter
341 (the Public Land Protective District) or under Chapter
161 (the Landmarks District). Frontage Strips and Island Strips shall be
required in the Central Business District, except as otherwise provided herein.
      (7)   Built-up Lots. The Commissioner of Building and Housing shall waive
the requirement for installation of any Strip or Screen Barrier, or reduce any
of the required dimensions thereof, for a new use on any developed lot where it
has been determined by the Director of the City Planning Commission that:
         A.   There is insufficient space to allow its installation; or
         B.   The Strip or Barrier could not be installed without creating
either a violation of any provision of this chapter or a greater degree of
nonconformity therewith; or
         C.   Installation would impede essential access onto or within the
lot.
      No waiver shall be granted if a reduction in dimensions of the Strip or
Barrier would allow its installation, and any such reduction shall be the
minimum needed to permit the installation, as determined by the Director of the
City Planning Commission.
      (8)   Access Ways. Transition Strips and Frontage Strips shall not be
required along the width of access ways. Width of access ways shall not be
counted for purposes of spacing requirements in the table contained in Section
352.11.
      (9)   Lots Without Water Supply. On any lot on which access to City water
for irrigation required for landscaping is unavailable or impractical in the
judgment of the Director of the City Planning Commission (such as may be the
case with a parking lot not associated with a building), the Director may
approve exceptions as provided herein.
         A.   In lieu of the trees and shrubs required by the table contained
in Section
352.11:
            1.   Where feasible in his or her judgment, the Director may
approve installation on the lot of drought-resistant xeriscape varieties
generally equivalent in number and dimensions to the installations required by
the table;
            2.   Otherwise, the Director may approve waiving the requirement
for shrubs and in lieu of the requirement for trees may approve installation of
street trees in the public right-of-way abutting the lot. Such street trees
shall meet the requirements of the table for trees and shall be approved by the
Division of Urban Forestry of the Department of Parks and Recreation.
         B.   In lieu of living ground cover in a landscaped strip required as
set forth in the table contained in Section
352.11 and division (c) of Section
352.05, the Director may approve exclusive use of non- living materials, such
as barks, stones or sand, in an ornamental arrangement but not artificial
plants or artificial turf. If in his or her judgment use of non- living
materials is impractical, the Director may approve waiving the requirement for
the landscaped strip.
      (10)   Alleys. No Frontage Strip shall be required abutting any alley or
court, as defined in Section
309.09, except as may be required in Chapter
457 of the Codified Ordinances.
      (11)   Vision Clearance Triangle. Notwithstanding any other provision
herein, no part of any wall, fence, hedge, berm, or other opaque landscaping or
screening obstruction, except for tree trunks and open fences (as defined
herein), shall project between two and one-half (2-1/2) feet and eight (8) feet
above grade within any vision clearance triangle.
      The vision clearance triangle shall be the area formed by the right-of-
way lines of two streets or a street and a railroad, or the right-of-way line
of a street and the edge of the pavement of a driveway, between their at-grade
intersection and points twenty-five (25) feet therefrom along each line, or ten
(10) feet in the case of a driveway, and a straight line connecting those two
(2) points. The restrictions for vision clearance triangles shall not apply
with regard to driveways on lots in one (1) family or two (2) family zoning
districts.
      (12)   Parking Districts. No Transition Strip shall be required abutting
a Parking District, as defined by the provisions of Chapter
339 of the Codified Ordinances. On a lot used for accessory parking in a
Parking District, abutting any Residence District a Medium Intensity Transition
Strip shall be required. On a lot in a Parking District developed in another
use, the required Transition Strip shall be as determined by the table
contained in Section
352.09.
      (13)   Other. Other exceptions may be approved by the Board of Zoning
Appeals under provisions for variances in Chapter
329.
(Ord. No. 3077-A-89. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 7-27-91)
§ 352.04 Landscape Plan
   (a)   For any use required to provide any Transition Strip, Frontage Strip,
or Island Strip, a Landscape Plan shall be filed with an application for:
      (1)   Rezoning (map amendment); or
      (2)   Any use requiring approval by the Board of Zoning Appeals; or
      (3)   Any variance from landscaping or screening requirements; or
      (4)   Building Permit or Certificate of Occupancy.
   The requirement for submission of a landscape plan shall be deferred in any
instance in which the specific use of the premises, and therefore the parking,
loading, or other requirements on which the requirements herein are based, are
not yet determined, such as in the case of an industrial subdivision the future
uses within which are not yet known.
   (b)   The Landscape Plan shall conform to the requirements of the table
contained in Section
352.12.
   (c)   No Landscape Plan shall be required for uses required to provide only
a Screen Barrier as provided in the table contained in Section
352.10. The application shall, however, describe the dimensions, materials,
color, and location of the Screen Barrier.
(Ord. No. 3077-A-89. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 7-27-91)
§ 352.05 Requirements for All Landscaped Areas
   (a)   Permitted Forms of Screening. Screening required in item 2 of the
table contained in Section
352.11 and the Screen Barrier required in the table contained in Section
352.10 may take the form of:
      (1)   A landscaped earthen berm;
      (2)   A concrete or masonry wall;
      (3)   A wood, wrought iron, tubular steel, or similar decorative fence as
approved by the Director of the City Planning Commission as compatible with the
character of the area in which the fence is to be placed;
      (4)   A compact hedge or other live evergreen vegetative barrier; or
      (5)   A combination thereof.
   Fences and walls used to meet screening requirements shall display a
finished face toward adjacent streets and properties.
   (b)   Types of Landscaping Materials. As determined by the Commissioner of
Park Maintenance, or the Commissioner of Urban Forestry, as appropriate,
(“Commissioner”) or a designee, or in accordance with standards promulgated by
the appropriate Commissioner or designee, all varieties of living landscape
materials used shall be:
      (1)   Healthy, hardy, and drought-resistant consistent with the
availability of water for artificial irrigation; and
      (2)   Suitable for the climate and environmental influences on the site,
such as exposure to sun, wind, water, heat, automobile exhaust fumes, and road
salt; and
      (3)   Compatible with the slope of the site, with existing vegetation to
be preserved and with utility lines above or below ground level; and
      (4)   Tree selection shall be based on recommended species in the
Cleveland Tree Plan as it may be amended from time to time.
   (c)   Ground Cover in Landscaped Strips. Grass or other ground cover shall
be planted over all landscaped strips including earthen faces of berms, except
in areas planted in flowers, shrubs, or trees, so as to present a finished
appearance and reasonably complete coverage within three (3) months after
planting.
   Non-living landscaping materials such as sand, stones, rocks, or barks may
be substituted for living cover over a maximum of thirty percent (30%) of the
landscaped area. No artificial plants or turf shall be used.
   (d)   Preservation of Landscaping.
      (1)   Credit Toward Requirements. The Director of Building and Housing,
in consultation with the Commissioner of Park Maintenance or the Commissioner
of Urban Forestry, as appropriate, or designee, shall credit healthy trees or
shrubs existing on a site prior to development and proposed to be preserved
toward the requirements of the table contained in Section
352.11.
      Except as provided herein for bonus credits, each preserved tree or shrub
meeting the applicable requirements of the table contained in Section
352.11 shall reduce by one (1) the number of new trees or shrubs required.
      (2)   Bonus Credit for Larger Trees. Larger preserved trees shall reduce
the number of new trees required in the table contained in Section
352.11 as follows:
 
Trunk Caliper of Existing Tree to be Reduction in Number of New Trees Required
Preserved*
8 - 16 inches                        2 trees
Over 16 inches                       3 trees
* Measured 4.5 feet above grade at base.
 
   (e)   Tree Protection During Construction. An applicant may claim a credit
for preservation of existing trees and shrubs under division (d) of this
section, and shall certify that all trees and shrubs for which a credit is
claimed are currently healthy. An applicant shall adhere to the requirements of
this section with respect to all trees on the site, including the trees for
which the credit is claimed.
      (1)   Tree protection during construction, including bark and root
protection, shall be according to Best Management Standards and ANSI Standards
for Arboriculture as may be amended from time to time.
      (2)   Damage Mitigation. Despite following Best Management Standards and
ANSI Standards for Arboriculture, as may be amended from time to time,
significant damage has been done to the roots, the tree may need to be removed
based on the assessment by the Commissioner of Urban Forestry or a designee. In
this case, the owner shall replace the tree with a tree or trees of equal or
greater diameter that are approved by the Commissioner of Urban Forestry or a
designee, or the owner shall make payment to the City’s Tree Preservation Fund
for the replacement cost of the tree as established using the Trunk Formula
Method outlined in The Guide for Plant Appraisal by the Council of Tree and
Landscape Appraisers, as may be amended from time to time, or other tree
replacement analysis provided by similar publication.
      Tree limbs damaged during construction shall be addressed following Best
Management Standards and ANSI Standards for Arboriculture, as may be amended
from time to time.
      (3)   Removal of Barriers. Protective fences and barriers around trees
shall be removed only as the final stage of post-construction cleanup.
   (f)   Berming. Berms used for screening shall be a minimum of two (2) feet
high at all points. The interior face of a berm may be retained by a wall,
terrace, or other means acceptable to the Director of Building and Housing in
lieu of taking the form of an earthen slope.
   All earthen berm faces on which ground cover is not yet completely
established shall be protected from erosion by a mulch and/or an erosion
control net.
   Slopes for earthen faces shall not exceed thirty-three percent (33%) if
covered with grass and fifty percent (50%) if covered with other vegetative
cover.
   (g)   Curbing. All landscaped strips located in or abutting parking areas
shall be separated on all sides from the parking surface by curbing consisting
of concrete, stone, brick, asphalt, or other material approved by the Director
of Building and Housing as having comparable appearance and durability. Curbing
shall be in good condition upon installation.
   (h)   Other. Other requirements shall be as specified in the table contained
in Sections
352.11.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 352.06 Installation and Maintenance
   (a)   Assurance of Installation. Before issuing any Certificate of Occupancy
for any application to which the provisions of this chapter apply, the Director
of Building and Housing shall determine that either:
      (1)   Landscaping and screening required in this chapter have been fully
installed; or
      (2)   If seasonal or weather conditions or other factors preclude such
installation at the time of application, that financial sureties have been
submitted to guarantee installation within nine (9) months of the date of
issuance of the certificate.
      Financial sureties shall be in the form of a performance bond, letter of
credit, cash or property escrow, or other form approved by the Director of
Building and Housing. They shall be in the amount of one hundred ten percent
(110%) of the estimated cost of the materials and their installation based on
figures approved by the Director of Parks and Recreation or a designee.
   (b)   Installation Procedures. All tree materials shall be installed in
conformance with the most current procedures established by Best Management
Standards and ANSI Standards for Arboriculture, as may be amended from time to
time. All other living landscaping materials shall be installed in conformance
with the most current procedures established by the American Association of
Nurserymen or its successor organization. A permanently-installed underground
irrigation system shall be provided for a required landscape area if it is
determined by the Commissioner of Urban Forestry or a designee that such
irrigation is required for proper maintenance of the type of landscape
materials proposed for installation.
   (c)   Maintenance and Replacement. The owner, occupant, tenant, and agent of
each, if any, shall be jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance,
repair, and replacement of all landscaping, screening, and curbing required
under this chapter so as to preserve at least the same quantity, quality, and
screening effectiveness as initially installed.
   A preserved existing tree that dies or is destroyed shall be replaced by:
      (1)   A replacement tree or trees of equal or greater diameter approved
by the Commissioner of Urban Forestry or a designee;
      (2)   The trees recommended in the Cleveland Tree Plan as it may be
amended from time to time; or
      (3)   The owner may make payment into the City’s Tree Preservation Fund
for the replacement cost of the tree as established using the Trunk Formula
Method outlined in The Guide for Plant Appraisal by the Council of Tree and
Landscape Appraisers, as may be amended from time to time, or other tree
replacement analysis provided by similar publication.
   All living and non-living landscaping, including fences, walls, and
ornamental lighting, shall be maintained in a good condition at all times so as
to present a healthy, neat, and orderly appearance and shall be kept free from
refuse and debris.
   Any unhealthy or dead vegetation shall be replaced with healthy living
plantings no later than the end of the next applicable planting season.
   (d)   Removal. Installed landscaping and screening may not be removed except
temporarily for replacement or maintenance unless the zoning of an abutting
parcel is changed to a district that does not require a Transition Strip or
unless any other condition that mandates landscaping or screening hereunder no
longer applies to the property.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 352.07 Other Provisions
   No other portion of this Code, and no other ordinance, regulation, or
redevelopment agreement, is intended to be repealed or abrogated by this
chapter.
   (a)   More Restrictive Requirement Applies. If any other part of this or any
other City ordinance, or any other law, regulation, Community Development Plan
approved pursuant to Section
317.02, redevelopment agreement, or any kind of private agreement, covenant, or
easement applying within the City, establishes a requirement different from
that established in this chapter, the provision that is the more restrictive or
that imposes the higher standard shall govern.
   (b)   Nonconformities.
      (1)   Nonconformities May Continue. A use lawfully existing immediately
before the effective date of this chapter or any amendment thereto that does
not conform to all applicable requirements hereof, may continue without such
conformance without time limit except as provided herein.
      (2)   When Board Determination Required. Notwithstanding the provisions
of Chapter
359, on or after such effective date a determination by the Board of Zoning
Appeals as provided herein shall be required prior to the issuance of a
Building Permit or Certificate of Occupancy for any such use, or any alteration
thereof, for either of the following:
         A.   Change of Use. Any change from one use to another, as determined
by the Commissioner of Building and Housing, whether or not a period of vacancy
has intervened.
         Such determination shall be guided by factors such as whether uses are
named separately in the Use District regulations of Chapter
335 and
345, whether uses are subject to different requirements for parking under the
Off-Street Parking and Loading chapter thereof, or other reasonable factors
judged appropriate by the Commissioner.
         B.   Expansion of Use. An expansion of any use required to provide
landscaping or screening under the tables contained in Sections
352.09 and
352.10, respectively, exceeds both:
            1.   Fifteen percent (15%) of the land area or floor area the use
occupies; and
            2.   One thousand (1,000) square feet of such area.
      (3)   Criteria for Determination. The Board shall determine whether and
to what degree the use shall comply with the requirements of this chapter as a
condition of such Permit or Certificate.
      The Board shall require full or partial compliance therewith if such
compliance would not require:
         A.   Acquisition of additional land; or
         B.   Full or partial removal or relocation of a sound major structure
or structures; or
         C.   Creation of other circumstances that would produce undue hardship
or practical difficulties.
      Issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for construction pursuant to an
unexpired Building Permit issued before the effective date of this chapter
shall not require action by the Board.
      (4)   Nonconforming Refuse Disposal Areas. Notwithstanding other
provisions of this section, an accessory refuse disposal area which is a legal
nonconforming use with respect to the screening requirements of this chapter
shall be screened to meet all such requirements prior to issuance of a
Certificate of Occupancy for any exterior construction of alterations to
structures or pavement area on the subject property.
   (c)   Approval by the Director of the City Planning Commission. Where
approval is required by the Director of the City Planning Commission, the
Director may refer such decision for action by the City Planning Commission,
if, in the opinion of the Director, the circumstances of a particular
application do not provide sufficient guidance for an administrative decision.
(Ord. No. 3077-A-89. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 7-27-91)
§ 352.08 Table Containing Zoning District Compatibility Index Numbers
Index Number Zoning District Type
Index Number Zoning District Type
0            Limited One-, One- and Two-Family
2            Limited Multi-Family and Multi-Family
3            Institutional a
4            Residence-Office
5            Local Retail and University (College) Retail
6            Shopping Center Retail and General Retail
7            Residence-Industry and Semi-Industry
8            General Industry
10           Unrestricted Industry
   a   Applies only to lots in Residence Districts accommodating an
institutional use.
 
   Index numbers are for use with the table contained in Section
352.09. See division (d)(12) of Section
352.03 for Parking Districts.
(Ord. No. 3077-A-89. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 7-27-91)
§ 352.09 Table Containing Uses Requiring Transition Strip
 
Difference Between Index Screening Intensity Required in Transition Strip
Numbers*
0                        No Strip Required
2                        Light
3                        Medium
4-5                      Heavy
6 or more                Maximum**
   *   Difference obtained by taking:
The Compatibility Index Number of the most restrictive district as provided
in Section
335.01 that allows the principal use on the subject lot;
And subtracting from it:
The Compatibility Index Number for the zoning district of the abutting lot.
   **   Except only heavy intensity shall be required abutting an actual
front yard of a lot in a residential district.
 
   Compatibility Index Numbers are as provided in the table contained in
Section
352.08. See also the tables contained in Sections
352.10 and
352.11, respectively.
(Ord. No. 3077-A-89. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 7-27-91)
§ 352.10 Table Containing Uses Requiring Other Screening or Landscaping a
Use Frontage Strip Island Strip eScreen Barrier
Use                                              Frontage Island   Screen Barrier
                                                 Strip    Strip e
1.   Open off-street parking spaces:
      Over 10 spaces c, d                  Medium j –      –
      Over 100 spaces c                    Medium j Light    –
2.   Open sales lots and service stations     Light    –      –
3.   Outdoor storage                          –      –      b
4.   Open service and refuse disposal areas   –      –      b
5.   Electrical and mechanical equipment f    –      –      b
6.   Utility stations g                       –      –      b
7.   Any open off-street loading space h      –      –      b
8.   Junk yard and auto wrecking yards        –      –      b
9.   Residential side yards abutting arterialsHeavy    –      –
– : No requirement
Light: Installation of Light intensity (see table in Section
352.11) is required.
Medium: Installation of Medium intensity (see table in Section
352.11) is required.
   a   Requirements herein shall not apply to single-family detached or attached,
2-family, or townhouse dwellings except where parking, refuse disposal, or other
uses are provided collectively for more than 2 dwellings.
   b   Installation is required of screening with 75% or greater opacity of
sufficient height to conceal uses specified herein from view from the ground floor
level on adjoining properties and from the street.
c   Minimum Parking Lot Landscaping. Except in the Central Business District as
defined in Section
325.12, a minimum of 5% of the parking area shall consist of landscaping. Any
required Strip may be credited toward this requirement.
   d   Or a lot of any number of spaces with parking along over 50 feet of street
frontage.
   e   Island Strips shall have a minimum area of 100 square feet each and shall
be separated by no more than 20 parking spaces. Island Strips shall not be
required for valet parking areas, as defined herein.
   f   Equipment such as transformers or air conditioners in the open on the
ground but protruding above grade, or on a roof and protruding above a roof or
parapet line.
   g   Electric substations, telephone exchanges, telephone terminal boxes over 20
cubic feet, and similar utility uses, except in Industrial Districts.
   h   Any open off-street loading space shall have a minimum screen barrier
height of 6 feet.
   i   Residential Side Yards Abutting Arterials. Required on lots in Single- and
Two-Family and Attached Residential Districts having a corner side lot line
abutting an arterial street prior to issuance of a Certificate of Zoning
Compliance for construction of any new principal building thereupon.
   j   “For hire” parking lots shall comply with the visual screening requirements
of Chapter
457 of the Codified Ordinances, where such requirements are more restrictive than
the requirements of this chapter.
 
(Ord. No. 3077-A-89. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 7-27-91)
§ 352.11 Table Containing Screening Intensity
 Screening Intensity
 Light Medium Heavy Maximum
                             Screening Intensity
                             Light Medium Heavy Maximum
1.   Landscaped Strip
   Width in ft. b         4     6      8     10
2.   Screening h
   a.   Height in feet –e  2.5    4     6
   b.   Year-round Opac– f 50%    75%   75%
3.   Trees
   a.   Spacing in feet50    40     30    20
   b.   Evergreens: g
      Height in feet   6     6      8     8
   c.   Deciduous: g
      Caliper in inches1.5 d 2.0    2.5   3.0
4.   Shrubs
   a.   Spacing in feet20    16     12    10
   b.   Height in feet 1.5d  2.0    2.5   3.0
All requirements 1 through 4 are mandatory; all figures are minimums.
   a   In linear feet of landscaped area. Spacing is mean average spacing: trees
and shrubs are not required to be spaced uniformly. At least 1 tree shall be
installed in each separate landscaped area.
   b   Except minimum width shall be 4 feet in the Central Business District, as
defined in Section
325.12.
   c   At 1 foot above grade at base.
   d   At time of installation.
   e   Fence height as defined herein.
   f   By the end of the second growing season after installation, if a screen
composed of landscaping is used.
   g   This requirement applies only if this type of tree is used.
   h   May be a fence, wall, berm, or landscape screening as provided in
division (a) of Section
352.05.
 
(Ord. No. 3077-A-89. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 7-27-91)
§ 352.12 Table Containing Required Contents of Landscaping Plan
   In addition to other plans required under this chapter, three (3) copies of
a plan at a scale of ten (10) to thirty (30) feet to the inch containing:
   (a)   Basic Information.
      (1)   Numeric and graphic scale, north arrow, and date of preparation;
      (2)   Name, address, and phone number of applicant and of preparer of the
plan;
      (3)   Boundaries of the development and of each phase thereof;
      (4)   Lot lines and dimensions and areas of lots;
      (5)   A photograph taken within thirty (30) days of the date of
application of the site on which the landscaping is to be installed.
   (b)   Existing Landscaping.
      (1)   Existing wooded areas; and
      (2)   Existing isolated trees four (4) inches or more in diameter at one
(1) foot above natural grade at the base of the tree.
   (c)   Proposed Landscaping.
      (1)   The following information about all proposed living and non-living
landscaping materials, including materials to be preserved:
         A.   Botanic and common names;
         B.   Quantity and location;
         C.   Height at installation and at maturity;
         D.   Caliper at one (1) foot above proposed grade.
      (2)   Proposed ground cover; types and boundaries.
      (3)   Proposed berming locations and contours at one (1) foot intervals.
      (4)   Dimensions and descriptions, renderings, elevations, or photographs
indicating the external appearance of proposed fences, walls, ornamental
lighting and other non-landscaping elements.
      (5)   Measures to be taken to protect new and preserved trees during
construction.
      (6)   Any other information the Commissioner of Building and Housing
requires to determine compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. No. 3077-A-89. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 7-27-91)
§ 352.13 Lighting Requirements for Parking Lots and Public Garages
   (a)   All parking lots containing ten (10) or more spaces, which are used
during non-daylight hours, shall be illuminated during those hours with one (1)
to two and a half (2.5) footcandles, as recommended by the Illuminating
Engineering Society (IES).
   (b)   All public garages required to have a license under Chapter
457 of these Codified Ordinances shall be illuminated with a minimum one (1)
footcandle (11 lux) on all egress walking surfaces and a minimum of ten (10)
footcandles (108 lux) on all stairways and their landings.
   (c)   All illumination requirements contained in this section shall be
designed and shielded so as not to shine, glare, reflect or be directed into or
towards any premises used for residential purposes.
   (d)   The installation of lighting, replacement of lighting, and changes to
existing light fixtures must be made in compliance with this section.
(Ord. No. 726-2025. Passed 8-13-25, eff. 8-18-25)
CHAPTER 353 – HEIGHT REGULATIONS
353.01   Height Districts Established; Definition
353.02   Setback Regulations and Maximum Height
353.03   Height of Corner Building along Side Street
353.04   Height of Buildings Fronting on Public Spaces
353.05   Maximum Height of Accessory Buildings in Residence Districts
353.06   Exceptions to Height Regulations
Cross-reference:
   Area districts established, CO
355.01
   Building height defined, CO
325.34
   Height of junk restricted, CO
347.06
   Height requirements for apartment houses, CO
337.06
   Height requirements for Residence-Office Districts, CO
337.21
   Use districts designated, CO
335.01
   Variances, CO
329.03
§ 353.01 Height Districts Established; Definition
   (a)   The City is hereby divided into nine (9) height districts which shall
be known as Height Districts Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9, respectively,
and so designated on the Building Zone Maps.
   (b)   As used in this Zoning Code, “height limit” means the height to which
a building located on a building line or required yard line may be erected
without setback from such building line or yard line. The height limit in the
various height districts shall be:
                       Height Limit – Above Grade Level
Height District Number (Height Limit = HL)
                       (Distance to Center Line of Street = D)
                       Height Limit – Above Grade Level
Height District Number (Height Limit = HL)
                       (Distance to Center Line of Street = D)
1 HL =                 D, but not to exceed 35 ft.
2 HL =                 2D, but not to exceed 60 ft.
3 HL =                 3D, but not to exceed 115 ft.
4 HL =                 4D, but not to exceed 175 ft.
5 HL =                 5D, but not to exceed 250 ft.
6 HL =                 20D, but not to exceed 600 ft.
7 HL =                 22D, but not to exceed 700 ft.
8 HL =                 24D, but not to exceed 800 ft.
9 HL =                 26D, but not to exceed 900 ft.
 
(Ord. No. 2669-81. Passed 12-6-82, eff. 12-8-82)
§ 353.02 Setback Regulations and Maximum Height
   Any portion of a building may be erected to exceed the height limit
specified in Section
353.01(b), provided that such portion is set back from all building lines or
required yard lines the distance specified in the following table, and provided
further that such portion does not exceed the maximum height specified in that
table.
 
                       Above Height Limit: Setback Maximum Height Above Grade
Height District Number for Each Foot of Additional Level* (Feet)
                       Height (Feet)
1                      1                           50
2                      1/2                         90
3                      1/3                         175
4                      1/4                         260
5                      1/5                         375
   *   Except as provided in Section
353.06
 
(Ord. No. 2204-A-48. Passed 12-19-49, eff. 1-29-50)
§ 353.03 Height of Corner Building along Side Street
   In a Number 3, 4 or 5 Height District the front building line height of a
corner building may extend back along the side street for a distance of twice
the width of the side street, but not farther at that height than one hundred
fifty (150) feet from the front street line, or to the boundary of a district
of lesser height limit, whichever is less.
(Ord. No. 2204-A-48. Passed 12-19-49, eff. 1-29-50)
§ 353.04 Height of Buildings Fronting on Public Spaces
   Where a building fronts on a square, park or other permanent open space
across which the distance to the opposite property line, measured from the
building line of the building under consideration, is not less than one hundred
(100) feet, the building height at the building line may be extended to the
height limit of the district in which it is located. The height of the building
back of the building line shall be governed by the height limitations and
setback regulations of the height district in which it is located.
(Ord. No. 2204-A-48. Passed 12-19-49, eff. 1-29-50)
§ 353.05 Maximum Height of Accessory Buildings in Residence Districts
   In Residence Districts an accessory building shall not exceed fifteen (15)
feet in height, or the distance from the accessory building to a main building
or potential location of a main building on adjoining premises in a Residence
District, whichever is less.
(Ord. No. 2204-A-48. Passed 12-19-49, eff. 1-29-50)
§ 353.06 Exceptions to Height Regulations
   (a)   Towers. For towers attached to the ground or mounted on a building,
except for roof structures as defined in the Ohio Basic Building Code and as
regulated in division (b) of this section, the maximum height specified in
Section
353.02 may be exceeded, provided that:
      (1)   The area of the tower’s horizontal cross section above the height
limit does not exceed twenty- five percent (25%) of the lot area excluding all
required yard area;
      (2)   The tower is not nearer to any lot lines at the height limit than
twenty-five (25) feet;
      (3)   The tower is located no closer to a public airport or landing field
than one (1) mile, unless closer proximity is specifically permitted by the
Board of Zoning Appeals, based on recommendations provided by the Department of
Port Control.
   (b)   Roof Structures. In any height district, stairway and elevator or
ventilating equipment penthouses, and penthouses for similar purposes; water
tanks, cooling towers, ornamental towers, scenery lofts, poles, chimneys or
other necessary appurtenances, when erected upon and as an integral part of the
building, may be erected or extended above the maximum height specified in
Section
353.02 if such building is more than one (1) mile from a public airport or
landing field, or if closer proximity to such airport or landing field is
specifically permitted by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
   (c)   Exemptions. No provision of this section shall apply to any tower
regulated by Chapter
354.
(Ord. No. 2306-2000. Passed 1-22-01, eff. 1-23-01)
CHAPTER 354 – WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES
354.01   Purpose
354.02   Definitions
354.03   Applicability and Exemptions
354.04   Conditionally Permitted Uses and Permitted Uses
354.05   Co-Location
354.06   Tower Location and Height
354.07   Tower Design and Lighting
354.08   Antenna Location, Height and Design
354.09   Fencing and Landscaping
354.10   Existing Nonconforming Towers
354.11   Maintenance and Abandonment
354.12   Application and Approval Process
354.13   Contents of Application
354.14   Special Exceptions and Appeals
§ 354.01 Purpose
   These regulations are established to ensure that outdoor telecommunications
facilities will be developed and maintained in a manner which provides adequate
telecommunication services to the community while protecting the visual
character of the city’s neighborhoods and scenic areas.
(Ord. No. 2306-2000. Passed 1-22-01, eff. 1-23-01)
§ 354.02 Definitions
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings given in this section.
   (a)   “Telecommunications” means all forms of wireless communication,
including, but not limited to voice and data communications.
   (b)   “Telecommunications Antenna” means a device that transmits and/or
receives electromagnetic telecommunications signals.
   (c)   “Telecommunications Antenna Structure” means a telecommunications
antenna and any incidental supporting structures necessary to mount the antenna
to a building, tower or other structure.
   (d)   “Telecommunications Tower” means a ground-mounted structure, other
than a building, that is designed for the sole purpose of supporting a
telecommunications antenna.
   (e)   “Telecommunications Facility” means the antennas and ancillary
equipment and structures used in transmitting and/or receiving electromagnetic
telecommunication signals.
   (f)   “Lattice Tower” means a tower constructed of vertical metal struts and
cross braces forming a square or triangular structure which tapers from the
foundation.
   (g)   “Monopole Tower” means a tower constructed of a single, self-
supporting metal tube, anchored to a foundation.
   (h)   “Co-location” means the sharing of a single tower, building or other
structure by two (2) or more telecommunications providers.
   (i)   “Topmost Element” means the highest point on a building or other
ground-mounted structure, excluding existing telecommunications antenna
structures mounted on such building or structure.
(Ord. No. 2306-2000. Passed 1-22-01, eff. 1-23-01)
§ 354.03 Applicability and Exemptions
   (a)   Applicability. No tower or antenna structure, as defined in this
chapter, shall be erected, enlarged or extended without conformance to the
provisions of this chapter, and other applicable regulations, as evidenced by
the issuance of a Building Permit by the Commissioner of Building and Housing.
   (b)   Exemptions. The following structures are not subject to the provisions
of this chapter:
      (1)   Telecommunications equipment completely enclosed within a permitted
building; and
      (2)   An antenna mounted to a building or other non-telecommunications
tower structure not more than fifteen (15) feet in height above the topmost
element of the building to which it is attached in a non- Residential District
and not more than ten (10) feet in height above the topmost element of the
building to which it is attached in a Residential District.
(Ord. No. 2306-2000. Passed 1-22-01, eff. 1-23-01)
§ 354.04 Conditionally Permitted Uses and Permitted Uses
   (a)   Conditionally Permitted Uses. The following uses shall be permitted
only after approval by the City Planning Commission, which shall determine
whether the proposed use complies with the applicable conditions set forth in
this chapter:
      (1)   A telecommunications tower not exempted by Section
354.03; and
      (2)   A telecommunications antenna structure which projects more than
fifteen (15) feet in height above the topmost element of the building or other
non- telecommunications tower structure to which it is attached and which also
exceeds the height limit established on the zoning map for buildings on the
subject property.
   (b)   Permitted Uses. All telecommunications facilities not listed in
division (a) of this section are permitted without City Planning Commission
approval, except where such approval is required by other regulations of these
Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 2306-2000. Passed 1-22-01, eff. 1-23-01)
§ 354.05 Co-Location
   (a)   Co-Location Requirement. No new telecommunications tower shall be
approved unless the applicant submits an affidavit attesting to the fact that
placement of an antenna(s) on an existing tower, building, utility pole or
other existing structure, where permitted, is made infeasible by one (1) or
more of the following conditions:
      (1)   No existing towers or other suitable structures are located within
the geographic area requiring service;
      (2)   Existing towers or other structures suitably located are not of
sufficient height or are not of sufficient structural strength and cannot be
reasonably altered to meet the applicant’s engineering requirements;
      (3)   Co-location would cause electromagnetic interference between the
proposed and existing antennas and that such interference cannot be prevented
at reasonable cost;
      (4)   The applicant has made a reasonable offer to co-locate on one (1)
or more suitably located towers or other structures, but the owner of such
structure or structures or the owner of the telecommunications equipment
thereon has refused permission for co-location.
   (b)   Accommodation of Co-Located Equipment. Any new telecommunications
tower shall be designed with sufficient structural loading capacity and height,
or the capability of being extended in height, to accommodate at least three
(3) antennas or antenna array platforms of equal loading capacity for use by
three (3) separate service providers. Similarly, any associated equipment
shelter shall be capable of accommodating three (3) separate users or space
shall be reserved on the site for necessary expansion. Furthermore, the owner
of any telecommunication facility permitted as a conditional use under the
provisions of this chapter shall respond in writing within thirty (30) days of
receipt of a written request for co-location made pursuant to the requirement
of division (a) of this section.
(Ord. No. 2306-2000. Passed 1-22-01, eff. 1-23-01)
§ 354.06 Tower Location and Height
   (a)   Location. A telecommunications tower subject to the regulations of
this chapter shall be located in only the following zoning districts: General
Retail, Shopping Center, Semi-Industry, General Industry and Unrestricted
Industry. No telecommunications tower subject to the regulations of this
chapter shall be located in a Landmark District or a public park.
   (b)   Setback from Residential or Landmark District. No portion of a
telecommunication tower subject to the regulations of this chapter shall be
located closer to a Residential District line or Landmark District line than a
distance equal to three (3) times the height of the tower.
   (c)   Setback from Non-Residential Zoning Districts. No portion of a
telecommunication tower subject to the regulations of this chapter shall be
located closer than ten (10) feet to the lot line of an adjoining
nonresidential, non-Landmark zoning district.
   (d)   Setback from Street Lines. No portion of a telecommunication tower
subject to the regulations of this chapter shall be located closer than twenty-
five (25) feet from a street right-of-way line.
   (e)   Setback from Public Park. No portion of a telecommunications tower
subject to the regulations of this chapter shall be located closer to a public
park than a distance equal to three (3) times the height of the tower.
   (f)   Distance from Public Airport. No telecommunication tower subject to
the regulations of this chapter shall be located closer than two (2) miles from
a public airport, measured from the center of tower to any border of the
airport, unless closer proximity is permitted by the Board of Zoning Appeals
based on a recommendation by the Department of Port Control.
   (g)   Impact on Scenic Vistas. No telecommunications tower shall be so
located as to impact adversely on scenic vistas, as determined by the City
Planning Commission.
   (h)   Height. A telecommunication tower may exceed the height limit
established on the zoning map for the subject property if the tower meets all
other regulations of this chapter.
   (i)   Spacing from Other Towers. A new telecommunications tower that exceeds
the height limit established on the zoning map shall be located no closer than
three (3) times the height of the new tower from any existing tower.
   (j)   Accessory Buildings. Any building which is accessory to the
telecommunications tower shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height and shall
be set back at least twenty-five (25) feet from any street right-of- way line
and at least fifty (50) feet from any Residential zoning district line.
   (k)   Guy Wires. Any guy wires supporting towers shall be anchored behind
the security fence surrounding the tower.
(Ord. No. 2306-2000. Passed 1-22-01, eff. 1-23-01)
§ 354.07 Tower Design and Lighting
   (a)   Lighting. Telecommunications towers shall not be illuminated except as
required by the Federal Aviation Administration or other applicable authority
or by the provisions of Chapter
633 of these Codified Ordinances. If lighting is required, a design that
minimizes disturbances to nearby residences shall be utilized.
   (b)   Structural Design. Telecommunications towers shall be designed to meet
all requirements of the Building Code of the City of Cleveland and all
applicable state and federal regulations.
   (c)   Aesthetic Design. Telecommunications towers shall be designed in a
manner that makes them as unobtrusive as possible, while meeting safety
requirements. To this end, tower design shall be monopole rather than lattice,
wherever feasible. With respect to color, towers, if painted, shall be light
gray or off-white in order to blend in with the sky and clouds, unless other
colors are required by federal regulations or the provisions of Chapter
633 of these Codified Ordinances or unless another color is approved by the
City Planning Commission as being more effective in a particular instance. The
City Planning Commission shall work with applicants to identify any other
design techniques that can be used in reducing the visual prominence of
telecommunication towers.
   (d)   Signs. No signs shall be located on or around a telecommunications
tower except for necessary warning signs located at or near ground level.
   (e)   Accessory Buildings. Any building accessory to a telecommunications
tower shall be faced with brick, stone, wood, decorative block, fiberglass or
metal, as approved by the City Planning Commission to ensure that the design of
such building is compatible with its environs.
(Ord. No. 2306-2000. Passed 1-22-01, eff. 1-23-01)
§ 354.08 Antenna Location, Height and Design
   The regulations of this section shall govern the location, height and design
of any telecommunications antenna and antenna structure, subject to the
provisions of this chapter, attached to a building or structure other than a
telecommunications tower.
   (a)   Location by Zoning District. A telecommunications antenna may be
located in any zoning district other than a One-Family, Two-Family or Townhouse
Residential District, except as permitted by the Board of Zoning Appeals in
accordance with the provisions of Section
354.14 regarding special exceptions.
   (b)   Height. A telecommunications antenna or antenna structure may exceed
the height limit established on the zoning map for buildings on the subject
property, but such antenna or antenna structure shall not exceed the height
limit by more than twenty (20) feet.
   (c)   Design. A telecommunications antenna structure shall be designed and
placed so as to blend in with the appearance of the structure to which it is
attached or to be otherwise screened or obscured from view from public streets
and adjoining properties to the maximum extent possible. Such design shall be
as approved by the City planning Commission, where installation of the antenna
is subject to the Commission’s approval.
   (d)   Accessory Equipment. Equipment that is accessory to a
telecommunications antenna shall be located within the subject building or
structure or shall be placed so as not to be visible from adjoining public
streets, unless the City Planning Commission determines that such screening is
not necessary in a particular instance.
(Ord. No. 2306-2000. Passed 1-22-01, eff. 1-23-01)
§ 354.09 Fencing and Landscaping
   (a)   Security Fence. The base of any ground- mounted telecommunications
tower shall be completely enclosed by a fence or wall not less than six (6)
feet and not more than eight (8) feet in height. Such fence or wall shall be
set back at least ten (10) feet from all property lines. Any fence or wall
located within twenty-five (25) feet of a street right-of-way shall be either a
wrought iron-style or black vinyl-coated chain link fence or a decorative
masonry wall. Barbed wire may be used if permitted by the regulations of
Chapter
358 of this code.
   (b)   Landscaping Location. A landscape strip meeting the standards
established in division (c) of this section shall be placed along the outside
of the entire perimeter of the security fence, except that the City Planning
Commission may alter the required location when it determines that another
location would be more effective and may waive the requirement for any
particular location where it determines that the landscaping would not be
visible from adjacent parcels or public streets or, otherwise, by members of
the general public.
   (c)   Landscaping Requirement. The landscape strip required in division (b)
of this section shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet in width and shall include,
at a minimum, evergreen trees or shrubs, at least six (6) feet in height,
spaced at maximum intervals of eight (8) feet. The landscape requirements may
be varied by the City Planning Commission in order to address particular site
conditions.
(Ord. No. 2306-2000. Passed 1-22-01, eff. 1-23-01)
§ 354.10 Existing Nonconforming Towers
   A telecommunications tower lawfully existing on the effective date of this
chapter or any amendment thereto may be continued in accordance with the
regulations of Section
359.01 of this code even if such tower does not conform to the provisions of
this chapter, but such tower shall not be made more nonconforming unless the
alteration is approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance with the
provisions of Section
354.14 of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 2306-2000. Passed 1-22-01, eff. 1-23-01)
§ 354.11 Maintenance and Abandonment
   (a)   Maintenance and Monitoring. All buildings, structures, fences, and
property used in connection with a telecommunications facility shall be
maintained in good condition and in safe working order. On each biennial
anniversary of the issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy for a
telecommunications tower, or not more than ninety (90) days prior to that date,
the permit holder for such tower shall submit to the Commissioner of Building
and Housing an affidavit that verifies continued operation of the
telecommunications use and compliance with all requirements of this chapter and
other applicable governmental regulations.
   (b)   Abandonment.
      (1)   Performance Bond. At all times the permit holder shall maintain a
performance bond sufficient to cover the demolition and removal of the
telecommunications facility. Such bond shall be sufficient to guarantee full
and faithful performance of the requirements of this chapter and shall be
satisfactory to the Commissioner of Building and Housing and the Director of
Law. On each biennial anniversary of the issuance of the Certificate of
Occupancy for a telecommunications tower, or not more than ninety (90) days
prior to that date, the permit holder shall provide to the Commissioner of
Building and Housing proof that the performance bond requirements of this
section are met.
      (2)   Notice. Not less than thirty (30) days after abandoning or
discontinuing operation of a telecommunications facility, the permit holder
shall send written notice of this fact to the Commissioner of Building and
Housing.
      (3)   Removal. If use of a telecommunications facility has been
discontinued for one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, the facility shall
be deemed abandoned. Within ninety (90) days of abandonment, the permit holder
or other responsible party shall remove the abandoned tower, antenna, and any
accessory structures, and shall restore the site to an attractive landscaped
condition. If such actions are not taken, the City may cause the removal of all
facilities at the expense of the permit holder or other responsible party.
(Ord. No. 2306-2000. Passed 1-22-01, eff. 1-23-01)
§ 354.12 Application and Approval Process
   (a)   Submission of Application. An application to construct or alter a
telecommunications facility subject to the regulations of this chapter shall be
submitted to the Division of Building and Housing as part of a Building Permit
application.
   (b)   Determination of Compliance. The Division of Building and Housing
shall determine if the application conforms to requirements of this chapter and
other applicable regulations of the City of Cleveland, except for those
provisions that require a determination by the City Planning Commission.
   (c)   Referral to Public Utilities. The Division of Building and Housing
shall refer all applications governed by this chapter to the Office of Radio
Communications of the Department of Public Utilities for review and approval.
The Office of Radio Communications shall review the application with respect to
any issues relating to the technical expertise of that office. No Building
Permit shall be issued without the approval of the Office of Radio
Communications.
   (d)   Referral to City Planning Commission. For proposals subject to
approval by the City Planning Commission as conditionally permitted uses, under
Section
354.04, the Division of Building and Housing shall refer the application to the
City Planning Commission for review and approval.
   (e)   City Planning Commission Action. The City Planning Commission shall
review any application subject to conditional approval and shall determine
whether the proposal meets all applicable standards established in this chapter
to ensure proper design and compatibility with surrounding uses. The Commission
shall take action on the application at a public meeting, subsequent to
providing public notice, as provided in division (f) of this section. The
Commission may require modifications to the proposal as a condition of
approval. The Commission may disapprove an application if it determines that
the proposed location does not meet the standards set forth in this chapter and
that a suitable alternative location is available. No Building Permit shall be
issued without the approval of the City Planning Commission for an application
subject to conditional approval.
   (f)   Notice Requirements.
      (1)   Upon receipt of an application, the Commissioner of Building and
Housing shall notify any Councilmember who represents the ward in which the
proposed tower is to be located, the Department of Port Control, the Department
of Public Safety and the Office of Radio Communications of the Department of
Public Utilities.
      (2)   Prior to taking action on a ground- mounted telecommunications
tower application subject to conditional approval, the City Planning Commission
shall mail notices describing the proposal to all property owners located
within a distance of the proposed tower equal to three (3) times the height of
the tower. Such notice shall be sent by first-class mail or an equivalent
method at least ten (10) calendars days prior to the date of the public
meeting. The Commission shall also provide notice in the same time frame to any
Councilmember who represents an area in which notices are to be mailed to
property owners.
(Ord. No. 2306-2000. Passed 1-22-01, eff. 1-23-01)
§ 354.13 Contents of Application
   All applications subject to the provisions of this chapter shall be
accompanied by the following information, as applicable, in addition to
information required for all Building Permit applications.
   (a)   Telecommunications Towers. The following information shall be
submitted with an application for a telecommunications tower permitted
conditionally under the provisions of Section
354.04.
      (1)   A site plan of the subject property showing adjoining streets, the
proposed tower and any proposed and existing buildings, fencing, structures,
landscaping, driveways, parking, and curb cuts on the subject property,
including specifications for all proposed landscaping.
      (2)   An elevation drawing showing the proposed tower and all structures
and landscaping shown on the required site plan, indicating the height, color
and materials of the tower and all proposed fencing and other structures.
      (3)   A lighting plan for the proposed tower, indicating the location,
color and intensity of the lighting, both as it will appear in daylight and at
night, and indicating any mechanisms to prevent glare on adjacent properties
and streets and to shield the lighting from residences, to the maximum extent
feasible.
      (4)   A vicinity map showing the subject property and the proposed tower
and fencing in the context of all property located within a distance from the
tower equal to three (3) times the height of the tower, showing within this
area, all streets and existing buildings and significant structures and
indicating the residential use of any buildings and any property zoned in
Residential or Landmarks Districts, such map being marked with topographic
contours at five (5) foot intervals.
      (5)   Color photographs showing the current view of the tower site from
any adjoining public street or any other street within two hundred (200) feet
of the proposed tower and from the closest groupings of residential buildings
located within an area from the proposed tower equal to three (3) times the
height of the proposed tower, plus a second set of color photographs showing
the same views with the proposed tower superimposed onto the photographs.
      (6)   A map showing all existing telecommunications towers and all
buildings and structures exceeding one hundred (100) feet in height located
within one (1) mile of the proposed tower, with such map being accompanied by
documentation, in accordance with the provisions of Section
354.05, demonstrating that the applicant has investigated all opportunities for
co-location or alternative location and has determined that such co-location or
alternative location is infeasible or that the owner of any such structure or
attached telecommunications equipment has refused a reasonable offer for co-
location.
      (7)   A statement indicating the estimated construction cost of the
telecommunications tower and a statement indicating the estimated cost for
demolition and removal of the telecommunications tower.
      (8)   A performance bond sufficient to cover the estimated demolition and
removal of the telecommunications tower.
   (b)   Telecommunications Antennas. The following information shall be
submitted with an application for a telecommunications antenna structure
proposed to be attached to an existing building or other structure, and
permitted conditionally under the provisions of Section
354.04 or otherwise subject to approval by the City Planning Commission or
Landmarks Commission.
      (1)   An elevation drawing of the building or structure to which the
proposed antenna will be attached, showing the placement of the antenna and
indicating the color of the antenna in relation to the color of the surface to
which it will be attached and showing the projection of the antenna from the
structure, marked with all necessary dimensions.
      (2)   A color photograph of the building or structure to which the
proposed antenna will be attached, with the proposed antenna superimposed onto
such photograph.
(Ord. No. 2306-2000. Passed 1-22-01, eff. 1-23-01)
§ 354.14 Special Exceptions and Appeals
   (a)   Special Exceptions. Subsequent to providing public notice in
accordance with the provisions of division (f) of Section
354.12, the Board of Zoning Appeals may approve an application to install a
telecommunications tower or antenna structure that does not meet the
regulations of this chapter if the Board determines that all of the following
conditions apply:
      (1)   The literal application of the regulations of this chapter in a
particular instance will prevent adequate provision of wireless communications
service, and no conforming alternative is technically feasible;
      (2)   The proposed installation will not be contrary to the stated
purpose of the regulations of this chapter;
      (3)   Specifically, in the case of a telecommunications tower proposed to
be placed in a Residential District, the subject parcel is not occupied by
residential uses and is not likely to be occupied by residential uses in the
foreseeable future;
      (4)   Specifically, in the case of a telecommunications antenna proposed
to be placed in a Residential District on a building or structure other than a
telecommunications tower, such building or structure is not a residence and is
not designed for residential occupancy;
      (5)   Specifically, in the case of the alteration of an existing
telecommunications tower, including the addition of an antenna or antennas, the
proposed alteration will not be detrimental to residential areas and will
result in public benefits such as reducing the need for additional
telecommunications towers in the vicinity or improving the appearance or safety
of the existing tower and its site.
   (b)   Appeals. Any decision of the City Planning Commission or an
administrative official made pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be
appealed to the Board of Zoning Appeals, in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter
329.
(Ord. No. 2306-2000. Passed 1-22-01, eff. 1-23-01)
CHAPTER 354A – WIND ENERGY FACILITIES
354A.01   Purpose
354A.02
   Definitions
354A.03
   Applicability
354A.04
   Location, Setbacks and Height
354A.05
   Lighting, Design and Noise
354A.06
   Application and Approval Process
354A.07
   Contents of Application
354A.08
   Maintenance and Abandonment
354A.09
   Existing Nonconforming Facilities
§ 354A.01 Purpose
   These regulations are established to ensure that wind energy facilities will
be developed and maintained in a manner that maximizes utilization of
Cleveland’s wind energy resources while protecting the public health, safety
and welfare.
(Ord. No. 458-09. Passed 6-8-09, eff. 6-12-09)
§ 354A.02 Definitions
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings given in this section.
   (a)   “Wind turbine” means a wind energy conversion system that converts
wind energy into electricity through use of a wind turbine generator and
includes such elements as a wind turbine generator hub, blade or rotor, tower
and transformer.
   (b)   “Wind turbine hub” means an electric power generator to which the
blade or rotor of a wind turbine is attached.
   (c)   “Wind energy facility” means a wind turbine and such associated
structures as substations, transmission lines and meteorological towers.
   (d)   “Rotor radius” means the distance between the center point of the
rotor or the outermost point on the rotor or blade.
   (e)   “Turbine height” means the distance between the base of the tower or
other supporting structure, whether mounted on the ground or on a rooftop, and
the outermost point of the rotor or blade at its maximum vertical extension.
   (f)   “Lattice Tower” means a tower constructed of vertical metal struts and
cross braces forming a square or triangular structure that tapers from the
foundation.
   (g)   “Monopole Tower” means a tower constructed of a single, self-
supporting metal tube, anchored to a foundation.
(Ord. No. 458-09. Passed 6-8-09, eff. 6-12-09)
§ 354A.03 Applicability
   (a)   General Applicability. No “wind energy facility” shall be erected,
enlarged or extended without conformance to the provisions of this chapter, and
other applicable regulations, as evidenced by the issuance of a Building Permit
by the Department of Building and Housing and, where required, approval by the
City Planning Commission.
   (b)   City Planning Commission Approval. Approval by the City Planning
Commission in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall be required
for all ground-mounted wind turbines that exceed the height limit for main
buildings on the subject property and for rooftop-mounted wind turbines that
exceed the height limit set in Section
354A.04, for wind energy facilities not subject to such City Planning
Commission approval by the provisions of this chapter but located in a Design
Review District, review and approval by the City Planning Commission or its
Director shall be made in accordance with the provisions of Chapter
341 regarding Design Review Districts.
   (c)   Landmarks Commission Approval. For wind energy facilities proposed for
locations in Landmark Districts or on individually designated Landmark
properties, the Landmarks Commission shall substitute for the City Planning
Commission in all responsibilities assigned to the City Planning Commission by
the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 458-09. Passed 6-8-09, eff. 6-12-09)
§ 354A.04 Location, Setbacks and Height
   (a)   Zoning Districts. Wind energy facilities may be located in any Zoning
District as either an accessory use or a principal use, subject to the
restrictions and requirements of this chapter.
   (b)   Setbacks for Ground-Mounted Wind Turbines.
      (1)   General. A ground-mounted wind turbine shall be set back from all
property lines, street right-of-way lines, and overhead utility lines a minimum
distance equal to one and none-tenth (1.1) times the height of the wind
turbine. Turbine setbacks shall be measured from the center of the wind turbine
base. With respect to an overhead utility line that provides service only to a
single building or a single parcel of land, the setback requirement shall be
met if the turbine is placed so that no portion of a rotor blade extends closer
than five (5) feet to the utility line.
      (2)   Residential. With respect to proximity to Residential District
lines, a wind turbine, including a wind turbine located in a Residential
District, shall be set back from Residential District lines of adjoining or
nearby properties a minimum distance equal to two (2) times the height of the
wind turbine. In the case of a wind turbine that does not exceed thirty-five
(35) feet in height and is located in a Residential District, the wind turbine
shall be set back at least fifteen (15) feet from all property lines, and no
portion of a rotor blade shall extend closer than five (5) feet to any lot
line.
   (c)   Height. The height of a ground-mounted wind turbine shall be limited
by the setback requirements of this section. The height of a rooftop or other
building- mounted wind turbine shall not exceed the maximum permitted building
height for the property by more than twenty percent (20%). For a rooftop or
other building- mounted wind turbine that exceeds the maximum permitted
building height by more than twenty percent (20%), the City Planning
Commission, after a public hearing, may approve a greater height if the
Commission determines that the placement of the turbine and context of the
turbine site will mitigate any significant negative visual or safety impacts on
nearby properties.
(Ord. No. 458-09. Passed 6-8-09, eff. 6-12-09)
§ 354A.05 Lighting, Design and Noise
   (a)   Lighting. Wind turbines shall not be illuminated except as required by
the Federal Aviation Administration or other applicable authority or by the
provisions of Chapter
633 of these Codified Ordinances. The City Planning Commission may, however,
approve lighting in other instances if it determines that the proposed lighting
will enhance the appearance of the wind turbine and will not result in
nuisances or hazards on nearby properties or streets. If lighting is required,
a design that minimizes disturbances to nearby residences shall be utilized.
   (b)   Structural Design. Wind turbines shall be designed to meet all
requirements of the Building Code of the City of Cleveland and all applicable
state and federal regulations.
   (c)   Aesthetic Design. Wind turbines shall be designed in a manner that
makes them as visually unobtrusive as possible, while meeting safety
requirements. To this end, towers shall be monopole rather than lattice design,
wherever feasible. With respect to color, wind turbines, shall be white or off-
white or unpainted metal, unless other colors are required by federal
regulations or the provisions of Chapter
633 or unless another color is approved by the City Planning Commission as
being more effective or more appropriate in a particular instance.
   (d)   Signs. No signs shall be located on or around a wind turbine except
for necessary warning signs or informational signs located at or near ground
level. Such signs may include information of an educational nature or
information identifying the manufacturer or installer of the wind turbine but
shall not include any off-premise advertising or any advertising for businesses
or other activities located on the premises. No more than two (2) permitted
signs shall be located on or around each wind turbine. The total area of such
signs shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet, except that no sign shall
exceed four (4) square feet if located on a property in a Residential District,
unless that property is occupied by a community facility use, in accordance
with the regulations of Chapter
350. Free- standing signs shall not exceed a height of five (5) feet, and the
setback of such signs shall be in accordance with the regulations of Chapter
350 for the zoning district in which the turbine is located.
   (e)   Noise. No wind turbine shall produce noise that violates the
provisions of Section
605.10 by unreasonably disturbing the quiet, comfort or repose of neighboring
inhabitants.
(Ord. No. 458-09. Passed 6-8-09, eff. 6-12-09)
§ 354A.06 Application and Approval Process
   (a)   Submission of Application. An application to construct or alter a wind
energy facility subject to the regulations of this chapter shall be submitted
to the Department of Building and Housing as part of a Building Permit
application.
   (b)   Determination of Compliance. The Department of Building and Housing
shall determine if the application conforms to requirements of this chapter and
other applicable regulations of the City of Cleveland, except for those
provisions that require a determination by the City Planning Commission under
provisions of this chapter.
   (c)   Referral to City Planning Commission. For proposals subject to
approval by the City Planning Commission, under Section
354A.03(b), the Department of Building and Housing shall refer the application
to the City Planning Commission for review and approval.
   (d)   City Planning Commission Action. The City Planning Commission shall
review any application subject to its approval under provisions of this chapter
and shall determine whether the proposal meets all applicable standards
established in this chapter to ensure appropriate appearance and compatibility
with surrounding uses. The Commission shall take action on the application at a
public meeting, subsequent to providing public notice, as provided in division
(e) of this section. The Commission may require modifications to the proposal
as a condition of approval. The Commission may disapprove an application if it
determines that the proposed location does not meet the standards set forth in
this chapter and that a suitable alternative location is available.
   (e)   Notice Requirements. Prior to taking action on a wind turbine
application subject to its approval under provisions of this chapter, the City
Planning Commission shall mail notices describing the proposal to all owners of
property located within a distance of the wind turbine equal to three (3) times
the height of the structure in the case of a ground-mounted structure and to
all owners of property located within one hundred (100) feet of the wind
turbine in the case of a rooftop-mounted structure. Such notice shall be sent
by first-class mail or equivalent method at least ten (10) calendar days prior
to the date of the public meeting. The Commission shall also provide notice at
the same time to any Councilmember who represents an area in which notices are
to be mailed to property owners.
   (f)   Permit Issuance. The Department of Building and Housing shall issue
the required permits if it determines that the application conforms to
requirements of this chapter and other applicable regulations of the City of
Cleveland, and if it has been approved by the City Planning Commission where
such approval is required.
(Ord. No. 458-09. Passed 6-8-09, eff. 6-12-09)
§ 354A.07 Contents of Application
   All applications subject to the provisions of this chapter shall be
accompanied by the following information, as applicable, in addition to
information required for all Building Permit applications.
   (a)   Ground-Mounted Wind Turbines. In addition to information required by
other provisions of these Codified Ordinances, the following information shall
be submitted with an application for a ground-mounted wind turbine and
accessory structures to demonstrate compliance with the provisions of this
chapter.
      (1)   A site plan of the subject property showing adjoining streets, the
proposed turbine and any proposed and existing buildings, fencing, structures,
landscaping, driveways, parking, and curb cuts on the subject property,
including specifications for all proposed landscaping.
      (2)   An elevation drawing showing the proposed wind turbine and all
structures and landscaping shown on the required site plan, indicating the
height, color and materials of the tower and all proposed fencing and other
structures.
      (3)   Where lighting of the wind turbine is proposed, a lighting plan for
the proposed wind turbine, indicating the location, color and intensity of the
lighting, both as it will appear in daylight and at night, and indicating any
mechanisms to prevent glare on adjacent properties and streets and to shield
the lighting from residences, to the maximum extent feasible.
      (4)   For any wind turbine that will exceed the height limit for
buildings on the subject property, a vicinity map showing the subject property
and the proposed wind turbine and fencing in the context of all property
located within a distance from the turbine equal to three (3) times the height
of the turbine, showing within this area, all streets and existing buildings
and significant structures and indicating the residential use of any buildings
and any property zoned in Residential or Landmarks Districts, such map being
marked with topographic contours at five (5) foot intervals.
      (5)   For any wind turbine that will exceed the height limit for
buildings on the subject property, color photographs showing the current view
of the wind turbine site from any adjoining public street or any other street
within two hundred (200) feet of the proposed wind turbine and from the closest
groupings of residential buildings located within an area from the proposed
wind turbine equal to three (3) times the height of the proposed structure,
plus a second set of color photographs showing the same views with the proposed
wind turbine superimposed onto the photographs.
      (6)   A statement by an engineer licensed in the State of Ohio certifying
that the proposed wind turbine will meet the noise standard of this ordinance
with respect to impacts on properties in nearby Residential zoning districts.
      (7)   A statement indicating the estimated construction cost of the wind
turbine and a statement indicating the estimated cost for demolition and
removal of the wind turbine.
      (8)   A performance bond or equivalent financial instrument, if required,
sufficient to cover the estimated demolition and removal of the wind turbine.
   (b)   Rooftop-Mounted Wind Turbines. In addition to information required by
other provisions of these Codified Ordinances, the following information shall
be submitted with an application for a wind turbine proposed to be attached to
the roof of a building or to another structure and subject to approval by the
City Planning Commission under provisions of this chapter.
      (1)   An elevation drawing of the building or structure to which the
proposed wind turbine will be attached, showing the placement of the wind
turbine and indicating the color of the structure and in any enclosures in
relation to the color of the surface to which it will be attached and showing
the projection of the wind turbine from the structure, marked with all
necessary dimensions.
      (2)   Color photographs of the building or structure to which the
proposed wind turbine will be attached, with the proposed wind turbine
superimposed onto such photographs, showing various perspectives from which the
wind turbine will be viewed.
      (3)   A statement by an engineer licensed in the State of Ohio certifying
that the proposed wind turbine will meet this noise standard of this ordinance
with respect to impacts on properties in nearby Residential zoning districts.
(Ord. No. 458-09. Passed 6-8-09, eff. 6-12-09)
§ 354A.08 Maintenance and Abandonment
   (a)   Maintenance and Monitoring. All buildings, structures, fences, and
property used in connection with a wind energy facility shall be maintained in
good condition and in safe working order. On each biennial anniversary of the
issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy for a wind turbine, or not more than
ninety (90) days prior to that date, the permit holder for such wind energy
facility shall submit to the Director of Building and Housing an affidavit that
verifies continued operation of the wind turbine use and compliance with all
requirements of this chapter and other applicable governmental regulations.
   (b)   Abandonment.
      (1)   Performance Bond. At all times the holder of a permit for a ground-
mounted wind turbine shall maintain a performance bond or equivalent financial
instrument sufficient to cover the demolition and removal of the wind turbine.
Such bond or other instrument shall be sufficient to guarantee full and
faithful performance of the requirements of this chapter and shall be
satisfactory to the Director of Building and Housing and the Director of Law.
On each biennial anniversary of the issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy
for a wind turbine, or not more than ninety (90) days prior to that date, the
permit holder shall provide to the Director of Building and Housing proof that
the performance bond requirements of this section are met. The requirement for
a performance bond or equivalent financial instrument shall not apply in the
case of a wind turbine that does not exceed thirty-five (35) feet height.
      (2)   Notice. Not less than thirty (30) days after abandoning or
discontinuing operation of a wind turbine, the permit holder shall send written
notice of this fact to the Director of Building and Housing.
      (3)   Removal. If use of a wind turbine has been discontinued for one
hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, the facility shall be deemed abandoned.
Within ninety (90) days of abandonment, the permit holder or other responsible
party shall remove the abandoned structures and shall restore the site to an
attractive landscaped condition. If such actions are not taken, the City may
cause the removal of all structures at the expense of the permit holder or
other responsible party.
(Ord. No. 458-09. Passed 6-8-09, eff. 6-12-09)
§ 354A.09 Existing Nonconforming Facilities
   A wind energy facility lawfully existing on the effective date of this
chapter or any amendment thereto may be continued in accordance with the
regulations of Section
359.01 of this code even if such facility does not conform to the provisions of
this chapter, but such tower shall not be made more nonconforming unless the
alteration is approved as a zoning variance by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(Ord. No. 458-09. Passed 6-8-09, eff. 6-12-09)
CHAPTER 355 – AREA REQUIREMENTS
355.01   Area Districts Established and Exceptions
355.02   Computing Area of Lot Abutting Alley
355.03   Independent Area Required
355.04   Residence Buildings and Other Main Buildings in Residence District
355.05   Existing Lots of Record
355.06   Large Scale Housing Developments
355.07   New Buildings on Developed Streets in E Area Districts
Cross-reference:
   Area requirements for apartment houses, CO
337.06
   Area requirements for Residence-Office Districts, CO
337.21
   Floor space required for rental dwellings, CO
371.12
   Height districts established, CO
353.01
   Use districts designated, CO
335.01
   Variances, CO
329.03
§ 355.01 Area Districts Established and Exceptions
   (a)   The City is hereby divided into area districts which are specified in
the table of Section
355.04 and are designated on the Building Zone Map.
   (b)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any property within
the boundary of the Central Business District as defined in
325.12.
(Ord. No. 573-18. Passed 7-18-18, eff. 8-17-18)
§ 355.02 Computing Area of Lot Abutting Alley
   One-half (1/2) the width of an alley which abuts and is parallel to the side
or rear of a lot may be included in computing the area of the lot.
(Ord. No. 2204-A-48. Passed 12-19-49, eff. 1-29-50)
§ 355.03 Independent Area Required
   No yard, open space or lot area provided for any building or group of
buildings for the purposes of complying with the requirements of this Zoning
Code shall be reduced or again considered as the yard, open space or lot area
required for any other building or additional construction of the same lot or
on another lot.
(Ord. No. 2204-A-48. Passed 12-19-49, eff. 1-29-50)
§ 355.04 Residence Buildings and Other Main Buildings in Residence District
   (a)   Except as provided in Sections
355.05 to
355.07, in any use district, no residence building shall hereafter be erected,
established or altered except in conformity with the limitations and
requirements specified in the following table.
   (b)   In a Residence District, no main building, irrespective of occupancy
classification, shall hereafter be erected, established or altered except in
conformity with the maximum gross floor area limitation specified in the
following table:
   Area Regulations for Residence Buildings in All Use Districts and for All
Main Buildings in Residence Districts
         Maximum   Minimum Lot       Minimum
         Gross     Width**           Street      Minimum Lot Area
         Floor     (feet)            Frontage*** (square feet)
         Area                        (feet)
         Any                                                                         Minimum
Area     Dwelling                                                  Row      Class A  Floor Area
District and Any   One      Two      One Family  One      Two      House:   Multiple per Primary
         Main      Family   Family   and Two     Family   Family   per      District Residential
         Building  Dwelling Dwelling Family      Dwelling Dwelling Dwelling per      Building
         in                          Dwelling                      Unit     Dwelling (square
         Residence                                                          Unit     feet)
         District
         Maximum   Minimum Lot       Minimum
         Gross     Width**           Street      Minimum Lot Area
         Floor     (feet)            Frontage*** (square feet)
         Area                        (feet)
         Any                                                                         Minimum
Area     Dwelling                                                  Row      Class A  Floor Area
District and Any   One      Two      One Family  One      Two      House:   Multiple per Primary
         Main      Family   Family   and Two     Family   Family   per      District Residential
         Building  Dwelling Dwelling Family      Dwelling Dwelling Dwelling per      Building
         in                          Dwelling                      Unit     Dwelling (square
         Residence                                                          Unit     feet)
         District
AA       1/2 lot   60       –      50          7200     –      –      –      1400
         area
A        1/2 lot   50       –      30          4800     –      –      –      1250
         area
B        1/2 lot   40       50       25          4800     6000     2400     2400     950
         area
C*       1/2 lot   40       50       25          4800     6000     2400     –      950
         area
D*       lot area  40       50       25          4800     6000     2100     –      950
E*       1-1/2 lot 40       50       25          4800     6000     2100     –      950
         area
F*       2 lot     40       50       25          4800     6000     2100     –      950
         area
G*       3 lot     40       50       25          4800     6000     2100     –      950
         area
H*       4 lot     40       50       25          4800     6000     2100     –      950
         area
J*       5 lot     40       50       25          4800     6000     2100     –      950
         area
K*       6 lot     40       50       25          4800     6000     2100     –      950
         area
*   Shall not apply to alterations made to an existing building in a Residence district nor to
an existing residence building in another use district, which building exceeds the maximum gross
floor area limitation, provided the gross floor area of such existing building is not increased.
**   Measured at “building line”.
***   Lot width measured at front street line.
 
(Ord. No. 573-18. Passed 7-18-18, eff. 8-17-18)
§ 355.05 Existing Lots of Record
   (a)   One (1) Family Use. Except where prohibited in General Industry and in
Semi-Industry Districts, in any area district, residence for one (1) family may
be provided on any lot that was separately owned and which could be built upon
under ordinances in effect immediately prior to the effective date of this
Zoning Code, or on any lot in a recorded subdivision that was on record on
November 5, 1929.
   (b)   Two (2) Family Use. Except where prohibited in General Industry and in
Semi-Industry Districts, in any area district other than an AA Area District or
an A Area District, residence for two (2) families may be provided on any lot
that was separately owned and which could be built upon under ordinances in
effect immediately prior to the effective date of this Zoning Code, or any lot
in a recorded subdivision that was on record on November 5, 1929, provided such
lot is not smaller than four thousand eight hundred (4,800) square feet in area
and not less than forty (40) feet in width.
(Ord. No. 2204-A-48. Passed 12-19-49, eff. 1-29-50)
§ 355.06 Large Scale Housing Developments
   In a housing development on a single lot or parcel of land twenty thousand
(20,000) square feet or more in area under one (1) control in any area district
other than an AA or an A Area District, the required minimum lot area per
dwelling unit may be calculated from the area of the entire development, in
which area may be included community open spaces, parking spaces and drives
other than public streets, which are within the same development parcel and
accessible to all occupants of the parcel group, as well as the private yards
accessible directly to individual buildings, but excluding any areas to be
dedicated for public purposes. The premises of each dwelling house or row house
in such housing development shall include a private yard having an aggregate
net area per dwelling unit of not less than eight hundred (800) square feet,
which aggregate net area shall be exclusive of the space occupied by the main
building and garage or parking space and shall be maintained as an independent
yard area as provided in Section
355.03.
(Ord. No. 2204-A-48. Passed 12-19-49, eff. 1-29-50)
§ 355.07 New Buildings on Developed Streets in E Area Districts
   In an E Area District, in any block where fifty percent (50%) or more of the
street frontage on one (1) side of the street between two (2) intersecting
streets is occupied by buildings which do not conform to the provisions of
Section
355.04, the ratio between aggregate gross floor area and aggregate lot area of
the existing main buildings on such frontage shall be the ratio between gross
floor area and lot area for any new main building on that frontage. However,
such gross floor area of the new main building shall not exceed that permitted
by ordinances in effect prior to the effective date of this Zoning Code.
(Ord. No. 2204-A-48. Passed 12-19-49, eff. 1-29-50)
CHAPTER 356 – CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT (CBD)
356.01   Properties within the Central Business District
356.02   Screening of Structured Parking; Liner Buildings
§ 356.01 Properties within the Central Business District
   Notwithstanding the provisions of
Chapters 355 and
357 to the contrary, any property within the boundary of the Central Business
District as defined in
325.12, shall conform to the requirements under this chapter.
(Ord. No. 573-18. Passed 7-18-18, eff. 8-17-18)
§ 356.02 Screening of Structured Parking; Liner Buildings
                                                                                Street    Required
                                                                                frontages
(a)   Where Required within the Central Business District                    Alleys,
                                                                                Ways &    Not
                                                                                Courts    required
                                                                                frontages
                                                                                Height of Liner
                                                                                Building shall be
(b)   Height                                                                 equal to or greater
                                                                                than the Height of
                                                                                the structured
                                                                                parking building.
                                                                                Ground floor: The
                                                                                Liner Building shall
                                                                                at minimum equal the
                                                                                width of the parking
                                                                                it screens, less the
                                                                                permitted vehicular
(c)   Width                                                                  access points.

                                                                                Upper floors: The
                                                                                Liner Building shall
                                                                                at minimum equal the
                                                                                width of the
                                                                                structured parking
                                                                                building.
                                                                                Depth of Liner
(d)   Depth                                                                  Building shall be a
                                                                                minimum of 15'.
                                                                                Required along 70%
(e)   Active Uses                                                            of all frontages not
                                                                                designated as an
                                                                                alley.
                                                                                70% min. of Building
                                                                                Frontage between
(f)   First Story Glazing, non-residential Liner Buildings, all Frontages    2'6" and 7'6" above
except Alleys                                                                   grade shall be
                                                                                transparent windows
                                                                                and doors.
                                                                                30% min. of Building
(g)   First Story Glazing, residential Liner Buildings, all Frontages except Frontage between 3'
Alleys                                                                          and 8' above grade
                                                                                shall be transparent
                                                                                windows and doors.
                                                                                          Max.
                                                                                          openings
                                                                                          per
                                                                                          frontage:
                                                                                          1
                                                                                          Max.
                                                                                          opening
                                                                                          width: 24'
                                                                                          Max.
                                                                                          opening
                                                                                          height for
                                                                                Street    parking
                                                                                frontages entrance:
                                                                                          11'
(h)   Parking and service access                                                       Max.
                                                                                          opening
                                                                                          height for
                                                                                          service
                                                                                          access:
                                                                                          14'
                                                                                          Continuous
                                                                                          at-grade
                                                                                          sidewalk
                                                                                          and apron
                                                                                          required
                                                                                Alleys,
                                                                                Ways &    Unlimited
                                                                                Courts
                                                                                frontages
                                                                                Shall not reduce
                                                                                existing sidewalk
(i)   Valet zones                                                            width, or shall
                                                                                maintain 8' min.
                                                                                through pedestrian
                                                                                sidewalk zone.
 
   "Liner Building" shall have the same meaning as provided in Section
348.01.
(Ord. No. 573-18. Passed 7-18-18, eff. 8-17-18)
CHAPTER 357 – YARDS AND COURTS
357.01   Application of Yard Regulations
357.02   Independent Yard and Court Spaces Required
357.03   Yards for Mixed Occupancy Buildings Used in Part for Residential or
Institutional H
357.04   Front Yard Regulations
357.05   Side Street Yard Regulations
357.06   Exceptions to Front Yard and Side Street Yard Regulations
357.07   Specific Building Lines
357.071   Watercourse Building Setback
357.08   Required Rear Yards
357.09   Required Interior Side Yards
357.10   Yard Requirements for Large-Scale Housing Developments
357.11   Yards for Buildings Not of Residential Occupancy or Institutional H
Occupancy Classification
357.12   Yard Height Regulations
357.13   Yard Encroachments Permitted
357.14   Yard Encroachments Prohibited
357.15   Rear Buildings
357.16   Courts
Cross -reference:
   Variances, CO
329.03
   Yard requirements for apartment houses, CO
337.06
   Yard requirements for Residence-Office Districts, CO
337.21
§ 357.01 Application of Yard Regulations
   The provisions of this chapter establish required yards in various use
districts as follows:
   (a)   Residence Districts. Front, rear and side yards for all main
buildings. A main building other than a residence permitted in a Residence
District shall observe the same yard requirements as a residence;
   (b)   Local Retail Business Districts. Front yards for all main buildings
and premises, and side street yards for all main buildings and premises on
corner lots;
   (c)   Local Retail Business Districts, Retail Business Districts, Semi-
Industry Districts and General Industry Districts. Rear and side yards for all
residence buildings and buildings of Institutional H Occupancy Classification.
Residence buildings in General Industry Districts and in certain parts of Semi-
Industry Districts are permitted only on special permit from the Board of
Zoning Appeals;
   (d)   Any Use District. Front yards when established by specific building
lines shown on the Building Zone Map;
   (e)   The provisions of
Chapter 357 shall not apply to any property within the boundary of the Central
Business District as defined in Section
325.12;
   (f)   Other Special Yard Requirements. As hereinafter established.
(Ord. No. 573-18. Passed 7-18-18, eff. 8-17-18)
§ 357.02 Independent Yard and Court Spaces Required
   No yard or court provided for any building or group of buildings for the
purposes of complying with the provisions of this Zoning Code shall be reduced
or again considered as the yard or court required for any other building or
additional construction on the same lot or on another lot.
(Ord. No. 2204-A-48. Passed 12-19-49, eff. 1-29-50)
§ 357.03 Yards for Mixed Occupancy Buildings Used in Part for Residential or
Institutional H
   Whenever any building of mixed occupancy is used or occupied in part for
Residential Occupancy or Institutional H Occupancy, the part of the building so
used shall be so located in respect to lot lines as to provide the yard spaces
required by this chapter. Any building of mixed occupancy occupied in part as a
dwelling house shall have side yards and a rear yard as required for dwelling
houses.
(Ord. No. 573-18. Passed 7-18-18, eff. 8-17-18)
§ 357.04 Front Yard Regulations
   In Residence Districts and in Local Retail Business Districts front yard
lines shall be determined as follows and, except as provided in this section
and Sections
357.05 to
357.07, no portion of a building or structure shall be erected above the grade
level within such front yard.
   (a)   General Provisions for Front Yard Lines. Except as provided in Section
357.06, on any street frontage, on either side of a street between two (2)
successive intersecting streets but excluding the frontage along the side lines
of corner lots, a line which is set back of the street line a distance equal to
fifteen percent (15%) of the average or normal depth of the lots having their
front lines along such street frontage shall be the front yard line, but the
distance from the front yard line to the street line shall not be required to
exceed thirty (30) feet.
   (b)   Lots Fronting on Public Spaces. Where one (1) or more lots abut a
public park or parkway such park or parkway frontage shall be deemed to be a
street frontage, and the line between such public park or parkway and the
privately owned property abutting thereon shall be deemed to be a street line
in determining the location of a required front yard line. This shall not,
however, be interpreted to relieve any privately owned property of any other
building line requirement.
(Ord. No. 2204-A-48. Passed 12-19-49, eff. 1-29-50)
§ 357.05 Side Street Yard Regulations
   (a)   General Provisions. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the
distance of the building line back from the side street line along the side
street line of a corner lot in a Residence District or in a Local Retail
Business District shall be not less than ten percent (10%) of the average width
of such lot or five (5) feet, whichever is less, except that accessory
buildings or uses shall be not less than ten (10) feet from such side street
line.
   (b)   Rear Portions of Corner Lots.
      (1)   On the rear third of a corner lot in a Residence District or in a
Local Retail Business District where the rear lot line abuts a Residence
District, the building line shall be not less than ten (10) feet back from the
side street line, except that in a Limited One-Family District or in a One-
Family District where the rear lot line is also the side line of the lot in the
rear or the boundary line of a rear alley, the building line on the rear third
of the corner lot shall be not less than fifteen (15) feet back from the side
street line.
      (2)   On the rear of a corner lot in any use district where the rear lot
line of the corner lot is also the side line of the butt lot in the rear or the
boundary line of an alley between them, and a setback building line is
established for such butt lot, no building shall be erected nearer to the side
street at the rear line of the corner lot than the setback building line of the
butt lot; provided that for each foot the building on the corner lot sets in
from the rear lot line or from the center of a rear alley, it may be set one
(1) foot nearer to the side street line.
(Ord. No. 2204-A-48. Passed 12-19-49, eff. 1-29-50)
§ 357.06 Exceptions to Front Yard and Side Street Yard Regulations
   (a)   Alignment to Existing Building Lines. Where no specific building line
is indicated on the Building Zone Map, on a street frontage on one (1) side of
a street between two (2) successive intersecting streets but excluding the
frontage along the side lines of corner lots, where twenty percent (20%) or
more of the aggregate street frontage of the property abutting thereon is
occupied by main buildings, the average of the setbacks of the existing
buildings within one hundred (100) feet on both sides of any lot shall
determine the location of the required front yard line for that lot, except
that such front yard line shall not be required to be more than forty (40) feet
back of the street line. The location of fences or structures other than a
building shall not be a consideration in making such determination.
   (b)   Alignment to Less Restricted Building Lines. Where a setback building
line is required on a lot that adjoins a street frontage along which either no
setback building line is required or the required setback building line is
nearer to the street, that part of a building within fifty (50) feet of such
less restricted frontage may be erected to a building line midway between the
required building lines or to a line drawn diagonally from a point fifty (50)
feet from the less restricted frontage and on the required setback building
line for such lot to the nearest point on the building line of the adjoining
less restricted frontage; provided that where such lot is less than fifty (50)
feet in width, the diagonal line shall be drawn from the point of intersection
of the side lot line and the required setback building line for such lot.
   (c)   Building Lines on Approved Plats. Whenever the plat of a land
subdivision approved by the Planning Commission and on record in the office of
the County Recorder shows a setback building line along any frontage for the
purpose of creating a front yard or side street yard line, the building line
thus shown shall apply along such frontage in place of any other yard line
specified in this chapter unless specific building lines shown on the Building
Zone Map require a greater setback.
   (d)   Front Yard Extensions into Other Districts. At the intersection of a
residence street with a street in any other use district, where the corner and
succeeding lots had been platted before November 5, 1929, to face the residence
street and not more than the first three (3) such lots, aggregating a frontage
of one hundred fifty (150) feet or less, are included within the less
restricted district, the required front yard line for such lots shall be a
continuation of the front yard line of the portion of the block included in the
Residence District.
   (e)   Building Lines on Widened Streets. The subsequent widening of a street
shall not change the location of a building line established before the street
widening except where it would lie within the new street.
(Ord. No. 2204-A-48. Passed 12-19-49, eff. 1-29-50)
§ 357.07 Specific Building Lines
   (a)   Except as provided in subsection (b) hereof, a specific building line
indicated on the Building Zone Map shall be the setback building line for that
street frontage.
   (b)   Except as may be required under Section
357.05 for the rear portion of a corner lot, where specific building lines are
indicated on the Building Zone Map for both the front and the side of a corner
lot of record on the effective date of this Zoning Code, the side street yard
for that lot for one hundred fifty (150) feet back from the front street line
shall not be required to exceed ten percent (10%) of the width of the lot.
(Ord. No. 2204-A-48. Passed 12-19-49, eff. 1-29-50)
§ 357.071 Watercourse Building Setback
   A specific building line indicated on the Building Zone Map along a
watercourse, as is defined in Section 351.04(ggg), shall be the building line
for that watercourse.
(Ord. No. 1017-2022. Passed 12-5-22, eff. 12-7-22)
§ 357.08 Required Rear Yards
   (a)   Where Required.
      (1)   Buildings of Residential Occupancy and Institutional H Occupancy
Classification. Rear yards conforming to the provisions of this section shall
be provided and maintained at the rear of all buildings or parts of buildings
of Residential Occupancy or Institutional H Occupancy Classification
irrespective of the use district in which they are located.
      (2)   Main buildings in Residence Districts. Rear yards conforming to the
provisions of this section shall be provided and maintained at the rear of all
main buildings in Residence Districts, irrespective of the occupancy
classification of the building.
   (b)   Depth of Required Rear Yards.
      (1)   Residence Districts. In a Residence District the depth of a rear
yard shall be not less than fifteen percent (15%) of the depth of the lot but
in no case less than twenty (20) feet; provided that in a Limited One-Family
District, One-Family District or Two-Family District, such depth shall be not
less than the height of the main building, and in a Multi-Family District such
depth shall be not less than one-half (1/2) the height of the main building.
      (2)   Use districts other than Residence Districts. In a use district
other than a Residence District the depth of a required rear yard in connection
with a building of Residential Occupancy or Institutional H Occupancy
Classification shall be not less than fifteen percent (15%) of the depth of the
lot but in no case less than twenty (20) feet or less than one-half (1/2) the
height of the main building.
      (3)   Irregularly Shaped Lots. In the case of an irregular, triangular or
segment-shaped lot, the required depth of a required rear yard shall be
interpreted to mean the average depth, provided that no required rear yard on
any lot in a Residence District or in connection with buildings of Residential
Occupancy or Institutional H Occupancy Classification shall be less than ten
(10) feet in depth at any point.
      (4)   Rear Yards Abutting Alleys. Where the rear yard abuts and is
parallel to an alley, one-half (1/2) the width of such alley may be assumed to
be a portion of such rear yard.
(Ord. No. 573-18. Passed 7-18-18, eff. 8-17-18)
§ 357.09 Required Interior Side Yards
   (a)   Where Required.
      (1)   Interior side yards conforming to the provisions of this section
shall be provided and maintained along the interior side lot lines of all
buildings or parts of buildings of Residential Occupancy or Institutional H
Occupancy Classification irrespective of the use district in which they are
located.
      (2)   Interior side yards conforming to the provisions of this Zoning
Code shall be provided and maintained along the interior side lot lines of all
main buildings in Residence Districts irrespective of the occupancy
classification of the building.
   (b)   Width.
      (1)   Limited One-Family Districts. In a Limited One-Family District the
minimum width of an interior side yard shall be five (5) feet and the aggregate
width of side yards on the same premises shall be not less than twenty (20)
feet. No building shall be erected less than twenty (20) feet from a main
building on an adjoining lot within such District, nor less than ten (10) feet
from a main building on an adjoining lot in other Residence Districts.
      (2)   Other Residence Districts.
                 Min. distance to Aggregate width of side Min. distance between
Where applicable property line    yards                   main buildings on
                                                          adjoining lots
                                  Min. distance                 Min. distance
Where applicable                  to property   Aggregate width between main
                                  line          of side yards   buildings on
                                                                adjoining lots
                                                                Limited One
                                                                Family
A.   Limited One Family        5'            20'             District: 20'
                                                                Other Residence
                                                                Districts: 10'
                                  1/2 height of
B.   One Family                main building No requirement  10'
                                  or min. 10'
C.   Two Family                3'            6'              6'
                  One or Two      3'            6'              6'
D.   Multi-FamiFamily Building
                  Multi-Family    7'            14'             10'
                  Building
E.   All other Residence       5'            10'             10'
Districts
                  Abutting a
F.   All other Residence       7'                            10'
Districts         District                      No requirement
                  Abutting all    0'                            0'
                  other Districts
 
      (3)   Irregularly Shaped Lots. In the case of an irregular, triangular or
segment-shaped lot, the required width of a required interior side yard shall
be interpreted to mean the average width, provided that no such required
interior side yard on any lot shall be less than three (3) feet in width at any
point.
      (4)   Interior Side Yards Adjoining Alleys.
         A.   An alley line at the side of a lot shall be deemed to be an
interior side lot line.
         B.   The half-width of an alley abutting and parallel to the side line
of a lot may be considered as part of an interior side yard required on that
side. However, in all cases a setback from the alley line of not less than
three (3) feet shall be provided.
      (5)   Interior Side Yards Adjoining Nonconforming Side Yards. For a
period of one (1) year from and after January 29, 1950, in Multi-Family
Districts on any lot where the adjoining interior side yard of an existing
building does not conform to the provisions of subsection (b)(2)C. hereof, the
minimum width and area of the interior side yard on that side may be the
average between the requirements specified in subsection (b)(2)C. hereof, and
such existing adjoining side yard, but if such existing side yard is less in
width than one-sixth (1/6) its building height (the ordinance requirement in
effect prior to the passage of Ordinance No. 573-18) then the existing side
yard shall be figured at one-sixth (1/6) the height of its building.
(Ord. No. 887-18. Passed 6-3-19, eff. 7-3-19)
§ 357.10 Yard Requirements for Large-Scale Housing Developments
   In a housing development consisting of a group of separate buildings where
such buildings do not all front upon a public street, and where such group is
on a single lot or parcel of land twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or more
in area under one (1) control, all buildings fronting upon a street or
adjoining a street shall be set back from the street and from side street lot
lines at least as much as would be required for front and side street yards on
a separate lot. All buildings which adjoin a lot line which is the interior
side lot line or rear lot line of adjoining premises shall conform to the
provisions of Sections
357.08 and
357.09 which would apply on a separate lot. Every residence building in such a
group shall be separated from any other building on the lot, except accessory
buildings not used for residence purposes and not over fifteen (15) feet in
height, by space not less in width than one-half (1/2) of the height of the
adjacent wall of the higher building; except that where such space provides all
required light and ventilation for any habitable room it shall not be less in
width than two-thirds (2/3) such height. Where it provides all required light
and ventilation for all the habitable rooms of any dwelling unit it shall not
be less than such height but in no case less than forty-five (45) feet between
one (1) story buildings, fifty (50) feet between two (2) story buildings,
fifty-five (55) feet between three (3) story buildings and sixty (60) feet
between buildings four (4) stories or more in height. Accessory buildings shall
not be closer to any building not an accessory building than the height of the
adjacent wall of such accessory building. Except as provided herein, no other
front, side or rear yard regulations shall apply to residence buildings in such
development. The Board of Zoning Appeals may modify the strict application of
the requirements of this section in a specific case where it is demonstrated to
the Board that the modification will provide light, air, ventilation and
sunlight for all habitable rooms and open space for all occupants of a standard
no lower than would be provided under such requirements.
(Ord. No. 2204-A-48. Passed 12-19-49, eff. 1-29-50)
§ 357.11 Yards for Buildings Not of Residential Occupancy or Institutional H
Occupancy Classification
   (a)   Where the provisions of Sections
357.08 to
357.10 do not apply, rear yards and interior side yards extending to rear yards
for required windows in buildings or parts of buildings not of Residential
Occupancy or Institutional H Occupancy Classification, shall have a width at
any given height of not less than three (3) inches for each foot of such height
measured from the bottom of such yard as actually constructed, or from the
grade level, whichever is higher, but in no case shall any such yard be less
than five (5) feet in width. As used in this section "the width of a rear yard"
means the distance from the extreme rear wall of the main building to the rear
lot line, and "the width of a side yard" means the distance from the extreme
side wall of the building to the adjoining side lot line.
   (b)   In the case of irregular, triangular or segment- shaped lots, the
required width of such yard shall be interpreted to mean the average width,
provided that no such yard shall be less in width at any point than three (3)
feet.
   (c)   The half-width of an alley abutting and parallel to a lot line may be
considered as part of a yard provided along such lot line.
   (d)   An interior side yard which does not extend to a rear yard of required
dimensions shall be deemed to be an outer court and shall conform to the
applicable provisions of Section
357.16.
(Ord. No. 573-18. Passed 7-18-18, eff. 8-17-18)
§ 357.12 Yard Height Regulations
   (a)   Level of Bottom of Yard.
      (1)   Residence Districts.
         A.   In Limited One-Family Districts, One-Family Districts and Two-
Family Districts every rear yard and interior side yard, and in Multi-Family
Districts every rear yard and interior side yard for a dwelling house or row
house, shall begin at a level not higher than the grade level or, where the
grade level of an abutting lot is at a higher level, at a level not higher than
the grade level of the abutting lot.
         B.   In Multi-Family Districts every rear yard and interior side yard
shall begin at a level not more than five (5) feet above grade level, except
that rear yards and interior side yards for dwelling houses or row houses shall
begin at the level specified in subsection (a)(1)A. hereof.
      (2)   Use Districts Other than Residence Districts.
         A.   In use districts other than Residence Districts every rear yard
or interior side yard for a dwelling house or row house shall begin at a level
not higher than the grade level, or where the grade level of an abutting lot is
at a higher level, at a level not higher than the grade level of the abutting
lot.
         B.   In use districts other than Residence Districts a rear yard or
interior side yard for a building other than a dwelling house or row house
shall begin at a level not lower than the window sill level of the lowest
habitable room or lowest room of human occupancy relying upon natural light or
natural ventilation from windows opening thereon, and the height of such yard
shall be measured from the bottom of such yard as actually constructed, or from
the grade level, whichever is higher.
   (b)   Application of Yard Depth or Width Requirements.
      (1)   The required depth or width of a yard in a Residence District, or
for a residence building or building of Institutional H Occupancy
Classification in other use districts, shall be the depth or width required for
the full height of such yard.
      (2)   The abutting walls of yards provided under the provisions of
Section
357.11, may be set back at various levels to provide the required width
specified therein.
      (3)   In establishing the required depth of a rear yard or required width
of an interior side yard as determined by the height of a building, such height
shall be deemed to be the height of that portion of the building which abuts
the yard; provided that such height shall not be required to include any
portion of the building which extends above the height limit specified in
Section
353.01 and is set back from the required yard lines as prescribed in Section
353.02.
(Ord. No. 573-18. Passed 7-18-18, eff. 8-17-18)
§ 357.13 Yard Encroachments Permitted
   Required yard spaces shall be maintained free and unobstructed except for
trees and shrubbery, and, in interior side or rear yards, cloths, poles,
arbors, garden trellis and similar accessories, and except that the following
encroachments shall be permitted.
   (a)   Underground Garage or Accessory Space in Multi-Family Districts.
Within the required yard spaces back of the setback building line in a Multi-
Family District, an underground garage or other accessory space may be
constructed provided the height of such structure, including parapets, piers or
railings, shall not exceed five (5) feet above the grade level, and provided
such structure does not prevent free access to the rear yard.
   (b)   Front Yard and Side Street Yard Encroachments. Except as restricted or
limited by other provisions of this Zoning Code, the following front yard and
side street yard encroachments shall be permitted in any use district:
      (1)   Front yard and side street yard encroachments permitted under
Chapter
3109, and Chapter
3113, except that in a Dwelling House District no entrance canopy shall be
erected, and no marquees or fixed or retractable awning shall project more than
six (6) feet beyond the building line or within ten (10) feet of the street
line.
      (2)   Steps and landings, and their appurtenant railings, balustrades and
parapets, leading up or down to floor levels directly above or below the grade
level.
      (3)   Fences and walls, as regulated in Chapter
358.
      (4)   Open porticos or porches projecting not more than eight (8) feet,
and enclosed porches, balconies or vestibules projecting not more than four (4)
feet.
      (5)   Structures permitted by division (a) of Section
3113.10, division (a) of Section
3113.13 and Section
3113.16 or where not so permitted, gasoline pump islands, sign poles or similar
temporary and easily removable structures, provided that conditional and
temporary permits therefore are granted, subject to appropriate conditions and
safeguards by the Board after public notice and public hearing, and provided,
further, that the erection, maintenance and use thereof do not conflict with
the intent and purposes of this Zoning Code.
      (6)   For one (1) to four (4) family dwelling structures, wheelchair
lifts, including platform and appurtenant structures, set back a minimum of
five (5) feet from any public right-of-way and a minimum of three (3) feet
setback from any other property line, to be removed when no longer in use.
      (7)   For one (1) to four (4) family dwelling structures, wheelchair
ramps set back a minimum of five (5) feet from any public right-of-way and a
minimum of three (3) feet from any other property line, to be removed when no
longer in use, and meeting slope requirements and all other requirements of the
Ohio Building Code, and as determined by collaboration between the City
Planning Commission office and the Department of Building and Housing:
         A.   designed to minimize the length of the ramp; and
         B.   located in a side yard or rear yard unless such placement is
determined to be infeasible, thereby necessitating location in a front yard.
   (c)   Rear Yard and Interior Side Yard Encroachments. Except as restricted
or limited by other provisions of this Zoning Code, the following rear yard and
interior side yard encroachments shall be permitted in any use district:
      (1)   In rear yards only, accessory buildings and uses in connection with
Residence Occupancy as defined and limited in Section
337.23, and similar accessory buildings and uses in connection with buildings
of Institutional H Occupancy Classification. Accessory buildings or uses
attached or forming part of a main building shall be permitted to encroach upon
such rear yards to the extent permitted for detached accessory buildings or
uses.
      (2)   Projections for architectural embellishment listed in Section
3109.08, provided that no main cornice or eaves shall project into a required
yard more than two (2) feet, measured horizontally, and no bar or oriel shall
be constructed in a required interior side yard and none shall project into a
required rear yard more than eighteen (18) inches, and no other projection
shall exceed the maximum permissible projection specified in Section
3109.08 or be so located as to materially obstruct natural light or
ventilation.
      (3)   Fixed awnings, as permitted by Section
3109.10.
      (4)   Retractable awnings, as permitted by Section
3109.11.
      (5)   Steps, landings and their appurtenant railings, balustrades and
parapets, leading up or down to floor levels directly above or below the grade
level, not extending nearer than one (1) foot to a rear or side lot line.
      (6)   Chimneys projecting not more than thirty-two (32) inches,
downspouts projecting not more than twelve (12) inches, and ventilating ducts
or pipes projecting not more than thirty-two (32) inches and having a maximum
aggregate cross-sectional area in any yard and at any level or one thousand
twenty-four (1,024) square inches.
      (7)   Fences, walls, hedges or other barriers, as regulated in division
(a)(6) of Section
337.23.
   (d)   Temporary Structures. Temporary offices, bridges, barricades and
similar structures required for and incident to building construction.
(Ord. No. 887-18. Passed 6-3-19, eff. 7-3-19)
§ 357.14 Yard Encroachments Prohibited
   (a)   Except as provided in Sections
343.13,
343.21, division (a) of Section
3113.15, division (a) of Section 3113.18 and 3113.21 nothing in this Zoning
Code, shall, however, authorize or permit, unless specifically authorized and
permitted by the Board of Zoning Appeals, erecting, storing or maintaining
beyond the established front building line at or above the grade level of the
front yard, any structure, material, vehicle, merchandise, temporary office
sign or other advertising matter on any lot used or maintained for any one (1)
or more of the following purposes:
      (1)   The parking or servicing of motor vehicles;
      (2)   The sale of motor vehicles or trailers;
      (3)   The wrecking of motor vehicles;
      (4)   The storage of scrap metals or junk;
      (5)   The storage of fuel;
      (6)   The storage of building materials;
      (7)   The storage of contractor’s equipment;
      (8)   Any similar use of an open lot or premises.
   (b)   Where the front setback building line is a minimum of ten (10) feet in
depth, the Board of Zoning Appeals may, after public notice and hearing, permit
the usage of no more than one-half (1/2) of said building setback area adjacent
to the setback building line for the purpose of accessory parking and/or the
display for sale of automobiles in a General Retail Use District or any other
less restrictive use district. Such permission shall be conditioned upon the
placement of landscaping in the remaining setback and erection of a
structurally sound barrier at least one and one-half (1-1/2) feet high located
midway between the sidewalk and the setback building line. In a General Retail
District or any other less restrictive use district, the Board of Zoning
Appeals may permit more than one- half (1/2) of the setback to be used for
accessory parking when the Codified Ordinances require that the permit is
subject to approval by either the City Planning Commission or Landmarks
Commission and the design has been approved by the appropriate commission. In
such a case, the height of screening provided as part of the design may exceed
the limits in Section
357.13. The plan for accessory parking in more than one-half (1/2) of the
setback plan must be determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals to be in
conformity with the purpose and intent of the Zoning Code and must not have a
significantly adverse effect on the surrounding area.
   (c)   As used in division (b) of this section “landscaping” generally
includes contouring the earth and providing an arrangement of plant materials,
to enhance the quality of a natural setting. Landscaping design may provide for
a wide variety of plant materials including ground covers, flowers, shrubs, and
trees. Landscaping may also include the design of outdoor amenity areas and
outdoor pedestrian parks and plazas which contribute to the urban landscape
form.
(Ord. No. 958-95. Passed 7-19-95, eff. 7-28-95)
§ 357.15 Rear Buildings
   (a)   Except where prohibited in General Industry and Semi-Industry
Districts, a residence building or building of Institutional H Occupancy
Classification may be erected in the rear of a main building in any use
district if required front, rear and side yards are provided and the distance
between such buildings is not less than forty (40) feet, and if free and
unobstructed entranceway is provided for access from the street to the rear
building. If only one (1) or two (2) families are to be accommodated in such
rear residence building the entranceway shall be not less than eight (8) feet
wide, and for each additional family, two (2) feet shall be added to the
required eight (8) feet. Entranceways of corresponding widths shall be provided
for buildings of Institutional H Occupancy Classification of corresponding
number of occupants, but such entranceways shall not be required to be more
than twenty (20) feet in width. A front yard not less than twenty (20) feet in
depth across the full width of the lot shall be provided for the rear residence
building or rear building of Institutional H Occupancy Classification, which
yard shall be independent of the rear yard, if any, required for the front
building.
   (b)   A building not of Residential Occupancy or Institutional H Occupancy
Classification may be erected in the rear of a main building of Residential
Occupancy or Institutional H Occupancy Classification if the latter building is
provided with all required yard spaces, and provided that, where necessary to
serve windows intended to provide required natural light or required natural
ventilation for such rear building, the rear building is provided with
independent yards or courts conforming to the applicable provisions of this
Zoning Code.
   (c)   When a building is placed on the same lot or plot with another
building so that any window of either receives required natural light or
required natural ventilation from the space between, and neither building is a
residence building or building of Institutional H Occupancy Classification, the
width of such space shall be not less than the sum of the widths of the two (2)
interior side yards that would be required by this Zoning Code, if each such
building were on a separate lot and adjacent to a lot line, but in no case less
than ten (10) feet.
   (d)   The provisions of this section shall not be interpreted to authorize
any construction in violation of any provision of Chapter
355.
   (e)   The provisions of this section shall not be interpreted to prohibit
permitted accessory buildings in rear yards.
(Ord. No. 2204-A-48. Passed 12-19-49, eff. 1-29-50)
§ 357.16 Courts
   (a)   Width and Area of Required Courts.
      (1)   General Provisions. No court serving a required window shall be
less in any part than the minimum sizes prescribed in this section and no
court, required or not, shall be less than five (5) feet in width.
      (2)   Outer Courts Opening on Alleys. When an outer court opens directly
upon an alley extending parallel to the opening, one-half (1/2) the width of
such alley may be assumed to be a portion of such court.
      (3)   Widths of Courts Serving Habitable Rooms.
         A.   Every outer court required to serve windows in habitable rooms
shall have a width at any level of not less than four (4) inches for each foot
or fraction thereof of the height of such court at that level, but not less
than ten (10) feet; such width at any level shall be not less than three (3)
inches for each foot or fraction thereof of the height of such court at that
level, but not less than five (5) feet; and except that where the length of an
outer court is ten (10) feet or less, the minimum width may be five (5) feet.
         B.   Every inner court required to serve windows in habitable rooms
shall have a width at any level of not less than one (1) foot for each foot or
fraction thereof of the height of such court at that level, but not less than
ten (10) feet; such width at any level shall be not less than eight (8) inches
for each foot or fraction thereof of the height of such court at that level,
but not less than ten (10) feet.
      (4)   Widths of Courts Serving Other than Habitable Rooms. Every outer or
inner court required to serve windows in other than habitable rooms shall have
a width at any level of not less than three (3) inches for each foot or
fraction thereof of the height of such court at that level, but not less than
five (5) feet.
      (5)   Widths of Irregular Shaped Courts. In the case of irregular or
segment-shaped courts, the average width of such court shall be not less than
the required width of such court, provided that no such court shall be less
than five (5) feet in width at any point.
      (6)   Area of Courts.
         A.   The cross-sectional area of a required inner court at any level
shall be not less than one and one-half (1-1/2) times the square of its
required width.
         B.   The cross-sectional area of a required outer court at any level
shall not be greater than three (3) times the square of its width; for outer
courts greater in length than three (3) times the required width, the width
shall be increased so that the cross- sectional area shall be not greater than
three (3) times the square of its width.
   (b)   Application of Court Width and Area Requirements.
      (1)   In Residence Districts, and for buildings of Residential Occupancy
or Institutional H Occupancy Classification in other use districts, the
required width and cross-sectional area of a court at its highest level shall
be the width and cross-sectional area required for its full height.
      (2)   Except as provided in subsection (b)(1) hereof, walls of courts may
be set back at various levels to provide the width and cross-sectional area
specified in this section.
   (c)   Air Intakes for Courts Serving Habitable Rooms. Every court serving
one (1) or more habitable rooms that does not open for its full height on one
(1) or more sides on a street, alley or other permanent open public space, or
upon a yard conforming to the provisions of this Zoning Code, shall be
connected, at or near the bottom, with a street, alley or other permanent open
public space, or with a yard conforming to the provisions of this Zoning Code,
by an intake or passage. Such intake or passage shall have a cross-sectional
area of not less than twenty-one (21) square feet, and shall be maintained
fully open at both ends and unobstructed for its full size and length, except
that grilles may be permitted at the ends.
   (d)   Encroachments upon Required Courts.
      (1)   Every court shall remain unobstructed for its required width and
full height, except that for outer courts, cornices, eaves and downspouts
projecting not more than twelve (12) inches from a wall, ordinary window sills
or belt courses projecting not more than four (4) inches from a wall, and fixed
or retractable awnings as limited by Sections
3109.10 and
3109.11 respectively, shall be permitted to encroach upon such required court
dimensions; and except that clothes poles, arbors, garden trellises and other
similar accessories shall be permitted.
      (2)   In inner courts no projections of more than four (4) inches into
the required dimensions shall be permitted, except that downspouts may project
to the extent required for their installation, and except that fixed and
retractable awnings may project to the extent permitted by Sections
3109.10 and
3109.11, respectively.
   (e)   Drainage and Accessibility of Court Bottoms.
      (1)   The bottom of every court shall be properly graded and drained and
shall be roofed, paved or suitably grassed over or landscaped. Courts shall be
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.
      (2)   Every court that is not otherwise accessible at the bottom shall be
made accessible by a door or other means to enable it to be properly cleaned.
(Ord. No. 573-18. Passed 7-18-18, eff. 8-17-18)
CHAPTER 358 – FENCE REGULATIONS
358.01   Purpose
358.02   Definitions
358.03   Sight Lines
358.04   Fences in Residential Districts
358.05   Fences in Non-Residential Districts
358.06   General Regulations
358.07   Permit Requirements
§ 358.01 Purpose
   The regulations of this chapter are established to permit fences in a manner
that promotes safety and security, while protecting and enhancing the
appearance and character of neighborhoods and business districts.
(Ord. No. 1811-2000. Passed 2-12-01, eff. 2-20-01)
§ 358.02 Definitions
   For purposes of this chapter, these terms shall have the following meaning:
   (a)   “Fence.” An artificially constructed barrier of any material or
materials erected to enclose, screen, or decorate areas of land. Fences include
walls, conifer trees, hedges and earth berms meeting this definition.
   (b)   “Fence Height.” The height of a fence, as defined herein, measured
from grade at the base of the fence.
   (c)   “Open and Solid Fences.” A fence shall be considered “open” if every
segment of the fence (e.g., a section between posts) is composed of at least
seventy-five percent (75%) open spaces and no more than twenty-five percent
(25%) solid materials. All other fences are considered “solid” fences.
   (d)   “Ornamental Fence.” A fence shall be considered “ornamental” if it is
composed of wrought iron-style pickets, wood pickets, wood split rails and
posts, brick, stone, or any other materials of a decorative nature approved by
the Director of the City Planning Commission as compatible with the character
of the area in which the fence is to be placed.
   (e)   “Yards.” As used in this chapter, the term “actual yard” shall refer
to the entire lot area between a main building and the corresponding lot line.
The term “required yard” shall refer to that portion of the actual yard in
which structures cannot be erected unless permitted as encroachments.
(Ord. No. 1389-02. Passed 11-25-02, eff. 12-3-02)
§ 358.03 Sight Lines
   No fence shall be installed or maintained except in conformance with the
following regulations regarding maintenance of sight lines at street
intersections and at driveway exits.
   (a)   Height and Location. No portion of a fence located within thirty (30)
feet of the intersection of two (2) street right-of-way lines shall exceed two
and one- half (2-1/2) feet in height, unless all portions of the fence above
two and one-half (2-1/2) feet in height are at least seventy-five percent (75%)
open. The same restrictions shall apply to any portion of a fence located along
and parallel to a driveway within fifteen (15) feet of its intersection with a
public sidewalk or public street, if no sidewalk is present.
   (b)   Nonconforming Fences. Any fence not conforming to the regulations of
this section regarding maintenance of sight lines shall be made to conform if
the owner or responsible party is so ordered by the Commissioner of Building
and Housing for the purpose of eliminating an identified and demonstrated
hazard. The Board of Zoning appeals may, however, permit retention or
installation of such nonconforming fence if the Board determines that no hazard
is created in a particular instance.
(Ord. No. 1811-2000. Passed 2-12-01, eff. 2-20-01)
§ 358.04 Fences in Residential Districts
   Fences in Residential Districts shall be installed and maintained in
accordance with the following regulations, as well as other applicable
regulations of the Codified Ordinances.
   (a)   Height and Opacity. Fences in actual front yards and in actual side
street yards shall not exceed four (4) feet in height and shall be at least
fifty percent (50%) open, except that, in an actual side street yard, a fence
that is set back at least four (4) feet from the side street property line may
be a maximum of six (6) feet in height and may be open or solid. Fences in
actual rear yards and in actual interior side yards shall not exceed six (6)
feet in height and may be solid or open. No fence shall be higher than its
distance from a residence building on an adjoining lot or from the permitted
placement of a future residence on such lot, if such fence will be generally
parallel to and adjacent to the closest wall of the residence.
   (b)   Location. A fence running generally parallel to and adjacent to a
building on the same property shall be located no closer than three (3) feet to
the closest wall of such building.
   (c)   Materials and Appearance.
      (1)   Front Yards. In Residential Districts, only ornamental fences, as
defined herein, shall be installed in actual front yards and in actual side
street yards if located within four (4) feet of the side street property line.
The Board of Zoning Appeals may, however, permit a chain link fence if the
Board determines that such fence is common in the immediate vicinity of the
subject property.
      (2)   Other Yards. In other yards, fences may be composed of any
materials except barbed wire and except as prohibited in division (a) of
Section
358.06.
   (d)   Residential Swimming Pools. Fences shall be provided around swimming
pools that are accessory to a residence in accordance with the regulations of
division (g) of Section
3117.03 of the Building Code.
(Ord. No. 1811-2000. Passed 2-12-01, eff. 2-20-01)
§ 358.05 Fences in Non-Residential Districts
   Fences in Non-Residential Districts shall be installed and maintained in
accordance with the following regulations, as well as other applicable
regulations of the Codified Ordinances.
   (a)   Height and Opacity.
      (1)   General and Unrestricted Industry Districts. In General and
Unrestricted Industry Districts, fences in actual front yards and in actual
side street yards shall not exceed six (6) feet in height and may be either
open or solid. In actual rear yards and actual interior side yards, fences
shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height and may be open or solid.
      (2)   Other Non-Residential Districts. Except as specifically required
because of the type of use, in Non-Residential Districts other than General and
Unrestricted Industry Districts, fences in actual front yards and in side
street yards shall not exceed four (4) feet in height and shall be at least
fifty percent (50%) open above two (2) feet in height. In actual rear yards and
actual interior side yards, fences shall not exceed six (6) feet in height and
may be open or solid.
   (b)   Barbed Wire Fences. Barbed wire fences are permitted in all Non-
Residential Districts except the Local Retail District and the Parking
District, and shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the
following regulations and other applicable regulations of the Codified
Ordinances.
      (1)   Sidewalk Setback. Except in General Industry and Unrestricted
Industry Districts, a fence with barbed wire shall be located at least four (4)
feet from a sidewalk in a public right-of-way.
      (2)   Residential Setback. In all Non- Residential Districts, a fence
with barbed wire shall be located at least four (4) feet from the property line
of a Residential District.
      (3)   Landscape Barrier. Where it is required that a barbed wire fence be
set back from a sidewalk or a Residential District line, such setback area
shall be planted with shrubs spaced no more than five (5) feet apart or trees
spaced no more than twenty (20) feet apart. The requirement for a landscape
barrier shall not apply to barbed wire fences legally established prior to the
initial effective date of this section nor to the replacement of such fences
and shall not apply to a fence setback area of eight (8) feet or more.
(Ord. No. 1811-2000. Passed 2-12-01, eff. 2-20-01)
§ 358.06 General Regulations
   The following regulations shall apply to fences in all zoning districts or
as specified.
   (a)   Prohibited Materials. No fence shall be composed of scrap materials,
tires, canvas, cardboard, asphalt-style shingles, or chicken wire. Furthermore,
except in General Industry and Unrestricted Industry Districts, no fence shall
be composed of corrugated metal or sheet metal.
   (b)   Appearance. All fences shall be uniform in material and color. In the
case of a fence with a finished side and an unfinished side, the finished or
more decorative side shall face outward toward the adjoining property or the
street.
   (c)   Barbed Wire. Where permitted by regulations of this chapter, barbed
wire may be installed at the top of a fence if not more than three (3) strands
are used, and if the lowest strand is at least six (6) feet above the adjoining
ground. In the case of a fence located less than four (4) feet from a public
sidewalk or a Residential District line, the vertical supports for the strands
shall slant away from the nearest property line at an angle of not less than
forty-five (45) degrees. Such barbed wire may be placed above the otherwise
applicable height limit for the fence to which it is attached. Any barbed wire
fence not conforming to any provision of this chapter regarding barbed wire
fences shall be made to conform or shall be removed no later than December 31,
2001.
   (d)   Maintenance. All fences shall be maintained in good condition, free of
significant rust, peeling paint or other damage. Furthermore, all fences shall
be kept plumb, with no more than a two (2) inch deflection from a vertical
position.
   (e)   Recreation Facilities. On the grounds of a school or on the grounds of
a public or private recreation use, an open fence erected to enclose a
playground, playfield, swimming pool, tennis court, golf course or similar
facility may exceed the otherwise applicable height limits, but shall not
exceed twelve (12) feet in height.
   (f)   Railroad and Utility Properties. An open fence erected for security
purposes along a railroad or rapid transit right-of-way or yard or around a
public utility use may exceed the otherwise applicable height limits, but shall
not exceed twelve (12) feet in height.
   (g)   Temporary Construction Fences. Notwithstanding other provisions of
this chapter, a temporary fence shall be permitted in any zoning district to
enclose a site at which construction activity is underway. Such fence shall be
in place only for the duration of the construction activity and shall be
removed when construction activity has been completed or has been discontinued
for a period of three (3) months or more. Such fence shall be located as
necessary to protect the public and to secure the construction site, as
approved by the Commissioner of Building and Housing. The fence may be chain
link, wood or another material approved by the Commissioner.
   (h)   Nonconforming Fences. Except as specified in division (b) of Section
358.03 with regard to sight lines and division (c) of Section
358.06, with respect to barbed wire, any fence not conforming to the
regulations of this chapter may be retained and repaired but shall not be moved
or replaced in whole unless made to conform with the provisions of this
chapter. Replacement of less than half (1/2) of a nonconforming fence in a
twelve (12) month period shall be considered “repair” and not “replacement” for
purposes of this provision.
(Ord. No. 1811-2000. Passed 2-12-01, eff. 2-20-01)
§ 358.07 Permit Requirements
   (a)   Applicability. Except as exempted in this section, no fence shall be
installed unless a permit for such fence has been issued by the Commissioner of
Building and Housing.
   (b)   Contents of Application. An application for a Building Permit to erect
a fence shall include the following information, in addition to other
information required by the Division of Building and Housing for a permit
application:
      (1)   A site plan showing the location of the fence and gates in relation
to all property lines, streets, driveways, sidewalks and structure on or within
six (6) feet of the subject property;
      (2)   Information indicating the height, materials, dimensions, colors,
style and opacity of the fence, including the use of barbed wire, if any; and
      (3)   Information and plans indicating the method of attaching the fence
to the ground or to other structures.
   (c)   Exemption for Repair or Replacement. No permit is required for repair
or replacement of a fence or portions thereof if the area being repaired or
replaced, in any twelve (12) month period, does not exceed fifty percent (50%)
of the length of the fence, and the replacement does not involve changes to
foundations or footers. The exemption regarding partial replacement does not
apply to walls.
(Ord. No. 1811-2000. Passed 2-12-01, eff. 2-20-01)
CHAPTER 359 – NONCONFORMING USES
359.01   Existing Nonconforming Buildings and Uses
359.02   Discontinuance of Nonconforming Use
359.03   Repairs and Restorations of Buildings of Nonconforming Use
Cross-reference:
   Nonconforming use defined, CO
325.52
   Nonconformity defined, CO
325.53
   Temporary permits in undeveloped sections, CO
329.06
   Variance as nonconforming use that did not previously exist, CO
329.04
Statutory reference:
   Nonconforming uses; retroactive measures, RC 713.15
§ 359.01 Existing Nonconforming Buildings and Uses
   (a)   Except as provided in Section
347.06 and Chapter
351, a use of building or land lawfully existing on the effective date of this
Zoning Code or of any amendment or supplement thereto, or for which a permit
has been lawfully issued, may be continued even though such use does not
conform to the provisions of this Zoning Code for the use district in which it
is located, but no enlargement or expansion shall be permitted except as a
variance under the terms of Chapter
329, and no substitution or other change in such nonconforming use to other
than a conforming use shall be permitted except by special permit from the
Board of Zoning Appeals. Such special permit may be issued only if the Board
finds after public hearing that such substitution or other charge is no more
harmful or objectionable than the previous nonconforming use in floor or other
space occupied, in volume of trade or production, in kind of goods sold or
produced, in daily hours or other period of use, in the type or number of
persons to occupy or to be attracted to the premises or in any other
characteristic of the new use as compared with the previous use.
   (b)   The enactment of this Zoning Code shall not in any way affect the
legality or previous orders requiring the discontinuance of nonconforming uses
nor extend the time limit already established when existing nonconforming uses
shall be discontinued.
(Ord. No. 845-62. Passed 4-27-64, eff. 4-27-64)
§ 359.02 Discontinuance of Nonconforming Use
   (a)   A nonconforming use of a building or premises which has been
discontinued shall not thereafter be returned to such nonconforming use.
   (b)   A nonconforming use shall be considered discontinued:
      (1)   When the intent of the owner to discontinue the use is express; or
      (2)   When the use is voluntarily discontinued for six (6) months or
more. The intent to voluntarily discontinue a use may be implied from acts or
the failure to act, including, but not limited to, the removal of and failure
to replace the characteristic equipment and furnishings; or
      (3)   The cessation of business operations for two (2) years or more
unless the cessation of business operations was caused by factors out of the
control of the business such as the disability or illness of the proprietor or
governmental action unrelated to the behavior of the business. If the business
operations have ceased for more than two (2) years, the presence of
characteristic equipment and furnishings is not relevant;
      (4)   When it has been replaced by a conforming use; or
      (5)   When it has been changed to another use under permit from the Board
of Zoning Appeals.
(Ord. No. 1138-02. Passed 12-6-04, eff. 12-7-04)
§ 359.03 Repairs and Restorations of Buildings of Nonconforming Use
   (a)   Nothing in this Zoning Code shall prevent the strengthening or
restoration to a safe condition of any structural part of any building declared
unsafe by the Director of Building and Housing or other authorized
administrative official or agency of the City. All repairs within the life of a
building used for a nonconforming use shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of
the valuation of the building. The value of the repairs shall be determined
under Section
3105.20 and the time of evaluation is the time of the repairs. The building
valuation shall be the most recent market value as determined by the County
Auditor. This section does not apply if the building is changed to a conforming
use.
   (b)   A building used for a nonconforming use more than fifty percent (50%)
destroyed or removed by whatever cause, including acts of God but not including
acts of malicious mischief or vandalism, shall not be restored or replaced
except in conformity with the regulations for the district in which it is
located.
(Ord. No. 1402-15. Passed 1-25-16, eff. 1-26-16)
TITLE VIIA: CLEVELAND NEIGHBORHOOD FORM-BASED CODE
To view Title VIIA in PDF format, click HERE.
(Ord. No. 347-2024, passed 6-3-24, eff. 7-3-24)
 
PART IIIC: LAND USE CODE – HOUSING CODE
TITLE IX: HOUSING CODE
   Chapter
361   Purpose and Scope
   Chapter
363   Definitions
   Chapter
365   Rental Registration and Lead-Safe Certification
   Chapter
367   Enforcement and Penalty
   Chapter
369   Residential Occupancy Standards
   Chapter
371   Rental Dwelling Standards
   Chapter
373   Rooming Occupancy Standards
   Chapter
375   Landlords and Tenants
CHAPTER 361 – PURPOSE AND SCOPE
361.01   Short Title
361.02   Purpose
361.03   General Scope
Cross-reference:
   Enforcement of Housing Code, CO
367.01
   Rules and regulations for Housing Code, CO
367.10
Statutory reference:
   Civil Rights Commission, fair housing, RC Ch. 4112
   Power to regulate sanitary condition of buildings, RC 715.26(A), 715.29
§ 361.01 Short Title
   This Title Nine of Part Three-Public and Private Land Use Regulations of the
Codified Ordinances, known as the “Housing Code of the City of Cleveland” and
hereinafter referred to as “this Code”, shall be deemed to be included within
the reference to the “Building Code of the City of Cleveland,” as used in
Charter Section
76-6.
(Ord. No. 2409-59. Passed 4-4-60, eff. 4-6-60)
§ 361.02 Purpose
   Within the scope of this Housing Code as hereinafter defined, the purpose of
this Code is to establish minimum standards necessary to make all dwelling
structures safe, sanitary, free from fire and health hazards and fit for human
habitation and beneficial to the public welfare; establish minimum standards
governing maintenance of dwelling structures in safe and sanitary condition;
fix responsibilities for owners and occupants of dwelling structures with
respect to sanitation, repair and maintenance; establish additional standards
for rented or leased dwellings and rooming occupancies; authorize the
inspection of dwelling structures; establish enforcement procedures; authorize
the vacation or condemnation of dwelling structures unsafe or unfit for human
habitation; and fix penalties for violations.
(Ord. No. 2409-59. Passed 4-4-60, eff. 4-6-60)
§ 361.03 General Scope
   (a)   The provisions of this Housing Code shall be supplementary to all
other provisions of these Codified Ordinances relating to the construction, use
and maintenance of residential buildings and shall apply to all buildings or
portions thereof, excepting hotels as defined herein, which are used or
designed or intended to be used for residential occupancy.
   (b)   Existing buildings may continue to be occupied for residential
purposes, if:
      (1)   The building complies with the provisions of this Code except as to
any variance heretofore specifically granted by the Board of Building Standards
and Building Appeals;
      (2)   The use and occupancy of the building is not in violation of the
zoning ordinances of the City.
   (c)   In the event of conflict between any other provisions of these
Codified Ordinances and the provisions of this Code, the provisions of this
Code shall prevail. However, where the construction of new buildings or the
alteration or conversion of existing buildings for residential use is made
after April 6, 1960, the more restrictive provision shall prevail.
(Ord. No. 2409-59. Passed 4-4-60, eff. 4-6-60)
CHAPTER 363 – DEFINITIONS
363.001   Definitions Generally
363.01   Approved
363.02   Commissioner of Housing
363.03   Communal Kitchen
363.04   Dwelling Building or Structure
363.05   Dwelling Unit
363.06   Family
363.07   Habitable Room
363.08   Hotel
363.09   Multiple Dwelling
363.10   Occupant
363.11   Operator
363.12   Owner
363.13   Premises
363.14   Rooming Occupancy
363.15   Secondary or Appurtenant Structure
363.16   Supplied
363.17   Row House
363.18   Basement
363.19   Cellar
363.20   Garbage
363.21   Rubbish
363.22   Infestation
363.23   Plumbing
363.24   Kitchen
363.25   Kitchen Sink
363.26   Lavatory
363.27   Nondwelling Structure
363.28   Yard
363.29   Condemned
Cross-reference:
   Zoning Code definitions, CO
Ch. 325
§ 363.001 Definitions Generally
   As used in this Housing Code, certain words and terms are defined as
provided in this chapter.
(Ord. No. 2409-59. Passed 4-4-60, eff. 4-6-60)
§ 363.01 Approved
   “Approved” means approved by the Commissioner of Housing as authorized in
this Code, or by the Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals, or
approved by any other authority designated by these Codified Ordinances to give
approval to the matter in question.
(Ord. No. 2409-59. Passed 4-4-60, eff. 4-6-60)
§ 363.02 Commissioner of Housing
   “Commissioner of Housing” shall be construed as though followed by the words
“or his or her authorized agent or representative.”
(Ord. No. 2409-59. Passed 4-4-60, eff. 4-6-60)
§ 363.03 Communal Kitchen
   “Communal kitchen” means a kitchen within a dwelling building used by the
occupants of more than one (1) dwelling unit or shared by any persons residing
in a rooming occupancy.
(Ord. No. 2409-59. Passed 4-4-60, eff. 4-6-60)
§ 363.04 Dwelling Building or Structure
   “Dwelling building or structure” means a building or structure used or
designed or intended to be used, all or in part, for residential purposes.
(Ord. No. 2409-59. Passed 4-4-60, eff. 4-6-60)
§ 363.05 Dwelling Unit
   “Dwelling unit” means a room or group of rooms located within a dwelling
structure and forming a single habitable unit with living, sleeping, cooking,
eating and sanitary facilities used or intended to be used by one (1) family.
(Ord. No. 2409-59. Passed 4-4-60, eff. 4-6-60)
§ 363.06 Family
   “Family” means one (1) or more persons related by blood, adoption or
marriage, or a family foster home, living and cooking together as a single
housekeeping unit, exclusive of house-hold servants. A number of persons, but
not exceeding three (3) living and cooking together as a single housekeeping
unit though not related by blood, adoption or marriage shall be deemed to
constitute a family. A family foster home shall mean a family related by blood,
adoption or marriage as defined above with no more than five (5) foster
children.
(Ord. No. 919-88. Passed 6-20-88, eff. 6-24-88)
§ 363.07 Habitable Room
   “Habitable room” means a room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be
used for living, sleeping or eating purposes, excluding kitchens (except where
eating space is included in a room also used for cooking), bathrooms, toilet
rooms, laundries, pantries, dressing rooms, storage spaces, foyers, hallways,
utility rooms, heater rooms, boiler rooms and basement or cellar recreation
rooms.
(Ord. No. 2409-59. Passed 4-4-60, eff. 4-6-60)
§ 363.08 Hotel
   “Hotel” means a building or part thereof in which rooms are available for
hire as lodging to the general public, which rooms are occupied as a rule
transiently and singly, rather than as dwelling units, and in which building
food and drink may be served for consumption by the general public, and shall
include all buildings known as motels or motor hotels, which conform to this
definition.
(Ord. No. 2409-59. Passed 4-4-60, eff. 4-6-60)
§ 363.09 Multiple Dwelling
   “Multiple dwelling” means a dwelling structure occupied for residence
purposes by more than two (2) families, or by individuals living in a rooming
occupancy as defined herein, or by both.
(Ord. No. 2409-59. Passed 4-4-60, eff. 4-6-60)
§ 363.10 Occupant
   “Occupant” means a person over one (1) year of age, living, sleeping,
cooking or eating in, or having actual possession of, a dwelling unit or a room
used for rooming occupancy.
(Ord. No. 2409-59. Passed 4-4-60, eff. 4-6-60)
§ 363.11 Operator
   “Operator” means a person who has charge, care, management or control,
whether as owner, manager, executor, administrator, trustee, guardian, receiver
or otherwise, of a building, dwelling, structure or part thereof in which
dwelling units or rooming occupancies are let in or used for purposes of use as
described in these Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 68-A-67. Passed 4-3-67, eff. 4-5-67)
§ 363.12 Owner
   "Owner" means the owner or owners of the premises, including the holder of
title thereto subject to contract of purchase, a vendee in possession, a
mortgagee or receiver in possession, a lessee or joint lessees of the whole
thereof or an agent or any other person, firm or corporation who has charge,
care, management of or is directly in control of the premises.
(Ord. No. 612-2022. Passed 9-26-22, eff. 10-3-22)
§ 363.13 Premises
   “Premises” means a lot, parcel or plot of land including the buildings or
structures thereon.
(Ord. No. 2409-59. Passed 4-4-60, eff. 4-6-60)
§ 363.14 Rooming Occupancy
   “Rooming occupancy” means that use wherein a room or group of rooms in a
dwelling structure is used or intended to be used for living or sleeping but
not for cooking or eating purposes. However, where one (1) or two (2) roomers
are accommodated within a dwelling unit occupied by a family, or where a
dwelling structure is occupied by not more than two (2) families and not more
than two (2) roomers or boarders per family, the accommodations so provided
shall not be deemed to be a rooming occupancy.
(Ord. No. 68-A-67. Passed 4-3-67, eff. 4-5-67)
§ 363.15 Secondary or Appurtenant Structure
   “Secondary or appurtenant structure” means a structure, the use of which is
incidental to that of the main building, and which is attached thereto or
located on the same premises.
(Ord. No. 2409-59. Passed 4-4-60, eff. 4-6-60)
§ 363.16 Supplied
   “Supplied” means paid for, furnished or provided by, or under the control of
the owner or operator.
(Ord. No. 2409-59. Passed 4-4-60, eff. 4-6-60)
§ 363.17 Row House
   “Row House” means an attached house in a row or group, each house containing
not more than two (2) dwelling units and each house separated from adjoining
houses in the same row or group by fire walls or separators.
(Ord. No. 2516-64. Passed 2-15-65, eff. 2-18-65)
§ 363.18 Basement
   “Basement” means that portion of the building located partly under ground
and conforming to Sections
369.01 and
369.02 and other provisions of these Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 68-A-67. Passed 4-3-67, eff. 4-5-67)
§ 363.19 Cellar
   “Cellar” means that portion of the building located partly under ground and
does not conform to Sections
369.01 and
369.02 and other provisions of these Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 68-A-67. Passed 4-3-67, eff. 4-5-67)
§ 363.20 Garbage
   “Garbage” means the animal, vegetable or mineral waste from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
(Ord. No. 68-A-67. Passed 4-3-67, eff. 4-5-67)
§ 363.21 Rubbish
   “Rubbish” means combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage; and includes the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and
other combustible material, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood excelsior,
rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral
matter, glass crockery and dust.
(Ord. No. 68-A-67. Passed 4-3-67, eff. 4-5-67)
§ 363.22 Infestation
   “Infestation” means the presence, within or around a dwelling, building or
structure, of any insects, rodents or other pests.
(Ord. No. 68-A-67. Passed 4-3-67, eff. 4-5-67)
§ 363.23 Plumbing
   “Plumbing” means and includes all of the following supplied facilities and
equipment: water pipes, gas lines, garbage disposal units, waste pipes, water
closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths,
installed clothes washing machines, catch basins, drains, vents and any other
similar supplied fixtures, together with all connections to water and sewer
lines.
(Ord. No. 68-A-67. Passed 4-3-67, eff. 4-5-67)
§ 363.24 Kitchen
   “Kitchen” means a room or area used or intended to be used or containing the
facilities for cooking or the preparation of meals.
(Ord. No. 68-A-67. Passed 4-3-67, eff. 4-5-67)
§ 363.25 Kitchen Sink
   “Kitchen sink” means a sink of a size and design adequate for the purpose of
washing eating and drinking utensils, located in a kitchen and properly
connected with both hot and cold water lines as required.
(Ord. No. 68-A-67. Passed 4-3-67, eff. 4-5-67)
§ 363.26 Lavatory
   “Lavatory” means a hand washing basin which is properly connected with both
hot and cold water lines and which is separate and distinct from a kitchen
sink, as required.
(Ord. No. 68-A-67. Passed 4-3-67, eff. 4-5-67)
§ 363.27 Nondwelling Structure
   “Nondwelling structure” means any structure except a dwelling used or
intended to be used for the shelter or enclosure of any person, animal or
property of any kind.
(Ord. No. 68-A-67. Passed 4-3-67, eff. 4-5-67)
§ 363.28 Yard
   “Yard” means all ground, lawn, court, walk, driveway or other open space
constituting part of the same premises of a dwelling, building or structure.
(Ord. No. 68-A-67. Passed 4-3-67, eff. 4-5-67)
§ 363.29 Condemned
   “Condemned” means a structure or part thereof that has been determined by
the Commissioner of Housing as unfit for human habitation.
(Ord. No. 68-A-67. Passed 4-3-67, eff. 4-5-67)
CHAPTER 365 – RENTAL REGISTRATION AND LEAD-SAFE CERTIFICATION
365.01   Definitions
365.02   Non-Owner-Occupied Residential Unit Registration Required; Application
for and Issuance of Certificate of Non-Owner-Occupied Residential Registration;
Certificate Approving Rental Occupancy; Revocation
365.03   Rental Registration Fee
365.04   Lead-Safe Certification Required for Residential Rental Units Built
Before January 1, 1978
365.05   Internal Review
365.06   Impact of Lead-Safe Certification Requirement; Review
365.07   Lead-Safe Advisory Board; Responsibilities
365.08   Records Kept by Department
365.09   Inspections; Right of Entry
365.10   Severability
§ 365.01 Definitions
   For purposes of this chapter:
   (a)   “Clearance examination” means an examination, performed by a clearance
technician, lead inspector, or lead risk assessor, to determine whether lead
hazards in a residential unit have been sufficiently controlled. A clearance
examination includes a visual assessment, collection and analysis of
environmental samples.
   (b)   “Clearance technician” means a person, other than a licensed lead
inspector or lead risk assessor, who is licensed under RC Chapter 3742 to
perform a clearance examination.
   (c)   “Director” means the Director of Building and Housing.
   (d)   “Governmental Entity” means the United States, or an agency thereof,
the State of Ohio or a political subdivision thereof, or a county land
reutilization corporation organized and existing under Chapter 1724 of the
Revised Code or its wholly owned subsidiary.
   (e)   “Lead-based paint” means any paint or other similar surface-coating
substance containing lead at or in excess of the level that is hazardous to
human health as set forth in Rule 3701-32-19 of the Ohio Administrative Code
(OAC) as it may be hereafter amended.
   (f)   “Lead hazard” means material that is likely to cause lead exposure and
endanger an individual’s health as set forth in OAC Rule 3701-32-19. Lead
hazard includes lead-based paint, lead-contaminated dust, lead-contaminated
soil and lead-contaminated water pipes.
   (g)   “Lead inspector” means any individual licensed under RC Chapter 3742
who conducts a lead inspection, provides professional advice regarding a lead
inspection, or prepares a report explaining the results of a lead inspection.
   (h)   “Lead risk assessment” means an on-site investigation to determine and
report the existence, nature, severity, and location of lead hazards in a
residential unit including information gathering from the unit, current owner’s
knowledge regarding the age and painting history of the unit, and occupancy by
children under six (6) years of age, visual inspection, limited wipe sampling
or other environmental sampling techniques, and any other activity as may be
appropriate.
   (i)   “Lead risk assessor” means a person licensed under RC Chapter 3742 who
is responsible for developing a written inspection, risk assessment and
analysis plan; conducting inspections for lead hazards in a residential unit;
interpreting results of inspections or risk assessments; identifying hazard
control strategies to reduce or eliminate lead exposures; and completing a risk
assessment report.
   (j)   “Lead-safe certification” means that the owner of a residential rental
unit built before January 1, 1978 has provided to the Director a clearance
examination report or lead risk assessment that indicates that lead hazards are
not identified in the unit. A lead-safe certification is valid for two (2)
years from the date of the certification.
   (k)   “Local Agent in Charge” means a natural person who is of sound mind
and at least eighteen (18) years of age and who is designated by the owner; who
is authorized by the owner to receive service of a Notice of Violation on the
owner’s behalf; and who is responsible for the maintenance and management of
the residential rental unit.
      (1)   If the owner is a natural person and a resident of Cuyahoga County
or a contiguous county, then the Local Agent in Charge may be the owner.
Otherwise, the Local Agent in Charge shall be a natural person who resides
within Cuyahoga County.
      (2)   If the Local Agent in Charge is not the owner, then the Local Agent
in Charge shall, in a form to be supplied by the Director, accept
responsibility with the owner (including any potential criminal, civil, or
administrative liability) for the maintenance and management of the premises
during any time when such person is identified as the Local Agent in Charge.
The form shall include a provision in which the owner indemnifies the Local
Agent in Charge for any such responsibility and liability. In any enforcement
or pursuit of those responsibilities and liabilities, the City shall make a
good faith effort to hold the owner exclusively responsible or liable, but the
City may, in its sole discretion, hold the Local Agent in Charge responsible or
liable, in part or in full.
      (3)   If the Local Agent in Charge is a real estate broker as defined in
RC 4735.01, then the Local Agent in Charge shall include a copy of their real
estate broker’s license in any form or application they file with the City.
      (4)   If the owner is a Governmental Entity, then the owner shall be
deemed to be the Local Agent in Charge and owner shall not be required to
designate any natural person as the Local Agent in Charge.
   (l)   “Owner” means the person, partnership or corporation that holds title
to the residential rental unit.
   (m)   “Permanent” means an expected design life of at least twenty (20)
years.
   (n)   “Residential rental unit” means any part of a building being used,
designed or intended to be used as an individual’s private residence, including
a unit occupied by one (1) or more persons regardless of whether the occupant
pays rent or provides anything else of value to the titled owner in
consideration for occupying the structure. A residential rental unit does not
include a unit occupied by the titled owner.
(Ord. No. 1039-2023. Passed 2-5-24, eff. 2-6-24)
§ 365.02 Non-Owner-Occupied Residential Unit Registration Required; Application
for and Issuance of Certificate of Non-Owner-Occupied Residential Registration;
Certificate Approving Rental Occupancy; Revocation
   (a)   Non-Owner-Occupied Residential Unit Registration Required. An owner of
a non-owner-occupied residential unit or units located in the City shall apply
to register each unit in a manner prescribed in writing by the Director in a
publicly available non-owner-occupied residential unit registry established and
maintained by the Director. Upon approval of an application, the owner shall
receive a Certificate of Non-Owner-Occupied Residential Unit Registration. Such
an owner, before renting such a unit, shall obtain a Certificate Approving
Rental Occupancy. If the owner is a Governmental Entity, then it shall be
exempt from the rental registration requirements of this Section
365.02, unless and until the Governmental Entity intends to rent the unit as
evidenced by the owner simultaneously applying for a Certificate Approving
Rental Occupancy as described in division (d) of this section.
   (b)   Information Required for Annual Non-Owner-Occupied Residential Unit
Registration. Application for a certificate of non-owner-occupied residential
unit registration required by this Housing Code shall be made annually, on or
before March 1st of each calendar year in accordance with the process
prescribed in writing by the Director. Information, or documentation, to be
supplied on, or with, an application shall include, but is not limited to, the
following:
      (1)   The name, address, telephone number and email address of the owner
or owners of the premises. If the owner is a partnership, then the names,
addresses, telephone numbers and email addresses of all general partners. If
the owner is a corporation, the names, addresses, telephone numbers and email
addresses of the current statutory agent and all corporate officers of the
corporation. The address for corporations and partnerships shall be the
principal place of business and the address for persons shall be the home
address;
         A.   If the owner is a natural person, then the application shall
include a copy of the owner’s driver’s license or an acceptable government
issued photo identification card.
         B.   If the owner is not a natural person, then the application shall
include a current copy of the owner’s Certificate of Good Standing issued by
the Ohio Secretary of State.
      (2)   The name, address, telephone number and email address of a Local
Agent in Charge.
   (c)   Issuance of Certificate of Non-Owner-Occupied Residential Unit
Registration. Upon receipt of application, the Director shall issue a
certificate of non-owner-occupied residential unit registration that shall
state conspicuously: “This Certificate establishes that the residential unit
described here is registered with the City of Cleveland Department of Building
and Housing, which means that the owner has provided information to the
Department concerning the property as required by law. This Certificate does
not establish that the residential unit described herein is safe from lead
paint hazards, meets Housing Code and Building Code requirements, or is fit and
habitable to live in. A separate “Certificate Approving Rental Occupancy” from
the Department of Building and Housing establishes a record of compliance with
those laws and requirements.” The Certificate shall also indicate:
      (1)   The street address or other identifying characteristics of the
building or other structure;
      (2)   The name, address, telephone number and email address of the owner
or owners of the premises. In the case of a partnership, the names of all
general partners;
      (3)   If the record owner is a corporation, the names, addresses,
telephone numbers and email addresses of the current statutory agent and all
corporate officers of that corporation;
      (4)   The name, address, telephone number and email address of the
managing agent of the premises, if any;
      (5)   The name, address (including the dwelling unit, apartment or room
number), telephone number and email address of the superintendent, custodian,
or other individual employed by the owner or managing agent to provide regular
maintenance services, if any;
      (6)   The name, address, telephone number and email address of an
individual representative of the owner or managing agent who may be reached or
contacted at any time in the event of an emergency affecting the premises of
any rental unit in that structure, including such emergencies as the failure of
a utility system or service, and who has the authority to make emergency
decisions concerning the building including its repairs or expenditures;
      (7)   The name, address, telephone number and email address of any Local
Agent in Charge;
      (8)   The use and occupancy authorized; and
      (9)   A statement concerning the current lead-safe certification status
of the property, if applicable and a statement concerning the existence of any
Lead Hazard Control Order.
   (d)   Certificate Approving Rental Occupancy. Before a non-owner-occupied
residential unit that is registered under this section can be rented, the owner
must apply for and obtain a Certificate Approving Rental Occupancy. The owner
shall apply for such certificate in a manner prescribed by the Director, using
forms supplied by the Director.
   The Director shall require documentation demonstrating compliance with the
following requirements:
      (1)   That where a non-owner-occupied residential unit is part of a
building with four (4) or more residential units, the unit shall have been
examined by a licensed Heating Ventilating and Air Condition (HVAC) contractor
and the HVAC systems for the unit(s) found to be well-maintained and in working
order.
      (2)   That where a non-owner-occupied residential unit is part of a
building with four (4) or more residential units, and where the service account
holder for water service, electricity service, or natural gas service is not
the occupant of that unit, then the account shall be active, paid in full, and
otherwise in good standing.
      (3)   The City of Cleveland’s Lead Safe Certification requirement and any
Lead Hazard Control Orders.
      (4)   Any Notices of Violations issued for the unit, with acceptable
documentation to include but not be limited to, as appropriate, certificates of
correction, inspection reports, or documentation from contractors that
demonstrates and certifies that the object of the Notice of Violation was
resolved.
      (5)   That parcels shall not be delinquent regarding their property tax
balance or in good standing on a County payment plan in the case of a tax
delinquency.
      (6)   That parcels shall not be delinquent in fines and/or fees owed to
the City, including but not limited to those related to nuisance abatement.
   (e)   Revocation of Certificate of Non-owner-Occupied Residential Unit
Registration. The Director may revoke a certificate of non-owner-occupied
residential Unit registration if the applicant makes any false statement in
connection with the registration, or if the structure that was covered by it is
no longer in compliance with the requirements of this Code, or if the owner,
agent, or person in charge of a structure refuses to comply with any provision
of this Code required for the use, maintenance and/or occupancy of a structure,
including this chapter and Chapters
240,
367,
369 and
371. If the Director revokes a certificate of non-owner-occupied residential
unit registration, the owner may appeal the Director’s action to the Board of
Zoning Appeals, in writing within ten (10) days from the date of the Director’s
action. The Board may sustain, disapprove or modify the Director’s action, and
the Board’s decision shall be final.
   (f)   Revocation of Certificate Approving Rental Occupancy. Whenever the
Director discovers that a non-owner-occupied residential unit no longer
qualifies for a Certificate Approving Rental Occupancy, the Director shall
revoke the certificate. The Director shall mail a copy of the revocation to the
owner and to the residential unit addressed to the occupants by name or as
“occupants”. The Director may have the revocation posted on the residential
unit. The revocation of the certificate shall in no way alter the rights of an
occupant under a rental agreement or relieve the owner of its obligations under
a rental agreement.
   (g)   Notice of Change in Information. It is the owner and the Local Agent
in Charge’s obligation to notify the Director, in writing, of any change in the
name, address, telephone number, and/or email address of any information
provided in this section within seven (7) days after the change occurs. If
written notification is not provided as required in this section, the Director
may revoke the certificate of non-owner-occupied residential unit registration
until the changed name, address, telephone number, and/or email address is
provided in writing.
   (h)   The owner or Local Agent in Charge of the unit shall pay a fine of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) upon revocation of the Certificate of Non-Owner-
Occupied Residential Unit Registration or the Certificate Approving Rental
Occupancy, and the certificates shall not be reissued while any fee or fine is
outstanding. Cumulative fines for such revocations that are associated with a
single owner shall not exceed thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00) per calendar
year.
   (i)   Within two (2) years of passage of this ordinance, the Director shall
submit to the Council a report produced by a third party that reviews and
evaluates the implementation of Chapter
365 and Chapter
3106; the effect of those chapters on the housing market in Cleveland and on
Cleveland residents; and the impact of the Local Agent in Charge requirement.
(Ord. No. 1039-2023. Passed 2-5-24, eff. 2-6-24)
§ 365.03 Rental Registration Fee
   (a)   An application for a certificate of non-owner-occupied residential
unit registration shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee for each non-
owner-occupied residential unit of seventy dollars ($70.00) for each
residential rental unit.
   (b)   The Board of Control shall establish any fee exemptions and guidelines
for implementation.
   (c)   No fees shall be collected from any one (1) owner for all units owned
by that owner within the City in excess of thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00)
per calendar year.
   (d)   A certificate may be renewed prior to expiration upon application and
payment of the fee described above. A certificate that has expired may be
renewed upon payment of the above registration fee plus a late fee of one
hundred dollars ($100.00).
   (e)   The Director shall be authorized to enter into one or more letter
agreements with an owner that is a Governmental Entity that reduces or waives
the registration fee described in this Section
365.03.
(Ord. No. 1039-2023. Passed 2-5-24, eff. 2-6-24)
§ 365.04 Lead-Safe Certification Required for Residential Rental Units Built
Before January 1, 1978
   (a)   Presumption and Policy. Any residential rental unit originally
constructed prior to January 1, 1978 is presumed to have lead-based paint. It
is the policy of the City to help prevent the poisoning of children by
requiring that the presence of deteriorated lead-based paint on the interior
and exterior of residential rental structures built before January 1, 1978 be
identified and be correctly addressed by reducing and controlling lead-based
paint hazards which may be present, in order to prevent human exposure to these
hazards. Therefore, it is the further policy of the City to require all
residential rental units in the City constructed prior to January 1, 1978 to
have lead-safe certification no later than March 1, 2023.
   (b)   Lead-Safe Certification. Beginning March 1, 2021, all residential
rental units constructed before January 1, 1978 shall have lead-safe
certification from the Director according to a quarterly schedule established
by the Director, but in no case later than March 1, 2023.
   A lead-safe certification is valid for two (2) years from the date of
issuance. No earlier than thirty (30) days prior to expiration, an owner shall
re-apply for a lead-safe certification by providing the necessary documentation
as set forth in this section.
      (1)   To obtain a lead-safe certification, an owner of a residential
rental unit constructed prior to January 1, 1978 shall provide to the Director
a copy of a clearance examination report or lead risk assessment, completed
pursuant to applicable Ohio laws and rules, within ninety (90) days prior to
the date of submission evidencing that lead hazards were not identified in the
unit.
      (2)   For a structure constructed prior to January 1, 1978 that contains
five (5) or more residential rental units to obtain a lead-safe certification,
an owner shall provide to the Director a copy of a report, completed pursuant
to applicable law within ninety (90) days prior to the date of submission, that
lead hazards were not identified in the minimum number of units tested relative
to the total number of units in the structure, according to Federal HUD
Guidelines, 2012 edition, as may be amended from time to time.
   (c)   Exemption. To be exempt from the lead-safe certification requirement
set forth in this section, the owner of a residential rental unit originally
constructed prior to January 1, 1978 shall submit a copy of a comprehensive
lead risk assessment and paint inspection report, issued by a lead risk
assessor verifying that the unit has been abated of lead hazards in accordance
with 40 C.F.R. 745.227 and applicable state law. The report shall have been
completed within twenty (20) years prior to the date of submission to the
Director.
   (d)   An owner of a residential rental unit is not required to obtain a
lead-safe certification so long as the unit is unoccupied and the owner does
not receive rent or anything else of value for the unit. The owner shall file
an affidavit, in the form prescribed by the Director, that the unit is
unoccupied and that the owner does not receive rent or anything else of value
for the unit, which affidavit shall be filed annually so long as the unit
remains unoccupied and the owner does not receive rent or anything else of
value for the unit.
   (e)   Affirmative Defense. It is an affirmative defense to a charge for a
violation of this section that the rental unit is unoccupied and the owner of
the rental unit does not receive rent or anything else of value for the unit.
   (f)   Conflict of Interest. Any clearance technician, lead risk assessor or
lead inspector who performs a clearance examination or lead risk assessment for
purposes of this section shall not be:
      (1)   the owner or an immediate family member, agent or employee of the
owner;
      (2)   part of a company or associated with a company that is directly or
beneficially owned, controlled or managed by the owner, or by an immediate
family member, agent or employee of the owner;
      (3)   a person hired by or under contract with the owner to manage or
maintain the owner's residential rental unit or units as directed by the owner;
      (4)   a person who has been authorized by the owner to manage or maintain
the owner's residential rental unit or units on the owner's behalf; or
      (5)   a person who has a financial interest in the laboratory results of
dust sampling or testing, or in the determination of whether lead hazards are
identified in the owner's residential rental unit or units.
   For purposes of this division "immediate family member" means a spouse
residing in the owner's household and any dependent child.
(Ord. No. 747-2019. Passed 7-24-19, eff. 7-26-19)
§ 365.05 Internal Review
   The Director, through a designated Lead-Safe Auditor, shall monitor the City
lead-safe certification process to ensure efficiency and effectiveness. The
Lead-Safe Auditor shall perform such other tasks as required by the Director,
including maintaining a list of certified inspectors and contractors and
coordinating regular monitoring and reporting with the Lead-Safe Advisory Board
and other appropriate entities.
(Ord. No. 747-2019. Passed 7-24-19, eff. 7-26-19)
§ 365.06 Impact of Lead-Safe Certification Requirement; Review
   Within one (1) year after implementation and yearly thereafter, the City
shall review the impacts of the lead-safe certification requirement to
determine if tenants have been unduly displaced and to identify any other
negative unintended consequences that may have occurred due to implementation
of the lead-safe certification requirement. If negative impacts are occurring
or have occurred, the City will re-evaluate the program and work toward
eliminating any negative impacts.
(Ord. No. 747-2019. Passed 7-24-19, eff. 7-26-19)
§ 365.07 Lead-Safe Advisory Board; Responsibilities
   (a)   There is hereby established a Lead-Safe Advisory Board to consist of
seven (7) members: six (6) members appointed by the Mayor with approval of
Council and one (1) member appointed by Council who shall be a member of
Council. Of the members, at least two (2) shall be representatives from the
Lead Safe Cleveland Coalition or similar organization, at least one (1) shall
be a current owner of residential rental property located in the City, one (1)
shall be the Lead-Safe Auditor, and one (1) shall be a current member of the
Cleveland Area Board of Realtors or similar organization of realtors. Of the
original appointments, three (3) shall be appointed for terms of two (2) years
and four (4) shall be appointed for terms of three (3) years. Thereafter, the
terms shall be four (4) years. None of the members shall be current employees
of the City. The Lead-Safe Advisory Board shall meet as often as a majority of
its members deems necessary, but at least quarterly in each calendar year. The
Board shall establish its own rules and regulations.
   (b)   The responsibilities of the Lead-Safe Advisory Board shall be as
follows: to provide recommendations for improvements to the City's lead-safe
policies and procedures; to report, on a quarterly basis, progress and status
of the City's Lead-Safe Certification requirement and other lead poisoning
prevention related efforts to the Council, the Directors of Building and
Housing, Public Health and Community Development, and the Lead Safe Cleveland
Coalition or similar organization; to cause an appropriate outside entity or
entities to produce impact analyses of the Lead Safe Certification program; to
review such impact analyses and report same to the Council, the Directors of
Building and Housing, Public Health and Community Development, and the Lead
Safe Cleveland Coalition or similar organization.
(Ord. No. 747-2019. Passed 7-24-19, eff. 7-26-19)
§ 365.08 Records Kept by Department
   Copies of all applications, certificates of rental registration and
documents submitted for lead-safe certification are a public record and shall
be kept on file by the Director as required by applicable law.
(Ord. No. 747-2019. Passed 7-24-19, eff. 7-26-19)
§ 365.09 Inspections; Right of Entry
   (a)   All residential rental units shall be subject to inspection for the
purpose of determining compliance with the provisions of this Housing Code and
all other applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. Inspections shall
be conducted in accordance with the residential rental unit inspection schedule
established by the Director, or as may be necessary in the Director’s
discretion pursuant to specific complaint received under this Code.
   (b)   The Director and the Director’s duly authorized agents or inspectors
may enter at reasonable times any residential rental unit registered under this
chapter in accordance with the right of entry defined in Chapter
367.
(Ord. No. 1039-2023. Passed 2-5-24, eff. 2-6-24)
§ 365.10 Severability
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or other portion of
this chapter, or its application to any person, is, for any reason, declared
invalid, in whole or in part by any court or agency of competent jurisdiction,
said decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter.
(Ord. No. 747-2019. Passed 7-24-19, eff. 7-26-19)
CHAPTER 367 – ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY
367.01   General Enforcement
367.02   Inspections
367.03   Right of Entry
367.04   Notice of Violation
367.05   Noncompliance with Notice; Vacation of Premises; Board and Demolition
of Premises
367.06   Cases of Emergency; Immediate Vacation of Premises
367.07   Placards Posted by the Department of Building and Housing and the
Division of Fire
367.08   Recovery of Expenses and Costs
367.09   Right of Appeal
367.10   Rules and Regulations
367.11   Misrepresentation of Legal Occupancy
367.111   Definitions
367.12   Certificate of Disclosure for Real Property and Notice of Violation;
Fee
367.13   Disbursal of Funds from Escrow Agent
367.131   Prohibiting Corporations from Owning or Transferring Real Property
Without Registering with the Ohio Secretary of State
367.14   Other Legal Action
367.15   Fees For Record Search and Document Preparation
367.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Condemnation of premises; conditions and notice, CO
369.21
   Director of Law to implement Zoning Code enforcement, CO
327.03
   Purpose of Housing Code, CO
361.02
   Rental registration and lead-safe certification, CO
Ch. 365
§ 367.01 General Enforcement
   This Housing Code shall be enforced by the Commissioner of Housing.
(Ord. No. 2409-59. Passed 4-4-60, eff. 4-6-60)
§ 367.02 Inspections
   The Commissioner of Housing is hereby authorized to make or cause to be made
inspections of all structures or premises used for dwelling purposes to
determine whether such structures or premises conform to the provisions of this
Housing Code, and to the provisions of the Zoning Code.
(Ord. No. 2409-59. Passed 4-4-60, eff. 4-6-60)
§ 367.03 Right of Entry
   (a)   Upon presentation of proper credentials, the Director of Building and
Housing and his or her duly authorized agents or inspectors; the Director of
Public Health and his or her duly authorized agents or inspectors; or the Fire
Chief or his or her duly authorized agents or inspectors may enter at
reasonable times, or at such other times as may be necessary in an emergency,
any dwelling, building, structure or premises in the City to perform any duty
imposed on him or her by this Housing Code, the Fire Code, or the Health Code.
   (b)   The Director of Building and Housing or Fire Chief or Director of
Public Health, or their representatives, when seeking to gain entry to a
dwelling, building or structure, shall consider, before seeking a search
warrant, the advisability of first seeking the consent of the occupants where a
dwelling, building or structure is occupied, or first seeking the consent of
the owner or person in control of the property where a dwelling, building or
structure is not occupied, with the Directors and Fire Chief presuming that, in
most circumstances, it is advisable to make a good faith effort to seek the
consent of occupants of a dwelling, building or structure or the consent of the
owner or person in control of a dwelling, building or structure that is not
occupied. The Directors or Fire Chief may, as part of that good faith effort,
knock and request the right to enter, and, if there is no answer, may leave a
written notice indicating that consent is being sought.
   (c)   The Directors and Fire Chief may, in the case of a dwelling, building,
or structure that is not occupied, seek the consent of the owner or person in
control by attempting to contact the owner by telephone, email, or certified or
regular mail. The sources of information used to attempt contact by telephone,
email, or certified or regular mail, may include:
      (1)   Information the owner provided to the City, such as rental
registration information or the address used on an appeal or an application; or
      (2)   Information that a City representative, such as an inspector, has
discovered during the performance of his or her duties; or
      (3)   Information from common and readily available sources such as
printed or online directories, utility records, credit bureaus, county property
records, board of election records, motor vehicle records, court records or
other state, county, municipal or federal records.
   (d)   The Directors or Fire Chief shall not be required, as part of a good
faith effort to seek consent, to use all of these methods and shall not be not
required to use any particular one of them; the good faith obligation shall be
to use whatever combination of them the Directors or Fire Chief judge to be
reasonably likely to be successful, with the Directors or Fire Chief having the
discretion to decide when to stop continuing to seek consent when it appears
that continued efforts are not reasonably likely to be successful. As part of
that consideration, the Directors or Fire Chief may consider the likelihood of
obtaining consent when the information examined as part of the good faith
effort to seek consent indicates that the owner is deceased, such likelihood
depending on factors such as the existence of an executor or administrator of
the deceased person’s estate or the existence of a surviving spouse or other
potential heir or legatee who has indicated that they are seeking to obtain
ownership of the dwelling, building or structure or that they are asserting
control over it.
   (e)   The Director of Building and Housing or Fire Chief or Director of
Public Health may seek a search warrant to enter, observe and inspect a
dwelling, building, or structure, or to allow their duly authorized agents or
inspectors to enter, observe and inspect a dwelling, building or structure.
Nothing in this section shall limit, or enlarge, the City’s legal right to seek
a search warrant under state and federal law based on probable cause or a valid
administrative program supporting requests for administrative search warrants
based on the criteria necessary to support such administrative warrants,
subject to review by a judge of a court authorized to issue the warrants and to
the rights of persons under the Ohio and U.S. Constitutions. Nothing in this
section shall limit or enlarge the rights of persons under the Ohio or U.S.
Constitutions to be free from searches made without a warrant.
   (f)   No person shall in any way obstruct, hinder, delay or otherwise
interfere with such entrance under this section.
(Ord. No. 1039-2023. Passed 2-5-24, eff. 2-6-24)
§ 367.04 Notice of Violation
   (a)   Whenever the Director of Building and Housing shall find any dwelling
structure or premises, or any part thereof, to be in violation of the
provisions of this Housing Code, he or she shall provide to the owner or agent
or person in charge of such structure or premises, and the mortgagee of record,
a written notice stating the violations therein. Such notice shall order the
owner within a stated reasonable time to repair, improve, demolish or
effectively board the structure or premises concerned.
   (b)   A notice of violation under Section
367.04(a) shall be served by one (1) or more of the following methods:
      (1)   Personal service. The City department issuing the notice may use
any method that causes the Notice of Violations to be actually delivered to the
responsible party. Actual delivery shall constitute legal service of the Notice
of Violations;
      (2)   Residence service at the owner’s address by leaving a copy of the
notice of violation with a person of suitable age and discretion then residing
therein;
      (3)   Certified mail to an address where it is reasonably calculated
under the circumstances to reach the owner. When determining such an address,
the City shall examine:
         A.   Information the responsible party provided to the City, such as
rental registration information or the address used on an appeal or an
application; or
         B.   Information that a City representative, such as an inspector, has
discovered during the performance of their duties; or
         C.   Information from common and readily available sources such as
printed or online directories, credit bureaus, county property records, board
of election records, motor vehicle records, court records or other state,
county, municipal or federal records.
      The City is not required to use all of the sources described in division
(b)(3) and is not required to use any one of them; the City must use whatever
combination of them is reasonably expected to be successful. The address found
can be the property or premises which is the subject of the violation.
      (4)   Regular mail and posting as follows:
         A.   Regular mail to the owner at an address found under division (b)
(3) above, which may be the address of the property that is the subject of the
violation; and
         B.   Regular mail service to the property address that is the subject
of the violation notice if the address is different from the address in
division (b)(4)A.; and
         C.   Posting of the notice of violation in a conspicuous location on
the building, premises or real estate or appurtenance thereto that is the
subject of the violation notice.
      (5)    Service by publication electronically or once in a newspaper of
general circulation in the City.
   (c)   Any owner, agent or person in charge of such dwelling structure,
mortgagee of record, lessee of record and lien holders of record who have
received a notice of violation as provided for in division (a) of this section,
or who receive a notice of the City’s intention to demolish or effectively
board as provided for in division (c) of Section
367.05, shall inform prospective purchasers, vendees, grantees, assignees,
sublessees or land contractees thereof of any such notice of violation or
notice of the City’s intention to demolish or effectively board. No owner or
agent or person in charge of such dwelling structure, mortgagee of record,
lessee of record or lien holders of record shall transfer to a vendee, grantee,
assignee, sublessee or land contractee or any other transferee any interest in
such dwelling structure after receiving a notice of violation, or notice of the
City’s intention to demolish or effectively board without first providing the
transferee with a copy of such notice.
   (d)   Any buyer or grantee, by land contract or otherwise, of a dwelling
building or structure, with the exception of those properties required to be
registered under Chapter
3106, shall begin at the date of transfer to comply with any notice obtained or
to be obtained pursuant to Section
367.12, and within ten (10) days of the date of transfer, shall notify the
Director, in writing, of the actions that will be taken to comply. The Director
may then establish a reasonable time to comply. If the grantee fails to provide
a written plan, or to comply with the notice, within ten days, the grantee
shall be in violation of Section
3103.25(e). If the Director considers the written plan to be acceptable, he or
she shall notify the grantee and the grantee shall be bound by the written plan
as an extension of time under the notice and shall be in violation of Section
3103.25(e) if the violations are not corrected by the time set forth in the
written plan. If the Director considers the written plan to be unacceptable, he
or she shall issue to the grantee a notice with dates for compliance.
(Ord. No. 1039-2023. Passed 2-5-24, eff. 2-6-24)
§ 367.05 Noncompliance with Notice; Vacation of Premises; Board and Demolition
of Premises
   (a)   No person shall fail to comply with any provision of this Housing Code
or fail to comply with any lawful order issued under this Housing Code.
   (b)   Whenever the owner, agent or person in charge of a dwelling structure
or premises fails, neglects or refuses to comply with a notice of the Director
of Building and Housing, the Director may issue a notice ordering the structure
or premises concerned to be vacated, or he or she may advise the Director of
Law of the circumstances and request the Director of Law to institute an
appropriate action of law to compel a compliance, or both.
   (c)   Whenever the owner or agent or person in charge of a dwelling
structure or premises fails, neglects or refuses to comply with a notice to
vacate issued by the Director, the Director may request the Director of Public
Safety to enforce the orders of such notice of vacation and cause the structure
to be vacated in accordance with the terms of such notice.
   (d)   Whenever the Director has made the determination that a dwelling
structure or premises constitutes a public nuisance in that the structure or
premises is injurious to the public health, safety and welfare, and the owner,
agent or person in charge of such structure fails, neglects or refuses to
comply with a notice of violation ordering such structure to be demolished or
boarded, or the violations corrected, the Director may take necessary action to
demolish or effectively board such structure in accordance with the procedure
and requirements set forth in Section
3103.09 or take such other action as may be necessary to abate the nuisance.
The Director shall give written notice in conformance with the procedures set
forth in division (h)(6) of Section
3103.09 for the service of notice of violation informing the owner or agent,
mortgagee of record, lessee of record or lien holder of record of the City's
intention to demolish or effectively board such structure at least thirty (30)
days prior to such intended action by the City.
(Ord. No. 1039-2023. Passed 2-5-24, eff. 2-6-24)
§ 367.06 Cases of Emergency; Immediate Vacation of Premises
   Whenever, in the opinion of the Commissioner of Building and Housing, the
condition of dwelling structure or premises constitutes an immediate hazard to
human life or health, he or she shall declare a case of emergency and shall
order immediate vacation of the dwelling structure or premises concerned.
   He or she may request the Director of Public Safety to enforce the orders he
or she gives that are necessary to cause the structure to be vacated in
accordance with the terms of the notice. The Director of Public Safety has the
authority to enforce such orders.
(Ord. No. 54-94. Passed 6-6-94, eff. 6-15-94)
   Note: This section became effective 90 days after passage on September 5,
1994.
§ 367.07 Placards Posted by the Department of Building and Housing and the
Division of Fire
   (a)   Whenever the Director of Building and Housing orders a dwelling
structure or premises to be vacated or condemned under these Codified
Ordinances, he or she shall cause to be posted at each entrance to the
structure or premises a placard which may state. “THIS BUILDING IS IN A
DANGEROUS CONDITION AND HAS BEEN CONDEMNED AND ITS USE HAS BEEN PROHIBITED BY
THE DIRECTOR OF BUILDING AND HOUSING.”
   (b)   Whenever the Fire Chief finds a vacant dwelling structure or premises
to be declared condemned or it is found to be unsafe under the provisions
authority, and procedures of any of these Codified Ordinances he or she may
cause to be posted placards on the front of the structure or premises which
comply with the following placarding requirements:
      (1)   Placard Location. Placards shall be applied on the front of the
structure and be visible from the street. Additional placards may be applied to
the side of each entrance to the structure and on penthouses.
      (2)   Placard Size and Color. Placards shall be twenty-four (24) inches
by twenty-four (24) inches (six hundred ten (610) mm by six hundred ten (610)
mm) in size with a red background, white reflective stripes and a white
reflective border. The stripes and border shall have a two (2) inch (fifty-one
(51) mm) stroke.
      (3)   Placard Date. Placards shall bear the date of their application to
the building and the date of the most recent inspection.
      (4)   Placard Symbols. The design of the placards shall use symbols
designated by the Fire Chief or his or her designee to indicate each of the
following:
         A.   That the structure had normal structural conditions at the time
of marking;
         B.   That the structural or interior hazards exist and interior fire-
fighting or rescue operations should be conducted with extreme caution;
         C.   That structural or interior hazard exist to a degree that
consideration should be given to limit fire fighting to exterior operations
only, with entry only occurring for known life hazards.
      (5)   Additional detail may be posted on the placard if determined
necessary by the Fire Chief.
      (6)   Informational Use. The use of these symbols and any additional
detail shall be informational only and shall not in any way limit the
discretion of the Fire Chief or his or her on-scene Officer in Charge.
   (c)   No person shall enter or use any structure or premises which have been
placarded under this section except for the purpose of making the required
repairs or demolishing the structure or premises.
   (d)   No person shall deface or remove any placard posted under this section
until written permission is given by the Director of Building and Housing or
the Fire Chief, whoever posted the placard, that the repairs have been
completed or demolition is complete or the building is safe.
(Ord. No. 1075-09. Passed 8-5-09, eff. 8-13-09)
§ 367.08 Recovery of Expenses and Costs
   (a)   Any expenses or costs, including but not limited to attorneys fees,
costs of inspection, administrative staff and support staff, property
maintenance costs, court costs, title search fees, process server fees, skip
tracing expenses, and costs of collection or prosecution, including discovery
and deposition expenses, incurred under the provisions for demolition or
boarding contained in this Housing Code shall be paid by the owner of the
dwelling structure or premises.
   (b)   Any and all owners of a building or structure, who appear in the chain
of title from the time of receipt of a notice of condemnation until demolition
of the building or structure, shall be jointly and severally responsible for
all costs and expenses incurred relating to the demolition and all costs and
expenses of prosecution or collection related thereto.
   (c)   Whenever an inspection is made after the compliance date stated on a
notice of violation of the Housing Code or the Zoning Code or after a
compliance date determined by a court of competent jurisdiction for compliance
to determine whether the violation has been remedied and the violation has not
been remedied, there shall be charged a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each
such inspection, except that this fee shall not apply to one (1) family and two
(2) family owner-occupied dwelling structures.
   (d)   If the owner fails to pay for the cost of demolition or boarding or of
inspections of violations that have not been remedied within thirty (30) days
after the receipt from the Director of Community Development of a statement of
the charges and costs incurred therein, then the Director of Community
Development may certify the amount to the Commissioner of Assessments and
Licenses. The Commissioner shall make written return to the County Auditor of
the action, under this Code, with a statement of the charges for their
services, the amount paid for the performing of such labor and a proper
description of the premises for the purpose of making the same a lien upon such
lands, to be collected as other taxes and returned to the City with the General
Fund with special accounting thereof in accordance with RC 715.261.
   (e)   Notwithstanding the method of collection set forth above, the Director
of Law, in the Director’s sole discretion, may take any action necessary to
collect the costs of demolition or boarding from the owner or other responsible
party or parties, including but not limited to filing of legal proceedings,
referring the amount due to outside counsel by the Law Director for collection
action, including filing civil complaints, and initiating post judgment
execution actions.
(Ord. No. 1519-11. Passed 11-14-11, eff. 11-16-11)
§ 367.09 Right of Appeal
   The owner, agent or person in charge of any dwelling structure shall have
the right to appeal from any notice issued by the Commissioner of Housing,
within the time specified in such notice for compliance therewith, and to
appear before the Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals or the Board
of Zoning Appeals, as the case may require, at a specified time and place to
show cause why he or she should not comply with such notice. However, when an
appeal is from a notice of revocation of a certificate of occupancy, such
appeal shall be filed not more than thirty (30) days from the date of such
notice of revocation. Failure to file an appeal within the time prescribed
shall constitute a waiver of the right to appeal. Filing of an appeal from any
notice of the Commissioner shall suspend action on enforcement of such notice
until the appeal is acted upon by the Board of Building Standards and Building
Appeals, or, in matters relating to zoning, by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(Ord. No. 2409-59. Passed 4-4-60, eff. 4-6-60)
§ 367.10 Rules and Regulations
   (a)   The Director of Community Development is hereby authorized to adopt
such written rules and regulations as may be necessary for the proper
interpretations and enforcement of this Code. Such rules and regulations shall
not conflict with or waive any provisions of this Housing Code or any other of
these Codified Ordinances. Such rules and regulations shall be submitted to the
Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals for approval and no such rule
or regulation shall be adopted without such approval. Failure of the Board to
approve, disapprove or modify such rules and regulations within ninety (90)
days after submission shall be deemed to constitute approval thereof.
   (b)   Such rules and regulations, upon adoption, shall be published in the
City Record for two (2) consecutive weeks and shall be in effect on and from
fifteen (15) days after the second publication therein. Such rules and
regulations shall have the force and effect of this Code and shall continue in
effect until revoked by the Director with the approval of the Board or by
action of Council.
(Ord. No. 2409-59. Passed 4-4-60, eff. 4-6-60)
§ 367.11 Misrepresentation of Legal Occupancy
   No person shall knowingly misrepresent the legal occupancy of a dwelling,
building or structure as an inducement for the sale of such property.
(Ord. No. 204-65. Passed 4-18-67, eff. 4-20-67)
§ 367.111 Definitions
   For purposes of Sections
367.12 and
367.13 of these Codified Ordinances, the following definitions apply:
   (a)   Appraiser. A person who makes an appraisement of property to determine
a just and true valuation.
   (b)   Buyer. A party in a real property transaction who buys or purchases
real property or who contracts to buy or purchase real property. Buyer includes
the grantee, vendee or purchaser in a real property transaction.
   (c)   Escrow Agent. A person with whom the seller deposits the deed and
other documents or items regarding the sale of real property until specified
conditions are met.
   (d)   Loan Originator. A person who negotiates or arranges a mortgage loan
between a person who makes or funds mortgage loans and a buyer; or who issues a
commitment for a mortgage loan to a buyer; or who places, assists to place, or
finds a mortgage loan for a buyer. A loan originator also includes a person who
makes or funds mortgage loans.
   (e)   Mortgage Broker. As defined in division (G) of RC 1322.01, a person
who holds him, her, or itself out as being able to assist a buyer in obtaining
a mortgage and charges or receives from either the buyer or lender money or
other valuable consideration readily convertible into money for providing this
assistance; or a person who solicits financial and mortgage information from
the public, provides that information to a mortgage broker and charges or
receives from the mortgage broker money or other valuable consideration reality
convertible into money for providing the information; or a person engaged in
table-funding or warehouse-lending mortgage loans that are first lien mortgage
loans.
   (f)   Real Estate Agent. A person licensed by RC Chapter 4735 to represent
another in a real estate transaction.
   (g)   Seller. A party in a real property transaction who sells, transfers or
grants real property or who contracts to sell, transfer or grant real property.
Seller includes the grantor, vendor, or transferor in a real property
transaction. The seller is the transferring agent if there is no escrow agent
involved in the transaction.
(Ord. No. 1864-01. Passed 10-20-03, eff. 10-22-03)
§ 367.12 Certificate of Disclosure for Real Property and Notice of Violation;
Fee
   (a)   No person, agent, firm or corporation shall sell or transfer real
property, or enter into a contract for the sale or transfer of real property
without furnishing to the purchaser a Certificate of Disclosure addressing the
condition of the property, including its current lead status for real property
with rental units, which Certificate shall be in a form prescribed by the
Director of Building and Housing. The Certificate of Disclosure shall include
all active Notices of Violation associated with the property. No transfer shall
be completed without the furnishing of the Certificate of Disclosure. If the
purchaser or transferee is not provided with the Certificate required by this
section, the purchaser or transferee may rescind any agreement for purchase,
and, if the transfer has been completed, shall have the right to demand that
the transferor accept a transfer of the interest conveyed in the property and
may file in any court with jurisdiction to specifically enforce that right.
   (b)   A request for a Certificate of Disclosure shall be accompanied by a
nonrefundable fee of sixty dollars ($60.00).
   (c)   The requirements of division (a) and (b) of this Section
367.12 shall not apply when the real property at subject is a vacant lot,
defined as a parcel that does not contain any permanent lawful occupied
structure; or when both parties to the sale or transfer or contract for sale or
transfer are Governmental Entities.
(Ord. No. 1039-2023. Passed 2-5-24, eff. 2-6-24)
§ 367.13 Disbursal of Funds from Escrow Agent
   No person, firm or corporation acting in the capacity of an escrow agent in
any real estate transaction involving the sale of a dwelling building or
structure situated in the City shall disburse any funds unless the provisions
of Section
367.12 have been met.
(Ord. No. 1864-01. Passed 10-20-03, eff. 10-22-03)
§ 367.131 Prohibiting Corporations from Owning or Transferring Real Property
Without Registering with the Ohio Secretary of State
   (a)   No corporation, partnership, limited-liability company or other
business entity, whether domestic or foreign, shall buy, own, sell, or transfer
real property in the City of Cleveland without filing articles of incorporation
and identifying a statutory agent, filing articles of organization and
identifying a statutory agent, or being licensed by the Ohio Secretary of State
and identifying a statutory agent in accordance with RC Chapters 1701, 1702,
1703 and 1705.
   (b)   No officer of a corporation, partnership, limited-liability company or
any other business entity shall transact business to buy, own, sell, or
transfer real property in the City of Cleveland unless the business entity has
filed articles of incorporation and identified a statutory agent, filed
articles of organization and identified a statutory agent, or been licensed by
the Ohio Secretary of State and identified a statutory agent in accordance with
RC Chapters 1701, 1702, 1703 and 1705.
   (c)   Any corporation, partnership limited-liability company or any other
business entity or officer who fails to comply with the requirements of
divisions (a) and (b) of this section is in violation of this chapter and shall
be charged as an organization or individual with a first degree misdemeanor.
Each property bought, owned, sold, or transferred by a business entity that is
not in compliance with these requirements is a separate violation.
(Ord. No. 1520-11. Passed 11-14-11, eff. 11-16-11)
§ 367.14 Other Legal Action
   The imposition of any penalty shall not preclude the Director of Law from
instituting an appropriate action or proceeding in a court of proper
jurisdiction to prevent an unlawful repair or maintenance, or to restrain,
correct or abate a violation, or to prevent the occupancy of a building,
structure or premises, or to require compliance with the provisions of this
Housing Code or other applicable laws, ordinances, rules or regulations, or the
orders or determinations of the Commissioner of Housing or the Board of
Building Standards and Building Appeals.
(Ord. No. 2409-59. Passed 4-4-60, eff. 4-6-60)
§ 367.15 Fees For Record Search and Document Preparation
   A request for a statement from the Division based on its records, which
statement is not specified in any other section, must be in writing and
accompanied by a fee of twenty dollars ($20.00).
(Ord. No. 2393-02. Passed 2-3-03, eff. 2-3-03)
§ 367.99 Penalty
   (a)   Whoever violates any provision of this Housing Code for which no other
penalty is provided or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder or fails
to comply with this Housing Code or with any order issued shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day of a continuing violation shall be
deemed a separate offense.
   Whoever causes or permits the continuation of any violation of this Housing
Code or any rule or regulation promulgated hereunder or fails to comply with
this Housing Code or with any written notice or written order issued hereunder,
subsequent to conviction therefor shall be liable for further prosecution,
conviction and punishment upon the same order or notice without the necessity
of issuing a new order or notice, until full compliance has been had on such
order or notice upon which the original conviction was made.
   (b)   Whoever violates Section
367.11 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (c)   Whoever violates Section
367.12 or
367.13 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (d)   Whoever violates Section
365.02,
365.04 or
371.01 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day of a
continuing violation shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (e)   Whoever violates Sections
369.13,
369.14,
369.15,
369.16,
369.17,
369.18,
369.19,
371.05,
371.07,
371.10 or
371.13, or Section
369.08, as a first offense shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor. In addition
to any other method of enforcement provided for in this chapter, the above
listed minor misdemeanors may be enforced by the issuance of a citation in
compliance with Rule 4.1 of the Ohio Rules of Criminal Procedure.
   Whoever violates Sections
392.02,
392.021,
392.03,
392.04, or
392.05 is subject to the penalty established in Section
392.99 of these Codified Ordinances. In addition to any other means of
enforcement provided for in these Codified Ordinances by statute, Sections
392.02,
392.03,
392.04,
392.05 or
392.06 may be enforced by the issuance of a citation in compliance with Rule
4.1 of the Rules of Criminal Procedure, provided that the offense is a minor
misdemeanor.
   (f)   Whoever violates Section
369.08 as a second offense of that section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree. Whoever violates Section
369.08 as a third or subsequent offense of that section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (g)   A court of competent jurisdiction may require whoever is convicted of
or pleads guilty to a violation of this Housing Code to pay to the Department
of Building and Housing fees for inspections of violations that have not been
remedied, which fees are described in Sections
367.08 and
3105.26, and the expenses or costs incurred under the provisions for demolition
or boarding contained in the Housing Code.
(Ord. No. 388-2024. Passed 4-1-24, eff. 4-3-24)
CHAPTER 369 – RESIDENTIAL OCCUPANCY STANDARDS
369.01   Requirements for Habitable Rooms
369.02   Restrictions for Habitable Rooms Below Grade
369.03   Required Window Area
369.04   Required Ventilation Area
369.05   Kitchens, Bathrooms, Water Closet and Urinal Compartments
369.06   Required Sanitary Facilities
369.07   Connection of Fixtures
369.08   Rubbish and Garbage Disposal
369.09   Heating Facilities Required
369.10   Flue Connections Required
369.11   Prohibited Locations of Heating Equipment
369.12   Electrical Facilities Required
369.13   General Maintenance Requirements
369.14   Maintenance of Foundations
369.15   Maintenance of Exterior Walls and Roof
369.16   Maintenance of Interior Walls and Floors
369.17   Infestation by Pests
369.18   Exterior Property Areas
369.19   Secondary or Appurtenant Structures
369.20   Access and Egress
369.21   Condemnation of Premises; Conditions and Notice
Cross-reference:
   Condemned defined, CO
363.29
   Habitable room defined, CO
363.07
   Notice of violation; vacation and demolition of premises, CO
367.04 et seq.
   Property owner to maintain premises free of litter, CO
613.14
   Rental dwelling standards, CO
Ch. 371
   Rooming occupancy standards, CO
Ch. 373
Statutory reference:
   Collection and disposal of garbage, RC 715.43
   Power to regulate sanitary condition of buildings, RC 715.26(A), 715.29
§ 369.01 Requirements for Habitable Rooms
   Every dwelling unit shall conform to the following standards:
   (a)   Every dwelling unit shall contain at least one (1) room which shall
have not less than one hundred twenty (120) square feet of habitable floor
area. However, any room used for both living and cooking, or both living and
sleeping, or for living, cooking and sleeping purposes shall have not less than
one hundred fifty (150) square feet of habitable floor area.
   (b)   No portion of any room which is less than seven (7) feet in width
shall be included in determining habitable floor area.
   (c)   All habitable rooms shall have a clear ceiling height of not less than
six (6) feet, nine (9) inches, provided that rooms with sloping ceilings shall
have a clear ceiling height of not less than six (6) feet, nine (9) inches in
at least one-half (1/2) of their habitable floor area. In determining the
habitable floor area of rooms with sloping ceilings, all portions of less than
five (5) feet in height shall be disregarded.
(Ord. No. 2409-59. Passed 4-4-60, eff. 4-6-60)
§ 369.02 Restrictions for Habitable Rooms Below Grade
   No room which has its floor level below grade shall be occupied as a
habitable room unless it conforms to the following standards in addition to all
other requirements of this Housing Code for habitable rooms, except that no
cellar space shall be used as a habitable room or a dwelling unit:
   (a)   The rooms shall have been designed and constructed, or legally
converted to use as a habitable room.
   (b)   The walls and floor enclosing the room shall be maintained in such
condition as to prevent the entrance of moisture into the habitable space.
   (c)   All required openings for light and ventilation shall be located
entirely above the average adjoining grade. However, such openings may face
upon an areaway or window well where the width of such well is not less than
the distance from the bottom of the window to the finished grade at such
window.
   (d)   The distance from the finished ceiling of such room to the average
adjoining finished grade shall not be less than three (3) feet, four (4)
inches.
(Ord. No. 68-A-67. Passed 4-3-67, eff. 4-5-67)
§ 369.03 Required Window Area
   Every habitable room shall be provided with natural light by one (1) or more
windows or approved equivalent facing upon an adequate open space. The
aggregate glass area of such required windows shall not be less than ten
percent (10%) of the habitable floor area of the rooms served by them.
(Ord. No. 2409-59. Passed 4-4-60, eff. 4-6-60)
§ 369.04 Required Ventilation Area
   Every habitable room shall be provided with natural ventilation by one (1)
or more openable windows or approved equivalent. The aggregate openable area of
such ventilation openings shall be not less than four percent (4%) of the
habitable floor area of the room served by them.
(Ord. No. 2409-59. Passed 4-4-60, eff. 4-6-60)
§ 369.05 Kitchens, Bathrooms, Water Closet and Urinal Compartments
   Every kitchen, bathroom, water closet and urinal compartment shall be
provided with light and ventilation as prescribed for habitable rooms, except
that in no case shall the aggregate glass area in each room be less than three
(3) square feet. However, where an approved exhaust ventilation system and
adequate artificial light are installed in such a manner as to be in operation
at all times when any such room is occupied, no natural light or ventilation
shall be required.
(Ord. No. 68-A-67. Passed 4-3-67, eff. 4-5-67)
§ 369.06 Required Sanitary Facilities
   (a)   Every dwelling unit shall be provided with not less than the following
sanitary facilities contained within a room which shall afford privacy to any
occupant thereof:
      (1)   A water closet;
      (2)   A bathtub or shower;
      (3)   A lavatory.
   (b)   Every dwelling unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink, installed
in connection with the main cooking facilities of the dwelling unit. No such
kitchen sink shall be placed within any water closet compartment or within any
bathroom containing a water closet.
(Ord. No. 2409-59. Passed 4-4-60, eff. 4-6-60)
§ 369.07 Connection of Fixtures
   (a)   All plumbing fixtures in a dwelling structure shall be supplied with
running water from the Municipal water supply system.
   (b)   Every dwelling unit shall have an adequate supply of running hot water
properly connected to all plumbing fixtures requiring hot water.
   (c)   All plumbing fixtures in a dwelling structure shall be so designed and
installed as to prevent contamination of the water supply system.
   (d)   All plumbing fixtures in a dwelling structure shall be connected to a
public sanitary sewer, provided that where no public sanitary sewer is
available within two hundred (200) feet of a structure, the fixtures therein
may be connected to an approved private sewage disposal system.
(Ord. No. 2409-59. Passed 4-4-60, eff. 4-6-60)
§ 369.08 Rubbish and Garbage Disposal
   (a)   Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all his
or her rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in approved
receptacles, or in other approved rubbish disposal facilities.
   (b)   Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall dispose of all his or her
garbage and other organic waste, which might provide food for insects and
rodents, in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in approved nonleakable,
nonabsorbent, garbage storage receptacles or in other approved garbage disposal
facilities.
(Ord. No. 2409-59. Passed 4-4-60, eff. 4-6-60)
§ 369.09 Heating Facilities Required
   Every dwelling unit shall be provided with approved heating facilities
capable of maintaining an average temperature of seventy degrees Fahrenheit
(70° F) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and water closet compartments when
the outdoor temperature is minus five degrees Fahrenheit (-5° F), without
forcing the facilities to operate in excess of their design capacity.
(Ord. No. 2409-59. Passed 4-4-60, eff. 4-6-60)
§ 369.10 Flue Connections Required
   Every appliance or piece of equipment burning solid, liquid or gaseous fuel,
where permitted, shall be connected to an approved smokepipe and flue. However,
any appliance approved for use without such connections is exempted from the
requirements of this section.
(Ord. No. 2409-59. Passed 4-4-60, eff. 4-6-60)
§ 369.11 Prohibited Locations of Heating Equipment
   No heating equipment, including water heaters, which burns solid, liquid or
gaseous fuel shall be located in any bedroom, bathroom, toilet room or any room
used for sleeping purposes unless specifically approved for such use.
(Ord. No. 2409-59. Passed 4-4-60, eff. 4-6-60)
§ 369.12 Electrical Facilities Required
   Every dwelling unit shall be provided with electrical service, outlets and
fixtures which shall be installed and maintained so as to be free of any
potential source of ignition of combustible material or any potential source of
electrical hazard. Such facilities shall be adequate to supply the requirements
of lighting, appliances and equipment of the dwelling unit concerned.
(Ord. No. 2409-59. Passed 4-4-60, eff. 4-6-60)
§ 369.13 General Maintenance Requirements
   (a)   All dwelling structures and all parts thereof, both exterior and
interior, shall be maintained in good repair and shall be capable of performing
the function for which such structure or part of any feature thereof was
designed or intended to be used.
   (b)   All equipment and facilities appurtenant to a dwelling structure or
dwelling unit shall be maintained in good and safe working order.
(Ord. No. 2409-59. Passed 4-4-60, eff. 4-6-60)
§ 369.14 Maintenance of Foundations
   (a)   All foundations of every dwelling structure shall be maintained
structurally sound and in good repair.
   (b)   All foundations of every dwelling structure shall be maintained in
such condition as to prevent the accumulation of moisture within the space
enclosed within such foundations.
   (c)   All openings into the foundations of every dwelling structure shall be
protected against the entrance of rodents.
(Ord. No. 2409-59. Passed 4-4-60, eff. 4-6-60)
§ 369.15 Maintenance of Exterior Walls and Roof
   (a)   All exterior walls of every dwelling, secondary and appurtenant
structure shall be maintained weathertight and shall be maintained so as to
resist decay or deterioration from any cause.
   In order to insure maintenance of weathertight exterior walls resistant to
decay or deterioration, all such walls shall be painted periodically or
otherwise protected in the manner prescribed by regulations adopted as provided
in Section
367.10, and in full compliance with such regulations.
   (b)   All roofs of every dwelling structure shall be maintained
weathertight, devoid of leaks and shall be equipped with gutter and downspouts
connected to a public storm sewer or combined storm and sanitary sewer.
(Ord. No. 68-A-67. Passed 4-3-67, eff. 4-5-67)
§ 369.16 Maintenance of Interior Walls and Floors
   (a)   All interior walls and floors of every dwelling structure shall be
maintained free of holes, large cracks and any loose or deteriorated material.
   (b)   All floors within every bathroom or water closet compartment of a
dwelling structure shall be maintained water-resistant.
(Ord. No. 2409-59. Passed 4-4-60, eff. 4-6-60)
§ 369.17 Infestation by Pests
   All dwelling structures and the premises thereof shall be maintained free
from sources of breeding, harborage and infestation by insects, vermin or
rodents.
(Ord. No. 2409-59. Passed 4-4-60, eff. 4-6-60)
§ 369.18 Exterior Property Areas
   Exterior property areas of all residential premises shall be kept free of
any object, material or condition which may create a health, accident or fire
hazard, or which is a public nuisance.
(Ord. No. 2409-59. Passed 4-4-60, eff. 4-6-60)
§ 369.19 Secondary or Appurtenant Structures
   All secondary or appurtenant structures on residential premises such as
sheds, barns, garages, fences, etc., shall either be maintained in good repair
and free from health, accident and fire hazards or shall be removed from the
premises. The roofs thereof shall be equipped with gutters and downspouts
connected to a public storm sewer or combined storm and sanitary sewer,
excepting, however, that if the roof area served by a specific downspout does
not exceed six hundred (600) square feet, measured horizontally, and the
drainage does not cause excessive erosion or water damage, or does not create a
nuisance on public or private property, this requirement shall be waived.
(Ord. No. 68-A-67. Passed 4-3-67, eff. 4-5-67)
§ 369.20 Access and Egress
   In a dwelling structure, access to every dwelling unit shall be provided
without passing through any part of any other dwelling unit.
(Ord. No. 2409-59. Passed 4-4-60, eff. 4-6-60)
§ 369.21 Condemnation of Premises; Conditions and Notice
   (a)   Any dwelling, dwelling unit, building or structure determined by the
Commissioner of Housing to have any of the following defects shall be condemned
as unfit for human habitation:
      (1)   One which is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, insanitary, unsafe
or vermin-infected that it creates a hazard to the health, welfare or safety of
the occupants or of the public;
      (2)   One which lacks illumination, ventilation or sanitary facilities
adequate to protect the health or welfare of the occupants or of the public; or
      (3)   One which, because of its general condition or location is
insanitary or otherwise dangerous to the health, safety or welfare of the
occupants or of the public.
   (b)   Notice of such condemnation and placarding the condemned dwelling,
dwelling unit, building or structure shall be accomplished as provided in this
Housing Code.
(Ord. No. 68-A-67. Passed 4-3-67, eff. 4-5-67)
CHAPTER 371 – RENTAL DWELLING STANDARDS
371.01   Restrictions on Leasing for Residential Occupancy
371.02   Access and Egress
371.03   Minimum Requirements for Fire-Protective Features
371.04   Restrictions on Other Uses in Dwelling Structures
371.05   Lighting of Public Hallways and Common Areas
371.06   Restrictions on Sleeping Rooms
371.07   Rubbish and Garbage Disposal Facilities
371.08   Communal Kitchens
371.09   Requirements for Janitor, Custodian or Agent
371.10   Sanitation Responsibilities of Owner and Occupant
371.11   Required Heating Capacity
371.12   Floor Space Required
371.13   Identification of Dwelling Units
Cross-reference:
   Dwelling unit defined, CO
363.05
   Rental registration and lead-safe certification, CO
Ch. 365
   Residential occupancy standards, CO
Ch. 369
   Rooming occupancy standards, CO
Ch. 373
Statutory reference:
   Collection and disposal of garbage, RC 715.43
   Power to regulate elevators, stairways and fire escapes, RC 715.26(D)
   Power to regulate sanitary condition of buildings, RC 715.26(A), 715.29
§ 371.01 Restrictions on Leasing for Residential Occupancy
   An owner, operator or agent shall not rent, lease or offer for rental or
lease for residential occupancy any dwelling units, dwelling structures or any
part of a dwelling unit or dwelling structure that does not comply with the
standards for residential occupancy in
Chapter 240 of the Health Code, including the requirements in Section
240.06 regarding disclosures in the lease of target housing regarding lead
hazards, Section
240.07 regarding residential property renovation, and Section
240.08 regarding notice requirements and
Chapters 365,
369, and
371 of the Housing Code.
(Ord. No. 747-2019. Passed 7-24-19, eff. 7-26-19)
§ 371.02 Access and Egress
   Every dwelling unit leased or rented for residential purposes shall have
direct access to a public stairway, hallway, corridor or other means of egress
without passing through any other dwelling unit, provided that where a
structure contains more than six (6) rooms or more than three (3) dwelling
units above the first story, the Commissioner of Housing shall require such
additional means of egress as shall be needed for the safety of the occupants
of such structure. Every public hallway, corridor, stairway, exit or other
means of egress shall be protected against fire with construction having a
required fire resistance rating and shall be kept clear and unobstructed at all
times, so as to afford safe passage from each dwelling unit to open space at
ground level.
(Ord. No. 68-A-67. Passed 4-3-67, eff. 4-5-67)
§ 371.03 Minimum Requirements for Fire- Protective Features
   Every dwelling structure containing three (3) or more dwelling units shall
be provided with such fire- protective features as may be required for the
adequate protection of the occupants thereof. The minimum requirements for such
protection are as follows:
   (a)   All openings into interior stairways used as a means of egress shall
be protected by self-closing doors having approved fire resistance, and such
stairways shall be enclosed by partitions having approved fire resistance.
   (b)   No plain glass shall be used in any door, window or transom opening
upon a public or common hallway from a dwelling unit or other private space.
All such transoms shall be fixed or otherwise made non-openable, and any
existing plain glass in such doors, windows or transoms shall be replaced with
wired glass or an approved equivalent, or covered with an approved material.
   (c)   Whenever the use or occupancy of the building or structure has been
changed from the use or occupancy for which the building or structure was
originally erected, every door leading from a public or common hallway to a
dwelling unit or other private space shall be made self-closing.
   (d)   The underside of any stairway located above a basement stairway or
cellar stairway shall be protected by material having a fire resistance rating
of not less than three-fourths (3/4) hour.
   (e)   Basement or cellar stairways shall be separated from the first floor
level by openings protected by self-closing doors having approved fire
resistance.
(Ord. No. 68-A-67. Passed 4-3-67, eff. 4-5-67)
§ 371.04 Restrictions on Other Uses in Dwelling Structures
   No other use shall be maintained in any dwelling structure unless such use
is so located and arranged that it does not constitute a hazard to the
residential occupants of the building, is provided with adequate means of
egress and ingress and there exists or are provided adequate toilet
accommodations separate from those provided for the occupants residing in the
building. No such use shall be maintained unless a certificate of occupancy
permitting such use has been issued by the Commissioner of Housing.
(Ord. No. 2409-59. Passed 4-4-60, eff. 4-6-60)
§ 371.05 Lighting of Public Hallways and Common Areas
   In every dwelling structure, all public hallways, corridors and stairways
shall be provided at all times with required illumination for the safe usage
thereof, and all other common areas, such as boiler rooms, laundry, basements,
cellars, locker rooms and meter rooms, shall be provided with electrical
lighting facilities, which when lighted, provide required illumination for the
safe usage thereof.
(Ord. No. 68-A-67. Passed 4-3-67, eff. 4-5-67)
§ 371.06 Restrictions on Sleeping Rooms
   Every room rented or leased to be used for sleeping purposes, whether
separately or as part of a dwelling unit, shall contain not less than seventy
(70) square feet of habitable floor area if used for one (1) occupant and not
less than fifty (50) square feet of additional habitable floor areas per
occupant if used by more than one (1) occupant.
(Ord. No. 68-A-67. Passed 4-3-67, eff. 4-5-67)
§ 371.07 Rubbish and Garbage Disposal Facilities
   (a)   In every dwelling structure, the owner, operator or his or her agent
shall be responsible for providing and maintaining suitable approved
receptacles, incinerators or other conveniences for the disposal of rubbish,
garbage, refuse or other waste matter. However, in a dwelling structure
containing not more than two (2) dwelling units, the occupant of each dwelling
unit shall provide himself or herself with such receptacles, incinerators or
other conveniences.
   (b)   Every occupant of a dwelling structure shall dispose of his or her
garbage, rubbish or any other waste in a clean and sanitary manner by placing
it in the facilities required herein.
(Ord. No. 2409-59. Passed 4-4-60, eff. 4-6-60)
§ 371.08 Communal Kitchens
   Communal kitchens are prohibited.
(Ord. No. 2409-59. Passed 4-4-60, eff. 4-6-60)
§ 371.09 Requirements for Janitor, Custodian or Agent
   (a)   In any multiple dwelling structure in which the owner thereof does not
reside, there shall be designated by the owner, a janitor, custodian, agent or
other responsible person who shall reside in the structure and have charge of
the same. However, where there exist two (2) or more such dwelling structures
on one (1) parcel of land or upon two (2) or more contiguous parcels of land,
one (1) janitor, custodian or agent residing in any one (1) of the dwelling
structures may serve as janitor, custodian or agent for all of the dwelling
structures.
   (b)   The janitor, custodian or agent shall be available, at reasonable
hours, to the Commissioner of Housing and to the tenant of the dwelling unit. A
schedule showing the name, location and hours the janitor, custodian or agent
is available shall be posted conspicuously at the main entrance of such
structure.
   (c)   The janitor, custodian or agent shall maintain the common areas in a
safe and sanitary manner.
(Ord. No. 2267-68. Passed 2-17-69, eff. 2-29-69)
§ 371.10 Sanitation Responsibilities of Owner and Occupant
   (a)   Owner. The owner of every dwelling structure or premises rented or
leased for residential occupancy or his or her appointed agent, shall be
responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition the shared or
common areas thereof.
   (b)   Occupant. The occupant of a dwelling unit shall be responsible for
maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition that part of the dwelling unit,
dwelling structure or premises which he or she occupies and controls.
(Ord. No. 2409-59. Passed 4-4-60, eff. 4-6-60)
§ 371.11 Required Heating Capacity
   The owner, operator or agent in charge of a dwelling structure who rents or
leases any dwelling unit therein under an agreement, express or implied, to
supply or furnish heat to the occupants thereof, shall supply heat adequate to
maintain an inside temperature of not less than seventy degrees Fahrenheit (70°
F) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms whenever the outside
temperature falls below fifty degrees Fahrenheit (50° F). The provisions of
this section shall not apply where the failure to meet minimum standards is
caused by a general shortage of fuel, a negligent or malicious act of the
occupant or any cause beyond the control of the owner or occupant.
(Ord. No. 2409-59. Passed 4-4-60, eff. 4-6-60)
§ 371.12 Floor Space Required
   Every dwelling unit shall contain at least one hundred fifty (150) square
feet of habitable floor space for its first occupant, and at least one hundred
(100) additional square feet of floor space for every additional occupant
thereof, the floor space to be calculated on the basis of total habitable room
area. A child under one (1) year of age is exempt from this section.
(Ord. No. 68-A-67. Passed 4-3-67, eff. 4-5-67)
§ 371.13 Identification of Dwelling Units
   Each dwelling unit must be identified with permanent numerals or letters
placed on the front entrance of such dwelling unit.
(Ord. No. 68-A-67. Passed 4-3-67, eff. 4-5-67)
CHAPTER 373 – ROOMING OCCUPANCY STANDARDS
373.01   Sanitary Facilities
373.02   Access and Egress; Accessibility of Sanitary Facilities
373.03   Prohibition of Cooking and Cooking Facilities
Cross-reference:
   Rental dwelling standards, CO
Ch. 371
   Residential occupancy standards, CO
Ch. 369
   Rooming occupancy defined, CO
363.14
Statutory reference:
   Power to regulate sanitary condition of buildings, RC 715.26(A), 715.29
§ 373.01 Sanitary Facilities
   (a)   In every dwelling structure used for rooming occupancy not less than
one (1) water closet, one (1) lavatory and one (1) bathtub or shower shall be
supplied for each eight (8) persons or fraction thereof residing within the
structure, provided that in a structure where single rooms are let only to
males, urinals may be substituted for not more than one-half (1/2) the required
number of water closets. In a structure where both sexes are accommodated, the
water closets shall be separately calculated based on occupancy of each sex and
shall be in rooms separated and marked for the use of each sex, except where
not more than one (1) water closet is required.
   (b)   The facilities required in this section shall be in addition to and
separate and apart from any such facilities required within a dwelling unit.
(Ord. No. 2409-59. Passed 4-4-60, eff. 4-6-60)
§ 373.02 Access and Egress; Accessibility of Sanitary Facilities
   (a)   Every room used for rooming occupancy shall be provided with a safe
and unobstructed means of access and egress leading to open space at ground
level.
   (b)   The sanitary facilities required in this Housing Code from rooming
occupancies shall be accessible to all occupants using such facilities from a
common room or hallway without passing through any room used for sleeping
purposes.
(Ord. No. 2409-59. Passed 4-4-60, eff. 4-6-60)
§ 373.03 Prohibition of Cooking and Cooking Facilities
   No room used for rooming occupancy shall be used for cooking purposes or
shall have any cooking facilities installed or maintained therein.
(Ord. No. 2409-59. Passed 4-4-60, eff. 4-6-60)
CHAPTER 375 – LANDLORDS AND TENANTS
375.01   Definitions
375.02   Terms of Rental Agreements
375.03   Terms Barred from Rental Agreements
375.04   Rent Receipt Required
375.05   Payment of Utilities
375.06   Unlawful Entry Prohibited
375.07   Landlord Denied Certain Remedies
375.08   Retaliation of Landlord Prohibited; Relief
375.09   Reasonable Security Against Criminal Activity
375.10   Abandonment of Dwelling Unit by Tenant; Landlord Remedies
375.11   Severability
375.12   Legal Representation in Housing Court
§ 375.01 Definitions
   (a)   “Dwelling unit” means a structure or the part of a structure that is
used as a home, residence, or sleeping place by one (1) person who maintains a
household or by two (2) or more persons who maintain a common household.
   (b)   “Landlord” means the owner, lessor, or sublessor of residential
premises, his or her agent, or any person authorized by him or her to manage
the premises or to receive rent from a tenant under a rental agreement.
   (c)   “Rental agreement” means any agreement or lease, written or oral,
which establishes or modifies the terms, conditions, rules, or any other
provisions concerning the use and occupancy of residential premises by one (1)
of the parties.
   (d)   “Residential premises” means a dwelling unit for residential use and
occupancy and the structure of which it is a part, the facilities and
appurtenances in it, and the grounds, areas, and facilities for the use of
tenants generally or the use of which is promised the tenant. “Residential
premises” do not include any structures excluded from the definition found in
RC 5321.01.
   (e)   “Tenant” means a person entitled under a rental agreement to the use
and occupancy of residential premises to the exclusion of others.
(Ord. No. 1844-A-99. Passed 7-18-01, eff. 7-26-01)
§ 375.02 Terms of Rental Agreements
   (a)   A landlord and tenant may include in a rental agreement any terms and
conditions, including the term relating to rent, the duration of an agreement,
and any other provisions governing the rights and obligations of the parties
that are not inconsistent with or prohibited by this chapter, RC Chapter 5321,
Chapter
240 regarding lead hazards, including Section
240.06 regarding disclosures regarding lead hazards in the lease of target
housing, or with any other rule of law.
   (b)   In the event that a landlord and tenant have a rental agreement for a
duration of six (6) months or more, and the rental agreement includes a
provision for automatic renewal, the automatic renewal provision must be set
forth in clear, unambiguous language and must be printed on the rental
agreement in bold type that is at least twice the size of any other print on
the page.
   (c)   If a rental agreement includes a provision that authorizes the
landlord to assess the tenant a fee for late payment of the monthly rent, the
total amount of that late payment fee for any month may not exceed the larger
of: (i) twenty-five dollars ($25.00); or (ii) five percent (5%) of the monthly
contract rent. In addition, the total amount of that late payment fee for any
amount may not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the portion of the monthly
contract rent that the tenant is obligated to pay under the rental agreement.
(Ord. No. 1027-04. Passed 8-11-04, eff. 8-17-04)
§ 375.03 Terms Barred from Rental Agreements
   (a)   No provision of this chapter, Section
240.06 of the Codified Ordinances, or RC Chapter 5321 may be modified or waived
by an oral or written agreement except as provided in division (f) of this
section.
   (b)   No warrant of attorney to confess judgment shall be recognized in any
rental agreement or in any other agreement between a landlord and tenant for
the recovery of rent or damages to the residential premises.
   (c)   No agreement to pay the landlord’s or tenant’s attorneys’ fees shall
be recognized in any rental agreement for residential premises or in any other
agreement between the landlord and tenant.
   (d)   No agreement by a tenant to the exculpation of limitation of any
liability of the landlord arising under law or to indemnify the landlord for
that liability or its related costs shall be recognized in any rental agreement
or in any other agreement between a landlord and tenant.
   (e)   A rental agreement, or the assignment, conveyance, trust deed, or
security instrument of the landlord’s interest in the rental agreement may not
permit the receipt of rent free of the obligation to comply with RC 5321.04.
   (f)   The landlord may agree to assume responsibility for fulfilling any
duty or obligation imposed on a tenant by RC 5321.05, other than the obligation
specified in division (A)(9) of that Section.
   (g)   A landlord who knowingly includes a provision in a lease that is
prohibited by this section shall be liable for damages in favor of the tenant
in an amount of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation, together with reasonable
attorneys’ fees.
(Ord. No. 1027-04. Passed 8-11-04, eff. 8-17-04)
§ 375.04 Rent Receipt Required
   Upon a tenant’s written request, the landlord shall provide the tenant with
a signed receipt for the security deposit and all rental payments except for
payments made by personal check of the tenant, at the time the security deposit
or rental payments are made. The tenant may make this request for a receipt,
relative to the security deposit and/or all rental payments, in one (1) written
request. A tenant may bring an action for mandatory or injunctive relief to
secure compliance with this section.
(Ord. No. 1844-A-99. Passed 7-18-01, eff. 7-26-01)
§ 375.05 Payment of Utilities
   (a)   A landlord who is a party to a rental agreement shall pay for the
electric, gas, and water services for the tenant’s dwelling unit unless:
      (1)   The applicable utility service is provided to the tenant’s dwelling
unit through an individual meter or submeter that measures usage only in the
tenant’s dwelling unit; and
      (2)   The rental agreement provides that, with respect to the applicable
utility service, the tenant shall pay only for the cost of the utility service
that is provided through the individual meter or submeter during the tenancy;
and
      (3)   The rental agreement provides that the tenant shall have reasonable
access at all times to the individual meter or submeter, for the purpose of
reading the meter or submeter; and the landlord grants the tenant such access
to the individual meter or submeter; and
      (4)   The provisions in the rental agreement that implement this section
are stated in clear and unambiguous language.
(Ord. No. 1844-A-99. Passed 7-18-01, eff. 7-26-01)
§ 375.06 Unlawful Entry Prohibited
   (a)   Except in the case of an emergency or if it is impracticable to do so,
a landlord shall give a tenant reasonable notice of his or her intent to enter
the leased premises and enter only at reasonable times. Twenty- four (24) hours
is presumed to be reasonable notice in the absence of evidence to the contrary.
   (b)   If a landlord makes an entry in violation of Section (a) hereof, makes
a lawful entry in an unreasonable manner, or makes repeated demands for entry
otherwise lawful that have the effect of harassing the tenant, the tenant may:
      (1)   At the tenant’s option, either recover actual damages resulting
from the entry or demands, or recover damages of an amount not less than Fifty
Dollars ($50.00) nor more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00);
      (2)   Obtain injunctive relief to prevent the recurrence of the conduct;
      (3)   Obtain a judgment for reasonable attorneys’ fees;
      (4)   Terminate the rental agreement.
(Ord. No. 1844-A-99. Passed 7-18-01, eff. 7-26-01)
§ 375.07 Landlord Denied Certain Remedies
   (a)   No landlord of residential premises shall initiate any act, including
the termination of utilities or services, exclusion from the premises, or
threat of any unlawful act against a tenant or a tenant whose right to
possession has been terminated, for the purpose of recovering possession of
residential premises, other than as provided in RC Chapters 1923, 5303, and
5321.
   (b)   No landlord of residential premises shall seize the furnishings or
possessions of a tenant, or of a tenant whose right to possession has
terminated, for the purpose of recovering rent payments, other than in
accordance with an order by a court of competent jurisdiction.
   (c)   A landlord who violates this section shall be liable in a civil action
for: at the tenant’s option, either all damages caused to the tenant or to the
tenant whose right to possession has been terminated, or damages of an amount
not less than Fifty Dollars ($50.00) nor more than Five Hundred Dollars
($500.00); and the tenant’s reasonable attorneys’ fees.
(Ord. No. 1844-A-99. Passed 7-18-01, eff. 7-26-01)
§ 375.08 Retaliation of Landlord Prohibited; Relief
   (a)   Subject to division (d) of this section, a landlord may not retaliate
against a tenant by increasing the tenant’s rent, decreasing services that are
due to the tenant, bringing or threatening to bring an action for possession of
the tenant’s premises, terminating or threatening to terminate the tenant’s
rental agreement, or refusing to renew the tenant’s rental agreement or to
continue the tenant’s tenancy because:
      (1)   The tenant has complained to an appropriate governmental agency of
a violation of a building, housing, health, or safety code that is applicable
to the premises, and the violation materially affects health and safety;
      (2)   The tenant has complained to the landlord of any violation of RC
5321.04;
      (3)   The tenant has joined with other tenants for the purpose of
negotiating or dealing collectively with the landlord on any of the terms and
conditions of a rental agreement;
      (4)   The tenant has complained to an appropriate governmental agency of
a violation of Chapter
240 that is applicable to the premises or the tenant (or an organization on the
tenant’s behalf) has taken action under division (b)(3) of Section
240.06.
   (b)   If a landlord acts in violation of division (a) of this section, the
tenant may:
      (1)   Use the retaliatory action of the landlord as a defense to an
action by the landlord to recover possession of the premises;
      (2)   Recover possession of the premises; or
      (3)   Terminate the rental agreement.
   In addition, the tenant may recover from the landlord, at the tenant’s
option, either any actual damages, together with reasonable attorneys’ fees, or
damages of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00), together with reasonable attorneys’ fees.
   (c)   Nothing in division (a) of this section shall prohibit a landlord from
increasing the rent to reflect the cost of improvements installed by the
landlord in or about the premises or to reflect an increase in other costs of
operation of the premises.
   (d)   Notwithstanding divisions (a) and (b) of this section, a landlord may
bring an action under RC Chapter 1923 for possession of the premises if:
      (1)   The tenant is in default in the payment of rent;
      (2)   The violation of the applicable building, housing, health, or
safety code that the tenant complained of was primarily caused by any act or
lack of reasonable care by the tenant or by any other person in the tenant’s
household, or by anyone on the premises with the consent of the tenant;
      (3)   Compliance with the applicable building, housing, health, or safety
code would require alteration, remodeling, or demolition of the premises which
would effectively deprive the tenant of the use of the dwelling unit. This
division does not apply where a landlord is required to reduce and control lead
hazards on residential rental property pursuant to
Chapters 240,
365 or
371.
   (e)   The maintenance of an action by the landlord under division (d) of
this section does not prevent the tenant from recovering damages for any
violation by the landlord of the rental agreement or of RC 5321.04.
(Ord. No. 747-2019. Passed 7-24-19, eff. 7-26-19)
§ 375.09 Reasonable Security Against Criminal Activity
   (a)   This Section applies only to residential premises that are located in
a multifamily structure or a multifamily development.
   (b)   Definitions.
      (1)   “Multifamily structure” means a structure that contains thirty (30)
or more dwelling units.
      (2)   “Multifamily development” means a tract of land or contiguous
tracts of land on which there are thirty (30) or more dwelling units of the
same landlord.
      (3)   “Multifamily structure or development” means a multifamily
structure or a multifamily development.
      (4)   “Safety Director” means the Safety Director of the City of
Cleveland or his or her designee.
      (5)   “Security audit” means the procedure in which:
         A.   The Safety Director shall conduct a full and thorough analysis of
the common areas of a multifamily structure or development to determine whether
the common areas have reasonable security measures against criminal activity;
         B.   In conducting this analysis, among other things, the Safety
Director shall conduct a voluntary survey of the tenants of the multifamily
structure or development without recording the names of the tenants;
         C.   In conducting this analysis, the Safety Director shall consider,
among other things, the statement of reasons (if any) in the petition that
requested the security audit, the responses (if any) to the Safety Director’s
survey of the tenants, the number and type of service calls that the City of
Cleveland Police Department has received concerning the multifamily structure
or development, and the Safety Director’s inspection of the common areas of the
multifamily structure or development;
         D.   Based on this analysis, the Safety Director shall determine and
specify the additional security measures, if any, that the landlord shall be
obligated to implement in the common areas of the multifamily structure or
development to provide the common areas with reasonable security measures
against criminal activity;
         E.   For each of these specified additional security measures, the
Safety Director shall determine and specify a reasonable time period within
which the landlord shall implement it;
         F.   These specified additional security measures may include, among
other things, cameras, lighting, locks for windows or doors, renovation of
windows, doors, or entrance areas, crime reporting procedures, and/or onsite
security personnel for specified hours; and
         G.   The Safety Director shall prepare a written report that includes
all of the Safety Director’s findings, determinations, and specifications in
the security audit.
   (c)   The tenants of a multifamily structure or development may file a
petition with the Safety Director that requests a security audit of the
multifamily structure or development in which they reside.
      (1)   The Safety Director shall prepare, and distribute to tenants at no
charge, a form that tenants may use, but are not required to use, for the
petition.
      (2)   In the petition, the tenants shall sign their names, state their
addresses, and state their request for a security audit of the multifamily
structure or development in which they reside.
      (3)   In the petition, the tenants shall identify the name and address of
at least one (1) tenant, and may identify the name and address of up to five
(5) tenants, who shall receive service of any documents that, under this
section, the Safety Director is required to serve on the tenants.
      (4)   In the petition, the tenants may state with specificity, but are
not required to state with specificity, their reasons for requesting a security
audit.
      (5)   The petition shall be signed only by tenants of the multifamily
structure or development and only by one (1) tenant per dwelling unit of the
multifamily structure or development. The number of such tenants who sign the
petition must equal at least ten percent (10%) of the total number of dwelling
units in the multifamily structure or development.
      (6)   The tenants shall file the petition with the office of the Safety
Director. At the time of the filing, the office of the Safety Director shall
time and date stamp the original petition and the tenant’s copy of the
petition.
      (7)   Within three (3) days after the filing of the petition, the tenants
shall serve the landlord of the multifamily structure or development with a
copy of the petition by delivering or mailing it to the address of the landlord
or to the place where their rent is normally paid.
   (d)   Within ten (10) days after receiving service of the petition, the
landlord shall provide the office of the Safety Director with a written
statement of the landlord’s name and address, for the purpose of receiving
documents that, under this section, the Safety Director is required to serve on
the landlord. If the landlord fails to provide the office of the Safety
Director with that information in a timely manner, the Safety Director shall
make reasonable efforts to identify an appropriate name and address for the
landlord and, based on those efforts, shall determine the name and address to
be used for such service.
   (e)   Within ten (10) days after the filing of the petition with the office
of the Safety Director, the Safety Director shall make an initial assessment,
in writing, as to whether a security audit of the multifamily structure or
development is appropriate and shall serve the tenants and the landlord with a
copy of the initial assessment.
      (1)   In the initial assessment, the Safety Director shall find that a
security audit of the multifamily structure or development is appropriate if
the requirements in this section for filing a petition are met and one (1) or
more of the following criteria are met: (i) during the thirty (30) day period
preceding the filing of the petition, the City of Cleveland Police Department
has received fifteen (15) or more service calls concerning the multifamily
structure or development; (ii) within ten (10) days after the filing of the
petition, the City of Cleveland Councilmember of the ward in which the
multifamily structure or development is located advises the Safety Director, in
writing, that a security audit of the multifamily structure or development is
appropriate; or (iii) there is any other reasonable basis for concluding that,
if a security audit is conducted, there is a reasonable possibility that the
Safety Director will specify additional security measures that the landlord
will be obligated to implement in the common areas of the multifamily structure
or development.
      (2)   In determining whether any such reasonable basis exists, the Safety
Director shall consider, among other things, the statement of reasons (if any)
in the petition that requested the security audit, the number and type of
service calls that the City of Cleveland Police Department has received
concerning the multifamily structure or development, and the Safety Director’s
preliminary inspection of the common areas of the multifamily structure or
development.
      (3)   The Safety Director shall serve the tenants and the landlord with a
copy of the initial assessment by delivering or mailing it to their respective
addresses.
   (f)   If the Safety Director determines in an initial assessment that a
security audit of the multifamily structure or development is not appropriate,
the Safety Director shall not conduct a security audit of the multifamily
structure or development.
   (g)   If the Safety Director determines in an initial assessment that a
security audit of the multifamily structure or development is appropriate,
within thirty (30) days after the Safety Director serves the tenants and the
landlord with the initial assessment, the Safety Director shall complete the
security audit and shall serve the tenants and the landlord with a copy of the
written report of the security audit. The Safety Director shall serve the
tenants and the landlord with a copy of the written report of the security
audit by delivering or mailing it to their respective addresses.
   (h)   If the Safety Director determines in a security audit that the
landlord is obligated to implement additional security measures in the common
areas of the multifamily structure or development, the landlord is obligated to
implement those security measures within the reasonable time period(s)
specified in the security audit.
   (i)   The landlord’s obligation under this section and the security audit to
implement the security measures specified in the security audit, within the
reasonable time period(s) specified in the security audit, is an implied term
of any rental agreement for any dwelling unit in the multifamily structure or
development. If the landlord breaches that implied term of a rental agreement,
it constitutes a breach of an obligation imposed upon the landlord by the
rental agreement, for the purposes of RC 5321.07(A).
   (j)   The tenants of a multifamily structure or development may not file a
petition pursuant to this section if, relative to the same multifamily
structure or development, a petition has been filed and served properly
pursuant to this section within the preceding twelve (12) months.
   (k)   If the landlord requests the Safety Director to inspect the
multifamily structure or development to determine whether the landlord has
implemented the landlord’s obligations under the security audit, within thirty
(30) days of the request, the Safety Director shall make that determination, in
writing, and shall serve the tenants and the landlord with a copy of that
determination. The Safety Director shall serve the tenants and the landlord
with a copy of that determination by delivering or mailing it to their
respective addresses.
(Ord. No. 1844-A-99. Passed 7-18-01, eff. 7-26-01)
§ 375.10 Abandonment of Dwelling Unit by Tenant; Landlord Remedies
   (a)   For the purposes of this section, “abandonment” means the tenant has
vacated the dwelling unit without notice to the landlord and does not intend to
return, which intention may be evidenced by the combination of the tenant’s
removal of substantially all of the tenant’s possessions and personal effects
from the dwelling unit plus one (1) of the following: (i) nonpayment of rent
for at least two (2) months, (ii) termination of the utilities to the dwelling
unit at the request of the tenant, or (iii) an express statement by the tenant
to the landlord that the tenant does not intend to occupy the dwelling unit
after a specified date.
   (b)   If the tenant abandons the dwelling unit, the landlord may send notice
to the tenant at the tenant’s last-known address both by regular mail, postage
prepaid, and by certified mail, return receipt requested, stating that (i) the
landlord has reason to believe that the tenant has abandoned the dwelling unit,
(ii) the landlord intends to reenter and take possession of the dwelling unit
unless the tenant contacts the landlord within ten (10) days of receipt of the
notice, (iii) if the tenant does not timely contact the landlord, the landlord
intends to remove any possessions and personal effects remaining in the
dwelling unit and to re-rent the premises, and (iv) if the tenant does not
reclaim such possessions and personal effects within thirty (30) days after the
notice, the landlord will dispose of them as permitted by this section. The
notice shall be in clear and simple language and shall include a telephone
number and a mailing address at which the landlord can be contacted. If the
notice is returned as undeliverable, or the tenant fails to contact the
landlord within ten (10) days of the receipt of the notice, the landlord may
reenter and take possession of the dwelling unit, at which time any rental
agreement or lease still in effect shall be deemed to be terminated.
   (c)   The landlord shall not be required to serve a notice to vacate as
provided in RC 1923.04 or to bring a forcibly entry and detainer action as
provided in RC Chapter 1923 to obtain possession or occupancy of a dwelling
unit that, according to the provisions of this section, the tenant has
abandoned. Nothing in this section shall relieve a landlord from complying with
the provisions of RC Chapters 1923 and 5321, if the landlord knows, or
reasonably should know, that the tenant has not abandoned the dwelling unit.
   (d)   The landlord shall inventory any possessions and personal effects of
the tenant that are in the dwelling unit and shall remove and keep them for not
less than thirty (30) days. The tenant may reclaim such possessions and
personal effects from the landlord within that thirty (30) day period. If the
tenant does not reclaim such possessions and personal effects by the end of
that thirty (30) day period, the landlord may dispose of them as the landlord
deems appropriate.
   (e)   No action shall be brought under RC 5321.15 against a landlord who
takes action in compliance with the provisions of this section.
(Ord. No. 1844-A-99. Passed 7-18-01, eff. 7-26-01)
§ 375.11 Severability
   If any provision or clause of this chapter or its application to any person
or in any circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other
provisions or applications of this chapter that can be given effect without the
invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this
chapter shall be severable.
(Ord. No. 1844-A-99. Passed 7-18-01, eff. 7-26-01)
§ 375.12 Legal Representation in Housing Court
   (a)   Definitions.
      (1)   "Brief legal assistance" means individualized legal assistance
provided in a single consultation by a designated organization to a covered
individual in connection with a covered proceeding.
      (2)   "Covered individual" means any person who occupies a dwelling, with
at least one (1) child in the City under a claim of legal right other than the
owner, whose annual gross income is not in excess of one-hundred percent (100%)
of the federal poverty guidelines as established and updated periodically by
the United States Department of Health and Human Services (42 U.S.C. 9902(2)).
      (3)   "Covered proceeding" means any proceeding in Cleveland Municipal
Court, Housing Division ("Housing Court") to evict, eject, or terminate the
tenancy of a covered individual.
      (4)   "Lead partner organization" means an organization or entity that
has the capacity to establish and implement a program to provide access to
legal services for covered individuals in covered proceedings in Housing Court
and that has entered into contract with the City for such program.
      (5)   "Designated organization" means a not-for-profit organization or an
entity to be determined, that has the capacity to provide legal services per
the standards set by the American Bar Association Standards for the Provision
of Civil Legal Aid (ABA standards) to income-eligible individuals facing
eviction.
      (6)   "Full legal representation" means ongoing legal representation
provided by any designated organization to a covered individual who is income-
eligible, and all legal advice, advocacy, and assistance associated with such
representation. Such representation includes, but is not limited to, the filing
of a notice of appearance on behalf of the covered individual in a covered
proceeding.
      (7)   "Legal services" means any legal representation provided to a
covered individual, including brief legal assistance and full legal
representation.
   (b)   Legal Representation in Housing Court.
      (1)   Covered individuals receive access to legal services from
designated organizations under contract with the lead partner organization. The
designated organizations shall provide legal services in a covered proceeding,
as soon as possible after the initiation of the proceeding, and no later than
at the time of the individual's first scheduled appearance in a covered
proceeding. Designated organizations must seek to provide high quality, full
legal representation in accordance with ABA standards, unless the individual is
ineligible, there is a conflict of interest, or other circumstances make full
legal representation infeasible to render.
      (2)   The access to legal services described in subdivision (1) above is
contingent upon additional legislative authority authorizing and appropriating
the funds for a contract between the City and the lead partner organization and
is subject to any terms and conditions contained in such agreement.
      (3)   Provision of legal services for covered individuals from designated
organizations in a covered proceeding shall be administered by the lead partner
organization.
      (4)   Designated organizations shall work with the lead partner
organization and community partners to engage and educate tenants of their
rights and available resources.
      (5)   Designated organizations shall be contractually obligated by the
lead partner organization to meet and report on pre-determined performance
metrics, report those metrics to the lead partner organization on a quarterly
basis, and adhere to quality assurance standards set by the lead partner
organization based upon ABA standards; all components must be satisfied in
order to receive an on-going contract to provide legal representation in
Housing Court under this section.
      (6)   Any legal services performed by a designated organization under
this section shall not supplant, replace, or satisfy any obligations or
responsibilities of that designated organization under any other program
agreement or contract.
      (7)   On January 31 of each year, beginning in 2021, the lead partner
organization shall submit a written report to the Council, detailing the number
of covered individuals served, the extent of legal services performed, metrics
evaluating outcomes, projected budgeting needs for full representation to all
covered individuals, and a summary of the engagement and education of tenants.
   (c)   Nothing in this section, or the administration or application of this
section, shall be construed to create a private right of action on the part of
any person or entity against the City or any agency, official, or employee of
the City.
(Ord. No. 1001-2019. Passed 9-30-19, eff. 6-30-20)
PART IIID: LAND USE CODE – FIRE PREVENTION CODE
TITLE XI: FIRE PREVENTION CODE
   Chapter
381   Enforcement and General Provisions
   Chapter
383   Flammable Liquids
   Chapter
385   Flammable Materials and Gases
   Chapter
387   Explosives, Including the Indoor and Outdoor Display of Pyrotechnics,
Flame Effects, and Lasers
   Chapter
389   Fire Extinguishing Equipment
   Chapter
391   Fire Alarm and Detection Systems; Fire Drills
   Chapter
392   Smoke Detectors, Smoke Alarms, and Carbon Monoxide Alarms
   Chapter
393   Hazardous Chemicals: Right-To-Know Code
   Chapter
394   Hazardous Material Transportation
   Chapter
395   Unnecessary Fire Alarms
   Chapter
396   Notification, Environmental Abatement and Securing of Closed or Vacated
Facilities
   Chapter
397   Emergency Rapid Entry Systems
CHAPTER 381 – ENFORCEMENT AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
381.01   Investigation of Fires
381.02   Power to Compel Attendance of Witnesses
381.03   Administering Oaths; Refusal to Testify
381.04   Right of Entry; Abatement Order and Appeal
381.05   Permits Required and Approval
381.051   Fees for Permits for Fire Protection Systems
381.052   Fees for Permits for Storage Tanks
381.053   Fees for Permits for Hazardous Substances and Explosives
381.054   Special Inspection and Testing Fees
381.06   Fees for Certificates of Qualification
381.07   Fire Lines
381.08   Smoking Prohibitions and Exceptions
381.09   Notice of Fire
381.10   Causing Fire; Posting Notice
381.101   Outdoor Grilling Restrictions
381.11   Tampering and Obstruction of Egress, Equipment
381.12   Means of Egress: Prohibitions and Maintenance
381.13   Delivery or Transfer of Flammable Liquids or Liquefied Petroleum Gases
381.14   Civil Tickets
381.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Building Code enforcement, CO
Ch. 3103
   Fire Chief approval required, CO
3105.11
   Fire Division organization, CO
135.21 et seq.,
173.28 et seq.
   Location and assignment of fire companies, CO
135.31
Statutory reference:
   Council may invest investigative powers, RC 737.27
   Right to examine buildings, RC 3737.14
§ 381.01 Investigation of Fires
   The Fire Chief and such members of the Fire Division as may be designated by
him or her are invested with the power and the duty to be present at all fires,
investigate the cause thereof, examine witnesses, compel the attendance of
witnesses and the production of books and papers, and to do and perform all
other acts necessary to the effective discharge of such duties.
   Such officers may make arrests, and enter, for the purpose of examination,
any building which in his or her opinion, is in danger from fire.
(Ord. No. 1320-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 381.02 Power to Compel Attendance of Witnesses
   The Fire Chief and such members of the Fire Division as may be designated by
him or her may summon and compel the attendance of witnesses to testify in
relation to any matter which is a proper subject of inquiry and investigation,
and may require the production of any book, paper or document concerning a
matter under examination and within the jurisdiction of the Division.
(Ord. No. 1320-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 381.03 Administering Oaths; Refusal to Testify
   The Fire Chief and such members of the Fire Division as may be designated by
him or her may administer an oath to any person appearing as a witness before
him or her. No witness shall refuse to be sworn or refuse to testify, or
disobey an order of the Fire Chief or his or her designees, or fail or refuse
to produce a book, paper or document concerning a matter under examination and
within the jurisdiction of the Division, or be guilty of contemptuous conduct
after being summoned by such officer to appear before him or her to give
testimony in relation to a matter or subject under investigation.
(Ord. No. 1320-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 381.04 Right of Entry; Abatement Order and Appeal
   (a)   No person shall fail to comply with any provision of this Fire
Prevention Code or shall fail to comply with any lawful order issued under this
Fire Prevention Code. The Fire Chief or his or her authorized representatives
upon presentation of proper credentials, may enter any building or premises at
all reasonable hours or at such times as may be necessary in an existing
emergency to examine and inspect for hazardous or dangerous conditions,
equipment, materials, liquids, gases or accumulations; obstructions to or on
fire escapes or other means of egress; and for the maintenance of fire
protection equipment. No person shall prevent, obstruct or delay any inspection
or the performance of any lawful duty of a firefighter acting within his or her
official capacity. The Fire Chief’s right of entry shall be as authorized in
Section
367.03.
   (b)   Whenever the Fire Chief or his or her representatives find that a
property is in violation of this Fire Prevention Code, he or she shall notify
in writing the owner or person in control of the property through an abatement
order which can also be labeled as a Notice of Violations to correct the
violation by a stated time. The order or notice may also order the person in
control or the owner to remedy any hazardous or dangerous condition or orders
to conduct the necessary tests to determine the sources of hazardous materials,
liquids, gases or the adequacy of the equipment within a stated time. The
Abatement order or Notice of Violations shall be served as stated in division
(f) below.
   (c)   In an emergency, an abatement order may be summarily issued to be
complied with immediately or the fire official may take such action as is
necessary to remedy or remove any hazardous or dangerous condition.
   (d)   No person to whom an abatement order is directed shall fail to comply
with such order within the time stated in such order.
   (e)   Except in an emergency, any person aggrieved by an abatement order may
appeal by filing written notice with the Board of Building Standards and
Building Appeals within thirty (30) days of the date of the order being
appealed, accompanied by the required appeal fee.
   (f)   Abatement Orders or Notices of Violation issued under this Fire
Prevention Code shall be served on responsible parties or owners by one (1) or
more of the following methods:
      (1)   Personal service. The City department issuing the notice may use
any method that causes the Notice of Violations to be actually delivered to the
responsible party. Actual delivery shall constitute legal service of the Notice
of Violations.
      (2)   Residence service at the owner’s address by leaving a copy of the
notice of violation with a person of suitable age and discretion then residing
therein;
      (3)   Certified mail to an address where it is reasonably calculated
under the circumstances to reach the owner. When determining such an address,
the City shall examine:
         A.   Information the responsible party provided to the City, such as
rental registration information or the address used on an appeal or an
application; or
         B.   Information that a City representative, such as an inspector, has
discovered during the performance of their duties; or
         C.   Information from common and readily available sources such as
printed or online directories, credit bureaus, county property records, board
of election records, motor vehicle records, court records or other state,
county, municipal or federal records.
      The City is not required to use all of these methods and is not required
to use any one of them; the City must use whatever combination of them is
reasonably expected to be successful. The address found can be the property or
premises which is the subject of the violation.
      (4)   Regular mail and posting as follows:
         A.   Regular mail to the owner at an address found under division (f)
(3) above, which may be the address of the property that is the subject of the
violation; and
         B.   Regular mail service to the property address that is the subject
of the violation notice, if that address is different from the address in
division (f)(4)A.; and
         C.   Posting of the notice of violation in a conspicuous location on
the building, premises or real estate or appurtenance thereto that is the
subject of the violation notice.
      (5)   Service by publication electronically or once in a newspaper of
general circulation in the City.
(Ord. No. 1039-2023. Passed 2-5-24, eff. 2-6-24)
§ 381.05 Permits Required and Approval
   (a)   A permit shall be obtained from the Division of Fire for storing,
using or handling a hazardous substance whenever the quantity exceeds the
maximum quantity which may be stored, used or handled without a permit as
specified in this Fire Prevention Code or the Ohio Fire Code. For the purpose
of this chapter, “hazardous substance” or “hazardous material” means any
chemical which is a physical or health hazard and shall include without
limitation such materials as flammable liquids, combustible liquids, compressed
gases, liquefied petroleum gases, corrosive liquids, flammable solids, highly
toxic materials, oxidizers, poisonous gases, radioactive material, unstable
(reactive) chemicals, cryogenic liquids, fumigants, fuel gases and explosives.
   (b)   A permit is required before any fire alarm, detection or fire
suppression system is installed, enlarged or altered. A permit shall be secured
from the Division of Fire. Plans and specifications shall be reviewed by the
Fire Chief prior to the issuance of the permit.
   (c)   A permit is required to install remove, repair or alter any tank for
the storage of hazardous substances. The permit shall contain a general
description of the proposed work and shall include two (2) copies of a drawing
indicting location, use, capacity and piping arrangement of all existing and
proposed tanks located, or which are to be located, upon the premises and all
adjacent buildings and property lines.
   (d)   A permit shall constitute permission to maintain, store or handle
materials, or to conduct processes which may produce conditions hazardous to
life or property, or to install equipment used in connection with such
activities and for the installation, alteration or enlargement of any fire
alarm, detection or fire suppression system in accordance with the provisions
of this Fire Prevention Code. Such permission shall not be construed as
authority to violate, cancel or set aside any of the provisions of this Fire
Prevention Code. Said permit shall remain in effect until revoked, or for such
period of time specified on the permit. Permits are not transferable and any
change in use, operation or tenancy shall require a new permit.
   (e)   Plans approved by the Fire Chief are approved with the intent that
they comply in all respects to this Fire Prevention Code. Any omissions or
errors on the plans do not relieve the applicant of complying with all
applicable requirements of this Code.
   (f)   Any permit issued shall become invalid if the authorized work or
activity is not commenced within twelve (12) months after issuance of the
permit, or if the authorized work or activity is suspended or abandoned for a
period of six (6) months after the time of commencement.
   (g)   A permit may be issued for an installation which existed prior to June
27, 1949, and which does not fully comply with the provisions of the Fire
Prevention or Building Codes provided the Fire Chief determines that such
installation is safe and does not represent an unusual hazard to life or to
adjacent property. As a condition for issuing such permit, the Chief may
require such changes in the installation or methods of handling or storage as
he or she deems necessary to minimize or reduce the hazard or to promote the
public interest. Each such permit shall be revocable at any time for a
violation of any safety requirement or regulation of the Fire Chief.
   (h)   No permit shall be issued unless the Commissioner of Building and
Housing has reviewed and approved all matters which are under his or her
jurisdiction or require his or her approval.
   (i)   The National Fire Protection Association 704 system shall be required
for each establishment, manufacturing plant, or premises and the location of
said 704 symbols shall be determined by the Fire Chief or his or her authorized
representatives.
   (j)   In addition to other authority granted to the Fire Chief by this Fire
Prevention Code or other law, the Fire Chief may suspend or revoke a permit or
approval issued under the provisions of this Fire Prevention Code if upon
inspection any violation of this Code exists, or if conditions of a permit have
been violated, or if there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as
to material fact in the application, data or plans on which the permit or
approval was based. The suspension or revocation of a permit or approval may be
appealed by filing written notice with the Board of Building Standards and
Building Appeals within thirty (30) days of the date of the suspension or
revocation being appealed, accompanied by the required appeal fee.
(Ord. No. 1654-89. Passed 1-22-90, eff. 1-30-90)
§ 381.051 Fees for Permits for Fire Protection Systems
   (a)   The fees for permits to install, enlarge or alter a fire protection
system are established as follows:
      (1)   Automatic Sprinkler Review: The fee for the sprinkler review is
based on the number of sprinkler heads in the system.
 
Sprinkler Heads Fee
1 to 20         $150.00
21 to 200       $200.00 plus $1.00 per head over 21
201 to 400      $250.00 plus $1.00 per head over 201
401 to 600      $300.00 plus $1.00 per head over 401
Over 600        $350.00 plus $1.00 per head over 600
 
      For hydraulically-designed systems, multiply the above fee by one and
one-half (1-1/2). For systems with a fire pump, add three hundred dollars
($300.00). Standpipes using the same supply as sprinkler systems with fire
pumps are included in the sprinkler system fee.
      (2)   Standpipe Review: Three hundred dollars ($300.00).
      (3)   Underground Fire Main / Yard Hydrant System: One hundred dollars
($100.00) plus twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per hydrant over three (3).
      (4)   Alternative Automatic Fire Extinguishing System: One hundred
dollars ($100.00) per system plus five cents ($0.05) per square foot over five
thousand (5,000) square feet. Associated alarm devices fee will be charged per
divisions (a)(9) and (a)(10).
      (5)   Carbon Dioxide Suppression System: Pre-engineered system, one
hundred dollars ($100.00) per system. Engineered system, one (1) to one hundred
seventy-five (175) pounds of agent, one hundred dollars ($100.00). Over one
hundred seventy-five (175) pounds of agent, one hundred dollars ($100.00) plus
fifty cents ($0.50) per pound.
      (6)   Clean Agent System: Up to thirty-five (35) pounds of agent, one
hundred dollars ($100.00). Over thirty-five (35) pounds of agent, one hundred
dollars ($100.00) plus fifty cents ($0.50) per pound.
      (7)   Dry Chemical Suppression System: Up to thirty (30) pounds of agent,
fifty dollars ($50.00). Over thirty (30) pounds of agent, one hundred dollars
($100.00) plus fifty cents ($0.50) per pound.
      (8)   Wet Chemical Suppression System: Up to three (3) gallons of agent,
one hundred dollars ($100.00). Over three (3) gallons of agent, one hundred
dollars ($100.00) plus five dollars ($5.00) per gallon.
      (9)   Automatic Fire Alarm Systems: The fee for an automatic alarm system
is based on the number of sending, signaling and detecting devices in the
system. Add one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for a smoke control or removal
system.
 
Devices Fee
1 - 25  $200.00
Over 25 $300.00, plus $1.50 per device over 25
 
      (10)   Manual Fire Alarm Systems: The fee for a manual fire alarm system
is based on the number of sending and signaling devices.
 
Devices Fee
1 - 10  $150.00
Over 10 $150.00, plus $2.00 per device over 10
 
   (b)   The services provided for the fees established by this section shall
include review of the permit application, review of the plans, and the issuance
of a permit. The services shall also include the presence of a representative
of the Division of Fire at the testing of the system for a single day not
exceeding four (4) hours. If the testing extends beyond a single day due to
continuation of the acceptance test, failure of the system, or any other cause
whatsoever, then an additional fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) plus
fifty dollars ($50.00) per each additional day shall be paid for the presence
of a representative of the Division of Fire at each additional day of testing
or fraction of a day. After hours inspection fees will be based on current
overtime rate, minimum of four (4) hours per inspection.
(Ord. No. 1144-2024. Passed 11-25-24, eff. 12-3-24)
§ 381.052 Fees for Permits for Storage Tanks
   (a)   The following fees are hereby established to install, remove, repair
or alter tanks for the storage of hazardous substances:
      (1)   To install outdoor above-ground or buried tanks inside street or
alley lines or tanks inside buildings for storing any substance or combustible
liquid other than water:
Gallon Capacity Fee (Each Tank)
Gallon Capacity        Fee (Each Tank)
Up to 1,000            $100.00
Over 1,000 to 3,000    $125.00
Over 3,000 to 12,000   $150.00
Over 12,000 to 20,000  $200.00
Over 20,000 to 50,000  $300.00
Over 50,000 to 100,000 $350.00
Over 100,000           $500.00
 
      (2)   To install tanks inside buildings other than high hazard occupancy
use group classification for storing hazardous substances:
 
Gallon Capacity       Fee (Each Tank)
Up to 1,000           $100.00
Over 1,000 to 3,000   $125.00
Over 3,000 to 12,000  $150.00
Over 12,000 to 25,000 $200.00
 
      (3)   To install new piping for existing tanks. Fee: one hundred dollars
($100.00).
      (4)   To remove, abandon, place temporarily out of service or otherwise
dispose of a tank. Fee: one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).
      (5)   To reline an underground liquid petroleum tank. Fee: one hundred
dollars ($100.00).
   (b)   The fees established by this section shall include review of the
permit application, review of the plans, and the issuance of a permit. The fees
established shall also include the presence of a representative of the Division
of Fire at the testing of the tank or piping, if applicable, for a single day
not exceeding four (4) hours. If the testing extends beyond a single day due to
continuation of the acceptance test, failure of the tank or the piping, or any
other cause whatsoever, then an additional fee of one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00) plus fifty dollars ($50.00) for each additional day shall be paid for
the presence of a representative of the Division of Fire at each additional day
of testing or fraction of a day. After hours inspection fees shall be based on
current overtime rate, minimum of four (4) hours per inspection.
(Ord. No. 1144-2024. Passed 11-25-24, eff. 12-3-24)
§ 381.053 Fees for Permits for Hazardous Substances and Explosives
   (a)   The fee for a permit to store, use or handle a hazardous substance
other than an explosive shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) for one (1) year
and in a fixed facility one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per three (3)
years. In the event that a permit to handle a hazardous substance other than an
explosive is issued for a period of five (5) days or less, the permit fee shall
be twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
   (b)   The fee for a permit to store, use, sell, give away, transport or
dispose of an explosive shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per event.
The permit shall be issued for a period of not to exceed one (1) year.
   (c)   The fee for a permit to exhibit and/or store pyro (fireworks), flame,
and lasers shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per event.
(Ord. No. 1144-2024. Passed 11-25-24, eff. 12-3-24)
§ 381.054 Special Inspection and Testing Fees
   (a)   The fee shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the Division of
Fire to conduct an initial inspection of any facility requiring a fire
inspection for a license, such as child care facilities, residential care
facilities, board and care facilities, half-way houses, group homes,
convalescent facilities, and alcohol and drug facilities. The fee for each re-
inspection shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) per license inspection.
   (b)   The fee for the Division of Fire to conduct a flow test of a dry
standpipe having no permanent water supply shall be four hundred fifty dollars
($450.00) and shall include up to three (3) risers. For each additional riser,
there shall be a cost of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per riser.
(Ord. No. 1144-2024. Passed 11-25-24, eff. 12-3-24)
§ 381.06 Fees for Certificates of Qualification
   (a)   Every standpipe installation, yard hydrant system, automatic sprinkler
installation, or installation of other automatic fire extinguishing equipment,
electrically operated interior fire alarm system and automatic fire detecting
system, shall be under the responsible charge of the owner or other person
designated by the owner, who is familiar with the operation of the systems in
his or her charge. The person shall see that the systems are maintained in a
serviceable condition. No person shall be in charge of any system or
installation unless he or she applies for and receives a certificate of
qualification issued by the Fire Chief and pays a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00)
for any initial certificate or annual renewal of a certificate. The following
categories require a Certificate of Qualification permit:
      (1)   Liquid Petroleum Gas (LPG).
      (2)   Fire Protection Systems.
         A.   Sprinkler.
         B.   Standpipe.
         C.   Fire Pump.
         D.   Yard Hydrant.
         E.   Fire Alarm.
         F.   Smoke Control System.
         G.   Other Automatic Protection System.
   (b)   Additional fees:
      (1)   FPS initial inspection fees for Fire Alarm and Wet based systems:
Category Fee
Category                      Fee
Less than 2,500 square feet   $100.00
2,501 - 5,000 square feet     $125.00
5,001 - 10,000 square feet    $150.00
10,001 - 12,000 square feet   $175.00
12,001 - 20,000 square feet   $200.00
20,001 - 40,000 square feet   $225.00
40,001 - 60,000 square feet   $250.00
60,001 - 100,000 square feet  $275.00
100,001 - 125,000 square feet $300.00
125,001 and over              $300.00 + $15.00 per additional 5,000 square feet
 
      (2)   Additional Inspection/Specialty fees:
Category Fee
Category                     Fee
New Cell Towers with Utility $150.00
Building
New Cell Towers              $100.00
Cellular Antennas            $50.00
Replacement
New Fire Alarm Test          $150.00
Fire Control Panel           $150.00
Replacement
Sprinkler Panel              $150.00
Kitchen Hood                 $150.00
Underground Fire Main        $150.00
Hazardous Escort During      $100.00
Business Hours
Hazardous Escort After Hours $334.32 / 4 hour minimum – $83.58 per additional
                             hour
Communication Permit         $100.00
(Annual)
FPS Contractor Fee (Annual)  $100.00
Festival Permit              $150.00 / year
Festival Inspection Fee      $334.32 / 4 hour minimum – $83.58 per additional
                             hour
 
      (3)   Additional Inspection/Specialty fees:
 
Category                            Fee
BUSTR (Underground Tank Inspection) $100 / hour
Knox Box Permit                     $50.00
 
      (4)   HAZMAT Response fees:
 
Category          Fee
HAZMAT Response   $400.00 / 4 hours – $100.00 / man hour after the initial 4
fee billed to     hours
spiller
HAZMAT Specialist $334.32 / 4 hour minimum – $83.58 per additional hour
 
   (c)   Replacement costs: any damaged supplies or equipment will be billed to
the spiller.
   (d)   By the discretion of the Fire Chief, any permit fees may be waived on
a case-by-case basis.
(Ord. No. 1144-2024. Passed 11-25-24, eff. 12-3-24)
§ 381.07 Fire Lines
   (a)   The Fire Chief or any fire official in charge of any fire shall have
authority to establish fire lines for the purpose of facilitating the
extinguishing of such fire.
   (b)   Whenever fire lines have been established, no person shall enter the
limits fixed by such lines, except a member of the Police or Fire Division or
any person authorized by a police or fire official.
   (c)   No person shall fail to obey the lawful order of any law enforcement
officer or fireman engaged in his or her duties at the scene or in connection
with a fire, accident, disaster, riot or emergency of any kind.
(Ord. No. 778-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
§ 381.08 Smoking Prohibitions and Exceptions
   (a)   Except in safe locations approved for smoking as specifically
designated by the Commissioner of Building and the Fire Chief or their
authorized representatives, no person shall smoke or carry a lighted cigar,
cigarette, pipe or match or use any spark or flame producing device in any
theater, or in any retail store employing twenty-five (25) or more persons or
able to accommodate three hundred (300) or more persons, or in any area of
indoor assembly used for row seating and having a capacity of one hundred (100)
or more persons.
   (b)   No person shall smoke or carry a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or
match in any public bus, rapid transit car or on any public or private property
where combustible materials or flammable liquids are stored, handled or
displayed or where the nature of the business occupation or conditions is such
as to make smoking a hazard as determined by the Fire Chief or his or her
authorized representatives.
   (c)   No owner, agent, occupant or person in charge of any building or
premises shall fail to post and maintain signs of a size and in such locations
as are determined by the Fire Chief to adequately apprise persons of the
prohibitions or limitations authorized by this section.
(Ord. No. 778-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
§ 381.09 Notice of Fire
   (a)   The owner, manager or lessee of the following buildings shall at all
times have a responsible person in such building who shall be charged with the
duty of immediately notifying the Fire Division when fire occurs therein.
      (1)   A Class A Multiple Dwelling used in whole or in part for single
room occupancy as defined in Section 3125.25(g) and which contains twenty (20)
or more sleeping rooms or is used or occupied by forty (40) or more persons for
sleeping purposes.
      (2)   A Class B Multiple Dwelling with twenty (20) or more sleeping rooms
or used or occupied by forty (40) or more persons for sleeping purposes.
      (3)   A Class A Multiple Dwelling which is more than seven (7) stories or
seventy-five (75) feet in height above grade level.
      (4)   A Class A Multiple Dwelling, occupied predominantly by elderly
persons with an age of sixty- two (62) years or more, and which contains twenty
(20) or more sleeping rooms or is used or occupied by forty (40) or more
persons for sleeping purposes.
   (b)   Failure to have a person on duty, as required herein, constitutes a
violation of this section. Each day’s operation without such a person on duty
constitutes a separate offense.
   (c)   Any person who discovers a fire shall immediately notify the Fire
Division and the person on duty or in charge of such building. Failure to
notify as required constitutes a violation of this section.
(Ord. No. 778-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
§ 381.10 Causing Fire; Posting Notice
   (a)   No person in any Class B Multiple Dwelling by any means through
carelessness, neglect or negligence shall set fire to or cause the burning of
any bedding, furniture, rugs, curtains, drapes or other household furnishings
or fittings or any other part of such businesses or premises in such a manner
as to endanger the safety of any person or property.
   (b)   The manager, owner or lessee of any hotel, motel, rooming house,
lodging house or similar place of abode shall post a copy of this section in
conspicuous places upon such premises. Failure to do so constitutes a violation
of this section.
(Ord. No. 778-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
§ 381.101 Outdoor Grilling Restrictions
   No person shall kindle or maintain a fire to be used for the preparation of
food or for any other purpose in any type of outdoor or portable grill in any
Dwelling Unit, as defined in 325.20, or on any balcony or porch of same or
within fifteen (15) feet of any residential structure.
(Ord. No. 1663-95. Passed 9-27-99, eff. 10-1-99)
§ 381.11 Tampering and Obstruction of Egress, Equipment
   No person shall tamper with or obstruct any means of egress, fire escape,
emergency exit or door, portable or fixed fire extinguishing equipment,
automatic sprinkler system, automatic fire detection system or manual or
automatic fire alarm system.
(Ord. No. 778-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
§ 381.12 Means of Egress: Prohibitions and Maintenance
   (a)   No person shall place any obstruction in front of, in or on any
required means of egress, or place any curtain or mirror over, on or in front
of exit doors, or obstruct access to or visibility of any exit door.
   (b)   No overhead electric service cable and no telephone cable shall be
directly over or within three (3) feet of an exterior stairway, exit balcony,
or fire escape unless such cable is enclosed in rigid conduit securely fastened
and supported.
   (c)   Exterior stairways, exit balconies, bridges and fire escapes shall be
promptly cleared of snow or ice, and shall be maintained in a usable condition
at all times.
   (d)   All means of egress shall be maintained in a safe and usable
condition. Corrodible metals shall be kept painted or otherwise protected
against rust and corrosion.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 381.13 Delivery or Transfer of Flammable Liquids or Liquefied Petroleum Gases
   (a)   No person, firm or corporation shall either directly or indirectly
deliver any flammable liquid from any tank, wagon, truck or other vehicle or by
bucket, pail, can or similar container into the fuel tank or other receptacle
of, in or on any motor vehicle which is stopped or parked upon any street or
highway. However, nothing herein shall prohibit in an emergency the delivery
from an approved container of not more than five (5) gallons of flammable
liquid into any motor vehicle fuel tank or receptacle.
   (b)   Except while delivering or transferring fuel oil into approved storage
tanks at consumer sites, tank trucks or other vehicles delivering or
transferring Class I, II or III flammable liquids shall be parked on private
property during the delivery or transfer of these liquids.
   The delivery and transfer of liquefied petroleum gases from tank trucks or
other vehicles shall be in accordance with Section
385.19 and the rules and regulations of the Board of Building Standards and
Building Appeals.
   (c)   In an emergency, the Fire Chief shall approve the method of transfer
of flammable liquids or liquefied petroleum gases while vehicles are parked on
streets or highways.
(Ord. No. 778-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
§ 381.14 Civil Tickets
   Any city officer or employee authorized to enforce the City’s Fire
Prevention Code may also enforce Chapter
3104 and issue a notice of civil offense and civil fine under the procedures in
that chapter.
(Ord. No. 1039-2023. Passed 2-5-24, eff. 2-6-24)
§ 381.99 Penalty
   (a)   Whoever violates a lawful order issued under this Fire Prevention Code
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day of failure to
comply constitutes a separate violation.
   (b)   Whoever violates any provision of Chapters
381 to
391 of this Title Eleven – Fire Prevention Code is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. For a second offense such person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree and shall be fined not more than two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) or imprisoned not more than thirty (30) days or both. On a third or
subsequent offense such person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree
and shall be fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisoned
not more than one (1) year or both. Each day of a continuing violation shall be
deemed a separate offense.
   (c)   Whoever violates Section
381.03 is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. Whoever violates Section
381.03 is also subject to being held in contempt by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the sanction for which can be to imprison the person until the
person complied with Section
381.03.
   (d)   Whoever violates Section
381.101 shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor. In addition to any other method
of enforcement provided in this chapter, this chapter may be enforced by the
issuance of a citation in compliance with Rule 4.1 of the Ohio Rules of
Criminal Procedures. Each day of a continuing violation shall be deemed a
separate offense.
   (e)   Whoever violates any provision of Chapter
393 shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Section
393.99.
(Ord. No. 1039-2023. Passed 2-5-24, eff. 2-6-24)
CHAPTER 383 – FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS
383.01   Scope and Application
383.02   Classification
383.03   Definitions
383.04   Conditions Requiring Permits
383.05   Storage Limitations when Not in Fire- Resistive Rooms
383.06   Storage in Dwellings and Row Houses
383.07   Storage in Garages
383.08   Storage in Multiple Dwellings
383.09   Storage in Business Occupancy
383.10   Storage in Mercantile Occupancy
383.11   Storage in Storage Occupancy
383.12   Storage in Industrial Occupancy
383.13   Storage in Institutional Occupancy
383.14   Storage in Assembly Occupancy
383.15   Storage in Educational Occupancy
383.16   Storage During Demolition or Building Moving
383.17   Storage in Stores and Mercantile Establishments
383.18   Storage in Fire-Resistive Storage Rooms
383.19   Storage and Handling of Class I and Class II Liquids
383.20   Tanks for Class I or Class II Liquid Buried Within Buildings
383.21   Storage Tanks for Class III Liquids Within Buildings
383.22   Underground Tanks Outside Buildings
383.23   Installation of Underground Tanks
383.24   Above-Ground Storage in Tanks of Class I, II or III Liquid
383.25   Fire Extinguishing Equipment for Above- Ground Storage Tanks
383.26   Dikes
383.27   Above-Ground Outdoor Storage of Flammable Liquids in Barrels, Drums or
Other Containers
383.28   Materials, Construction and Equipment of Storage Tanks and Containers
383.29   Tank Car and Tank Truck Loading Docks
383.30   Processing Equipment
383.31   Processing Room Ventilation
383.32   Piping, Valves and Pumps
383.33   Marking and Labeling Storage Areas
383.34   Yard Hydrant Systems
383.35   Storage of Flammable Liquids Subject to Drug Abuse
383.36   Appeal
Cross-reference:
   Tank truck delivery, CO
381.13
   Fire Chief approval required, CO
3105.11
Statutory reference:
   Gasoline, oils and paints, RC Ch. 3741
   Underground storage tanks, RC 3737.87 et seq.
§ 383.01 Scope and Application
   (a)   The provisions of this chapter shall govern the use, handling, storage
and sale of flammable liquids, and the products thereof, having a flash point
of two hundred degrees Fahrenheit (200°F) or less; except that this chapter
applies to fuel oil installations and fuel oil storage in connection with oil-
burning equipment used for the heating of buildings and for similar purposes
only as specified in Chapter 3155.
   (b)   After June 27, 1949, all new installations and new storage of
flammable liquid and all use and handling thereof shall be in conformity with
this chapter.
   (c)   When existing installations or methods of storage do not conform to
the provisions of this chapter and are deemed unusually hazardous to life or to
adjacent property by the Fire Chief, such installations and methods of storage
shall be altered or changed to substantially conform with the provisions of
this chapter.
   (d)   The use, handling and storage of flammable liquid having a vapor
pressure above fifteen (15) psi absolute pressure, at one hundred degrees
Fahrenheit (100°F), shall be under special permit only, and in conformity with
the conditions of the permit prescribed by the Fire Chief.
   (e)   The use, handling and storage of combustible liquid with a flash point
over two hundred degrees Fahrenheit (200°F) shall be in conformity with
accepted safe practice as approved by the Fire Chief. When deemed necessary,
the Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals may promulgate rules or
regulations to define accepted safe practice in the use, handling and storage
of such combustible liquid.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 383.02 Classification
   (a)   For the purposes of this chapter, “flammable liquid” means liquid
having a flash point of two hundred degrees Fahrenheit (200°F) or less and
having a vapor pressure less than forty (40) psi absolute pressure at one
hundred degrees Fahrenheit (100°F). Flammable liquids shall be divided into
three (3) classes, according to the flash point, as follows:
      (1)   Class I Liquids with flash point at or below twenty degrees
Fahrenheit (20°F), Tag. closed cup tester.
      (2)   Class II Liquids with flash point above twenty degrees Fahrenheit
(20°F) to seventy degrees Fahrenheit (70°F) Tag. closed cup tester.
      (3)   Class III Liquids with flash point from seventy degrees Fahrenheit
(70°F) to two hundred degrees Fahrenheit (200°F), Tag. closed cup tester or,
for thick paints or paint vehicles, or other liquids having a flash point above
one hundred seventy-five degrees Fahrenheit (175°F), Pensky-Martens closed
tester.
   (b)   “Flash point” means the minimum temperature, in degrees Fahrenheit, at
which a flammable liquid will give off vapor sufficient to form an ignitable
mixture in the air immediately above the liquid or in the vessel in which the
liquid is stored. All tests for flash point shall be made in accordance with
ASTM D 56, except that pigmented and thick paints or paint vehicles, and
liquids having a flash point above one hundred seventy-five degrees Fahrenheit
(175°F), may be tested and classified in accordance with ASTM D 93.
   (c)   Representative examples of classes of flammable liquids are:
Class I Flash Point F.
        (approx.)
Class I           Flash Point F.
                  (approx.)
Ether             -49
Carbon Bisulfide  -22
Gasoline          -45
Benzol            12
Collodion         0
Acetone           0
Class II          Flash Point F.
                  (approx.)
Alcohol (Ethyl)   55
Amyl Acetate      70
Toluene           40
Ethyl Acetate     25
Naphtha V.M. & P. 25 - 45
Class III         Flash Point F.
                  (approx.)
Kerosene          100 - 165
Amyl Alcohol      100
Turpentine        95
Fuel Oil No. 1    100 - 165
Fuel Oil No. 2    110 - 190
Fuel Oil No. 3    110 - 230
Fuel Oil No. 4    150 and more
 
   (d)   Any manufactured liquid or fluid which is flammable, such as paint,
varnish, dryer, cleaning solution or polishing liquid, shall be classified
according to the flash point of the mixture.
   (e)   Liquefied petroleum gases shall be subject to the provisions included
under Sections
385.18 and
385.19, and shall not be deemed to be flammable liquids as defined in this
section.
   (f)   The Police Chief and such members of the Police Division as may be
designated by him or her shall designate flammable liquids in addition to the
designation in subsection (g) hereof which are subject to drug abuse. The
Police Chief shall make his or her determination in consultation with the Fire
Chief as to what flammable liquids are subject to drug abuse on the basis of
information provided to the Police Chief by such members of the Police Division
as may be designated by him or her. The following information, including but
not limited to the following, is relevant in determining that a flammable
liquid is subject to drug abuse:
      (1)   Possession of the liquid is a crime as provided in Chapter
607;
      (2)   Arrests have been made for possession, use, and abuse of the liquid
as provided in Chapter
607;
      (3)   Theft and burglary offenses have been committed to obtain the
liquid for drug abuse purposes;
   (g)   Toluene, also known as tuleol, is hereby designated as a flammable
liquid which is subject to drug abuse.
   (h)   The Police Chief or his or her designated representative may, from
time to time, add to or delete flammable liquids from the list of drug abuse
substances promulgated in subsection (g) hereof and pursuant to this section.
Notice of additions or deletions to the list of flammable liquids subject to
drug abuse shall be published in the City Record for two (2) consecutive weeks.
(Ord. No. 2864-78. Passed 1-29-79, eff. 1-30-79)
§ 383.03 Definitions
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   “Container” means any can, bucket, barrel, drum, tank or other vessel
in which flammable liquid or mixtures are stored or kept, except stationary or
fixed tanks, tank vehicles and tank cars. “Closed container” means a container
sealed by a lid, attached pump or other device.
   (b)   “Retail store” means a store or mercantile establishment in which
flammable liquids are sold direct to consumers in containers usually portable,
and usually in small quantities.
   (c)   “Jobber” means a person, firm or corporation which sells flammable
liquids at wholesale and usually in large quantities.
   (d)   “Paint and oil store” means a store or mercantile establishment in
which paints, varnishes, oils or other flammable liquids used in painting and
finishing are stored, handled and sold at retail.
   (e)   “Painter” means a person, firm or corporation handling and mixing
paints, varnishes, oils or other flammable liquids to be used in painting and
finishing by himself or herself or his or her employees on premises other than
those occupied by him or her.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 383.04 Conditions Requiring Permits
   (a)   No permit shall be required for the temporary storage of paints, oils,
varnishes or similar mixtures while being used in painting or refinishing a
building or other structure and stored therein for a period not exceeding
thirty (30) days, in quantities not exceeding that required for one (1) week’s
operations. However, this shall not apply, and permits shall be obtained, for
the storing of paints, oils and varnishes kept for maintenance operations.
   (b)   No permit shall be required by an owner, occupant or agent of an owner
or occupant, for the use of paints, oils, varnishes and similar mixtures in
painting or finishing premises owned or occupied by such owner or occupant,
except that a permit shall be required for refinishing bowling alley floors and
similar surfaces in places of assembly when highly flammable liquids are used.
   (c)   Except as provided in subsections (d) and (e) hereof, no permit shall
be required by a painter for the storage, use and handling of flammable liquids
required for his or her trade or business, provided that no such liquids in
excess of those required for the conduct of his or her trade or business are
stored, and none are sold at wholesale or retail or regularly stored by him or
her in buildings of residential occupancy classification or in other locations
where prohibited by this chapter or deemed hazardous to the occupancy by the
Division of Fire. It is provided further that the location of each such place
of storage shall be registered with the Division and the location, quantity and
manner of storing and handling of such flammable liquids, the precautions
against fire and the provisions for fire fighting, shall be subject to the
inspection, order and approval of the Division.
   (d)   A permit shall be required for the regular storage of flammable
liquids in excess of an aggregate of five (5) gallons within any building or on
the premises of any building of residential occupancy, business occupancy,
institutional occupancy, assembly occupancy or educational occupancy
classification.
   (e)   A permit shall be required for the regular storing or handling of
flammable liquids in excess of the following quantities within or outside or on
the premises of any building of industrial occupancy, storage occupancy or high
hazard occupancy classification:
 
Gallons Class Liquid
10      I
25      II
25      III inside building
55      III outside building
 
   (f)   No retail store, jobber, paint and oil store, hardware store, drug
store or other mercantile establishment shall store, handle or sell flammable
liquid unless a permit to do so has been obtained from the Fire Chief, except
that no permit shall be required by a mercantile establishment to store, handle
or sell perfumes, hair tonics, medicinal or toilet preparations or shoe polish,
or similar mixtures intended for domestic or household use.
   (g)   Every certificate of occupancy issued after June 27, 1949, shall state
the quantity, character, location and method of storage of flammable liquid
permitted on the premises as approved by the Chief. A new certificate of
occupancy shall be obtained whenever there is any increase in the quantity, or
substantial change in the character, location or method of storage of flammable
liquid on such premises.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 383.05 Storage Limitations when Not in Fire- Resistive Rooms
   (a)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to buildings, each
occupied by one (1) tenant and used for the manufacturing or processing of
flammable liquid, provided such buildings are adequately isolated from other
premises and do not present a conflagration hazard to the community.
   (b)   In applying the provisions of this section, each part of a building
which is separated from all other parts by construction having a fire
resistance rating commensurate to the fire load but of not less than one (1)
hour may be deemed to be a separate building, and each such part may contain
the maximum quantities hereinafter specified.
   (c)   Except as provided in subsections (a) and (b) hereof, or in Section
383.17, or as may be further limited or restricted by this Fire Prevention
Code, the maximum quantity of flammable liquid stored or kept in containers in
buildings and not stored or kept in rooms conforming to the provisions of
Section 3129.43(c), or stored or kept in stationary or fixed tanks conforming
to the applicable provisions of this chapter, shall be as follows: (Chapters
3125 to
3131 shall govern limits and restrictions applicable to occupancies other than
high hazard occupancy.)
      (1)   Class I Liquid.
         A.   In buildings of Type IV, wood construction: in the Inner or Outer
Fire District, none; in the Urban District, an aggregate of ten (10) gallons in
sealed containers or safety cans of not more than one (1) gallon capacity each;
         B.   In buildings of Type I, fireproof, Type II, incombustible, or
Type III, exterior protected construction: an aggregate of fifty (50) gallons
in sealed containers or safety cans of not more than one (1) gallon capacity
each.
      (2)   Class II Liquid.
         A.   In buildings of Type IV, wood construction: in the Inner or Outer
Fire District, none; in the Urban District an aggregate of fifty (50) gallons
in sealed containers or safety cans of not more than five (5) gallons capacity
each;
         B.   In buildings of Type I, fireproof, Type II, incombustible or Type
III, exterior protected construction: an aggregate of sixty (60) gallons in
sealed containers or safety cans of not more than five (5) gallons capacity
each or barrels or drums not exceeding sixty (60) gallons capacity each.
      (3)   Class III Liquid. In buildings of any type of construction; an
aggregate of three thousand (3,000) gallons in sealed containers or safety cans
not exceeding five (5) gallons capacity each or barrels or drums not exceeding
sixty (60) gallons capacity each.
      (4)   Substitution of Liquids of Higher Flash Point. Class II or III
liquid, in the same quantity, may be substituted for the permitted quantity of
Class I liquid, and Class III liquid, in the same quantity, for the permitted
quantity of Class II liquid. When substitutions are made, the maximum size of
container may correspond to that permitted for storage of the class of liquid
substituted.
   (d)   Flammable liquid in excess of the quantities given above or contained
within containers exceeding the capacities specified above shall be stored
either within rooms conforming to the provisions of Section 3129.43(c), or
stored in aboveground or underground tanks as prescribed in this chapter,
Chapters
385 and
3129, or stored in approved separate storage houses approved for such storage,
or in drums or barrels stored outdoors in an approved isolated location.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 383.06 Storage in Dwellings and Row Houses
   (a)   Flammable liquid with flash point of ninety degrees Fahrenheit (90°F)
or less shall not be stored or used in dwelling houses or row houses in
quantities aggregating more than five (5) gallons, and all such liquid shall be
in containers not exceeding one (1) gallon capacity. Containers shall be kept
tightly sealed when not in actual use.
   (b)   Sections
385.73(h) to (m) and 3155.32 shall govern the storage and use of fuel oil and
the installation of oil-fired appliances and equipment.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 383.07 Storage in Garages
   The storing and handling of flammable liquids in garages and the application
of flammable finishes shall be done in conformity with the applicable
provisions of this chapter and Chapter
385.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 383.08 Storage in Multiple Dwellings
   (a)   No use or occupancy classified as high hazard occupancy shall be
contained within any multiple dwelling, except that paint and oil stores,
liquor stores and other retail stores of similar hazard may be permitted when
separated from other occupancies in the building by approved occupancy
separations, and when a permit for such use is issued by the Fire Chief and a
certificate of occupancy therefor is issued by the Commissioner of Building.
   (b)   The provisions of this subsection apply to the storage of flammable
liquid in parts of multiple dwellings classified as residential occupancy. The
storage of flammable liquids in mercantile occupancies within such multiple
dwellings shall be subject to the provisions of Section
383.17.
   (c)   No flammable liquid, in excess of an aggregate of five (5) gallons
shall be stored without a permit from the Division of Fire. Flammable liquid
with a flash point of ninety degrees Fahrenheit (90°F) or less shall be in
containers not exceeding one (1) gallon capacity. Containers of flammable
liquid shall be kept tightly sealed when not in use.
   (d)   Flammable liquid, including paint, stored in excess of such aggregate
of five (5) gallons, shall be stored and used in conformity with the provisions
of this chapter. Except as otherwise provided for the storage of fuel oil, all
storage of flammable liquids in excess of an aggregate of five (5) gallons
shall be within rooms or spaces contained within incombustible walls or
partitions having a fire resistance rating of not less than one and one-half
(1-1/2) hours with openings protected with self-closing doors having a fire
resistance rating of not less than one and one-half (1-1/2) hours. Ceilings of
such rooms or spaces shall have a fire resistance rating of not less than one
(1) hour.
   (e)   Except as provided in subsection (d) hereof, each such storage room or
space shall conform to the provisions of Section 3129.43(c).
   (f)   Sections
385.73 and 3155.22 shall govern the storage and use of fuel oil and the
installation of oil- fired appliances and equipment.
   (g)   All flammable liquid stored within any multiple dwelling shall be
stored only in conformity with the provisions of subsections (b) to (f) hereof.
(Ord. No. 341-A-55. Passed 6-27-55, eff. 7-1-55)
§ 383.09 Storage in Business Occupancy
   (a)   The provisions of this section apply to the storage of flammable
liquids in parts of buildings classified as of business occupancy. The storage
of flammable liquids in mercantile occupancies shall conform to the provisions
of Section
383.17.
   (b)   No flammable liquid in excess of an aggregate of five (5) gallons
shall be stored without a permit from the Division of Fire. Flammable liquid
with a flash point of 90° F or less shall be in containers not exceeding one
(1) gallon capacity. Containers of flammable liquid shall be kept tightly
sealed when not in use.
   (c)   Flammable liquid, including paint, stored in excess of an aggregate of
five (5) gallons, shall be stored and used in conformity with the provisions of
this chapter, and Sections
381.05,
385.35,
391.29 and 3129.34 to 3129.50. Except as otherwise provided in the Fire
Prevention and Building Codes for the storage of fuel oil, all storage of
flammable liquids in excess of an aggregate of five (5) gallons shall be within
rooms or spaces contained within incombustible walls or partitions having a
fire resistance rating of not less than one and one-half (1-1/2) hours with
openings protected with self-closing doors having a fire resistance rating of
not less than one and one-half (1-1/2) hours. Ceilings of such rooms or spaces
shall have a fire resistance rating of not less than one (1) hour.
   (d)   Except as provided in subsection (c) hereof, each such storage room or
space shall conform to the provisions of Section 3129.43(c).
   (e)   Sections
385.73(a) to (g) and 3155.32 shall govern the storage and use of fuel oil and
the installation of oil fired appliances.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 383.10 Storage in Mercantile Occupancy
   (a)   Sections
383.04,
383.17,
385.63 and
385.64 shall govern the storage and handling of flammable liquids and pyroxylin
products within buildings and parts of buildings of mercantile occupancy
classification.
   (b)   Storage rooms and spaces for the storage of flammable liquid shall
conform to the provisions of Section 3129.43(c). Except when lesser fire
resistance rating is specifically approved by the Commissioner of Building for
storage not exceeding a fire load of ten (10) pounds per square foot, such
rooms or spaces shall be enclosed within incombustible walls or partitions
having a fire resistance rating of not less than one and one-half (1-1/2) hours
with openings protected with self-closing doors having a fire resistance rating
of not less than one and one-half (1-1/2) hours, and ceilings of such rooms or
spaces shall have a fire resistance rating of not less than one (1) hour.
   (c)   The storage and handling of flammable liquid at service stations shall
conform to the applicable provisions of this chapter. Gasoline storage at
service stations shall be in approved underground tanks.
   (d)   Sections
385.73(a) to (g) and 3155.32 shall govern the storage and use of fuel oil and
the installation of oil-fired appliances.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 383.11 Storage in Storage Occupancy
   (a)   No flammable liquid in excess of the quantities specified in Section
383.04(e) shall be stored in any building or part of a building of storage
occupancy classification without a permit from the Fire Division. Sections
381.05,
385.35,
391.29 and 3129.34 to 3129.50 shall govern permits required for storing other
hazardous substances.
   (b)   When issuing permits for the storage of flammable liquid and other
hazardous substances, the Fire Chief may prescribe maximum quantities, maximum
height at which such material may be stored and other conditions necessary for
safety or efficient fire fighting.
   (c)   Storage of any of the hazardous substances listed in Section 3129.34
shall be in substantial conformity with the provisions for such storage
included in Sections
381.05,
385.35,
391.29 and 3129.34 to 3129.50.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 383.12 Storage in Industrial Occupancy
   (a)   No flammable liquid in excess of the quantities specified in Section
383.04(e) shall be stored in any building or part of a building of industrial
occupancy classification without a permit from the Fire Division. Sections
381.05,
385.35,
391.29 and 3129.34 to 3129.50 shall govern permits required for storing or
handling other hazardous substances.
   (b)   Storing or handling of any of the hazardous substances listed in
Section 3129.34 shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter,
Chapters
385 and
3129.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 383.13 Storage in Institutional Occupancy
   (a)   No flammable liquid in excess of an aggregate of five (5) gallons
shall be stored in any building of institutional occupancy classification
without a permit from the Division of Fire.
   (b)   Flammable liquid, including paint, stored in excess of an aggregate of
five (5) gallons, and all flammable or explosive gases, and all gases which
support combustion or promote oxidation such as oxygen and nitrous oxide, shall
be stored and used in conformity with the applicable provisions of Sections
381.05,
385.35,
391.29 and 3129.34 to 3129.50. Except as otherwise provided in the Fire
Prevention and Building Codes for the storage of fuel oil, all such storage
shall be within rooms or spaces contained within incombustible walls or
partitions having a fire resistance rating of not less than one and one-half
(1-1/2) hours with openings protected with self-closing doors having a fire
resistance rating of not less than one and one-half (1-1/2) hours. Ceilings of
such rooms or spaces shall have a fire resistance rating of not less than one
(1) hour.
   (c)   Except as provided in subsection (b) hereof, each such storage room or
space shall conform to the provisions of Section 3129.43(c).
   (d)   Flammable or explosive liquids or gases shall be stored in separate
rooms from oxygen and oxidizing agents.
   (e)   Flammable gases, other than illuminating gas, and including hydrogen,
ether and other flammable or explosive anesthetics; all gases which support
combustion or promote oxidation or are flammable or explosive when combined
with other gases, and all gases under pressure, shall be stored within
cylinders conforming to the requirements of the Interstate Commerce Commission
and bearing the ICC label. All such containers shall be clearly marked to
indicate the gases contained within them. All cylinders, except those
containing low pressure oxygen, shall have approved regulators or other
approved gas flow control devices. No equipment shall be used which might
result in the intermixing of different gases from various cylinders by an error
in manipulation.
   (f)   Cylinders containing flammable, explosive or oxidizing gases shall be
removed from the storage room or space only as needed for immediate use.
   (g)   Every room in which flammable gases are administered as anesthetics
shall have provisions for mechanical ventilation which will provide not less
than twelve (12) air changes per hour and will maintain a temperature of not
less than seventy degrees Fahrenheit (70°F) and a relative humidity of not less
than fifty percent (50%). All air exhausted from such rooms shall be discharged
outdoors and none shall be recirculated.
   (h)   Every room in which flammable gases are administered as anesthetics
shall have an approved floor of conductive material, or an approved floor
equipped with a conductive grid, properly grounded, to draw off charges of
static electricity from objects and persons thereon.
   (i)   Electrical equipment in rooms where flammable gases are administered
as anesthetics shall be explosion-proof and shall conform to the applicable
provisions of Chapter 3161.
   (j)   No open flames, and no device equipped with gas burners, shall be
installed or maintained within any room in which flammable gases are
administered as anesthetics.
   (k)   Section
385.73(a) to (g) shall govern the storage and use of fuel oil and the
installation of oil- fired appliances.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 383.14 Storage in Assembly Occupancy
   (a)   No flammable liquid in excess of an aggregate of five (5) gallons
shall be stored in any building of assembly occupancy classification without a
permit from the Division of Fire. No flammable liquid in any quantity shall be
kept or stored in any location where deemed hazardous by the Fire Chief. No
flammable liquid shall be contained within the fuel tank of any motor vehicle
placed on exhibition in a place of public assembly.
   (b)   No flammable gas of any kind whether natural gas, manufactured gas or
compressed gas, shall be stored or used in any part of a building of assembly
occupancy classification accessible to the public, or in any room or space of
assembly occupancy, except for the preparation of food in kitchens where
adequate approved and independent means of natural or mechanical ventilation
are provided, or for heating by means of properly vented approved appliances,
or for special necessary purposes when approved by the Commissioner of
Building.
   (c)   Bowling pin finishing or refinishing operations shall be performed
only in separate rooms used only for that purpose conforming to the provisions
of Section 3129.43(c), except that the fire resistance rating of walls and
partitions shall be not less than one and one-half (1-1/2) hours, and of floors
and ceiling construction not less than one (1) hour.
   (d)   No flammable liquid shall be used for refinishing within any building
or part of a building of assembly occupancy classification at a time when any
part of the building is in use by the public, and no such building shall again
be used by the public until all flammable vapor and dust have been removed.
   (e)   Sections
385.73(a) to (g) and 3155.32 shall govern the storage and use of fuel oil and
the installation of oil-fired appliances.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 383.15 Storage in Educational Occupancy
   (a)   No flammable liquid in excess of an aggregate of five (5) gallons
shall be stored in any building of educational occupancy classification without
a permit from the Division of Fire.
   (b)   Flammable liquid, including paint, stored in excess of an aggregate of
five (5) gallons, and all flammable or explosive gases, and all gases which
support combustion or promote oxidation, such as oxygen, shall be stored and
used in conformity with the applicable provisions of Sections
381.05,
385.35,
391.29 and 3129.34 to 3129.50. Except as otherwise provided in the Fire
Prevention and Building Codes for the storage of fuel oil, all such storage
shall be within rooms or spaces contained within incombustible walls or
partitions having a fire resistance rating of not less than one and one-half
(1-1/2) hours with openings protected with self-closing doors having a fire
resistance rating of not less than one and one-half (1-1/2) hours. Ceilings of
such rooms or spaces shall have a fire resistance rating of not less than one
(1) hour.
   (c)   Except as provided in subsection (b) hereof, each such storage room or
space shall conform to the provisions of Section 3129.43(c).
   (d)   Flammable or explosive liquids or gases shall be stored in separate
rooms from oxygen and oxidizing agents.
   (e)   Flammable gases, other than illuminating gas, and including acetylene
and other flammable or explosive gases, all gases which support combustion or
promote oxidation or are flammable or explosive when combined with other gases,
and all gases under pressure, shall be stored within cylinders conforming to
the requirements of the Interstate Commerce Commission and bearing the ICC
label. All such containers shall be clearly marked to indicate the gases
contained within them. All cylinders, except those containing low pressure
oxygen, shall have approved regulators or other approved gas flow control
devices. No equipment shall be used which might result in the intermixing of
different gases from various cylinders by an error in manipulation.
   (f)   Cylinders containing flammable, explosive or oxidizing gases shall be
removed from the storage room or space only as needed for immediate use.
   (g)   Sections
385.73(a) to (g) and 3155.32 shall govern the storage and use of fuel oil and
the installation of oil-fired appliances.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 383.16 Storage During Demolition or Building Moving
   The storage of flammable liquids shall be limited to the amount necessary
for immediate use, and they shall be stored and handled in a safe and approved
manner. Flammable liquids with flash point less than ninety degrees Fahrenheit
(90°F) and in excess of one (1) day’s supply shall be stored in approved
standard storage cabinets conforming to the provisions of Section 3129.43(d).
Flammable finishing material in excess of that required for three (3) days’
operations shall be stored in approved fire resistive rooms for storing or
handling hazardous substances substantially conforming to the provisions of
Section 3129.43(c).
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 383.17 Storage in Stores and Mercantile Establishments
   (a)   Maximum Quantity. The storage of flammable liquids within the sales
space of any retail store, paint and oil store or other mercantile
establishment shall not exceed the limits set in Section
383.05, and shall not exceed the following quantities in any one (1)
establishment or fire area:
      (1)   The aggregate quantity of flammable liquid with flash point less
than ninety degrees Fahrenheit (90°F) shall not exceed one hundred (100)
gallons and of this quantity not more than one-half (1/2) shall be liquid with
flash point of twenty-five degrees (25°F) or less.
      (2)   The aggregate quantity of flammable liquid with flash point of
ninety degrees Fahrenheit (90°F) or more shall not exceed three thousand
(3,000) gallons.
   (b)   Material and Size of Containers. In retail stores, paint and oil
stores, hardware stores, drugstores and other mercantile establishments,
flammable liquids within the sales space, and all Class I liquids in any
location, shall be stored, handled and sold in sealed containers conforming to
the following requirements:
      (1)   Liquids with flash point of fifty degrees Fahrenheit (50°F) or less
shall be in metal or other approved incombustible nonfragile containers not
exceeding one (1) gallon in size except that glass containers not exceeding one
(1) quart in size may be used for shellac and other flammable liquids with a
flash point more than twenty-five degrees Fahrenheit (25°F) which are shown to
be unstable when stored in metal containers, and except that glass containers
not exceeding four (4) ounce capacity may be used for flammable liquid
irrespective of flash point.
      (2)   Flammable liquids with flash point of fifty degrees Fahrenheit
(50°F) or more shall be in metal or other approved incombustible nonfragile
containers not exceeding five (5) gallons capacity except that flammable
liquids with a flash point of ninety degrees Fahrenheit (90°F) or more may be
in glass containers not exceeding one (1) gallon capacity.
   (c)   Storage in Fire-Resistive Storage Rooms. Storage of flammable liquid
in excess of the quantities specified in subsection (a) hereof, and storage of
flammable liquid in metal containers or other approved incombustible containers
exceeding the capacities specified in subsection (b) hereof, but not exceeding
sixty (60) gallon capacity, shall be either within rooms conforming to the
provisions of Section 3129.43(c), or in aboveground or underground tanks as
prescribed in this chapter and Chapters
385 and
3129, or in approved separate storage houses approved for such storage, or in
drums or barrels stored outdoors in an approved isolated location. Class I
liquids stored within such fire- resistive rooms shall be in sealed containers
not exceeding the sizes specified in subsection (b)(1) hereof.
   (d)   Dispensing.
      (1)   The provisions of this subsection (d) shall not apply to the mixing
or compounding of medicines by a registered pharmacist.
      (2)   Except as provided in subsections (d)(1) and (4) hereof, there
shall be no dispensing of flammable liquid by drawing into a container within
the sales space of any retail store, paint and oil store, hardware store,
drugstore or other mercantile establishment.
      (3)   Any Class I liquid stored or handled within the sales space of any
retail store, paint and oil store, hardware store, drugstore or other
mercantile establishment shall be in sealed containers, and none shall be
dispensed or transferred from one (1) container to another except as provided
in subsection (d)(1) hereof.
      (4)   Flammable anti-freeze liquid with a flash point of fifty degrees
Fahrenheit (50°F) or more, and Class III liquid, may be dispensed in the rooms
of a service station building, provided there is no open flame which is less
than eight (8) feet above the floor level within the room where dispensing of
flammable liquid with a flash point of one hundred degrees Fahrenheit (100°F)
or less is done, or within the range of vapor flow from containers of flammable
liquid with flash point of one hundred degrees Fahrenheit (100°F) or less, and
provided no container of flammable liquid with flash point of one hundred
degrees Fahrenheit (100°F)or less in such room exceeds sixty (60) gallon
capacity.
      (5)   Flammable liquid with a flash point of ninety degrees Fahrenheit
(90°F) or more, such as kerosene or turpentine, and flammable anti-freeze with
a flash point of fifty degrees Fahrenheit (50°F) or more, may be dispensed
within a retail store, paint and oil store, hardware store, drugstore or other
mercantile establishment if the dispensing or drawing of such liquid is done
within a room, separate from the sales space, provided with approved natural or
mechanical ventilation adequate to prevent fire and health hazards and enclosed
in partitions, floor and ceiling construction and self-closing doors having a
fire resistance rating of not less than three-fourths (3/4) hour, and provided
further that there is no source of ignition which is less than eight (8) feet
above the floor level within the room where dispensing is done or within the
range of vapor flow, and no container within such room exceeds sixty (60)
gallon capacity.
      (6)   The floor surface in any such dispensing room shall be of
incombustible material.
      (7)   All withdrawal from containers exceeding ten (10) gallon capacity
shall be done by means of approved pumps. No withdrawal from such containers
shall be by operation of a pressure or gravity system.
   (e)   Construction Requirements.
      (1)   Every retail store, paint and oil store, hardware store, drugstore
or other mercantile establishment in which flammable liquid is stored, handled
and sold, contained within any building of residential occupancy
classification, shall be separated from other occupancies in the same building
by an occupancy separation having a fire resistance rating of not less than
three-fourths (3/4) hour.
      (2)   Whenever any basement or cellar in any retail store, paint and oil
store, hardware store, drugstore or other mercantile establishment is used for
storing, handling or selling flammable liquid, the floor construction above
such basement or cellar shall have a fire resistance rating of not less than
three-fourths (3/4) hour.
      (3)   There shall be not less than two (2) approved means of egress from
the sales area of all retail stores, paint and oil stores, hardware stores,
drugstores or other mercantile establishments storing in excess of an aggregate
of three hundred (300) gallons of flammable liquid in the sales area.
   (f)   Labeling. All containers in which flammable liquid is sold to the
retail trade or for domestic or household use shall have a warning label or
marking. Such warning label or marking shall conform to nationally recognized
standards therefor approved by the Division of Fire.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 383.18 Storage in Fire-Resistive Storage Rooms
   (a)   Flammable liquid stored within fire resistive storage rooms and not
stored in approved stationary or fixed storage tanks shall be within approved
containers or safety cans not exceeding sixty (60) gallon capacity. No open
containers shall be permitted and caps, plugs and bungs shall be in place and
containers closed except when being filled or emptied. A container with an
attached approved dispensing pump shall be deemed to be a closed container.
   (b)   Containers shall be stored on or in suitable incombustible racks or
cabinets, or shall be stored on racks of wood heavily treated so as to make
them fire- resistant, or shall be stored on suitable approved open strip-type
pallets or dunnage which may be of untreated wood. All storage shall be so
arranged that Fire Division access for fire fighting purposes shall not be
obstructed and so that efficient operation of any automatic fire extinguishing
system shall not be prevented. No containers shall be stored by being piled one
on top of another without provisions for maintaining the piles in a stable
condition by the use of pallets or other suitable supports.
   (c)   Whenever practicable, withdrawal from containers or from stationary or
fixed tanks shall be by pumping. Incombustible drip pans shall be provided to
catch all drip or overflow.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 383.19 Storage and Handling of Class I and Class II Liquids
   (a)   Bulk storage of Class I liquid shall be in underground storage tanks
or in outdoor aboveground storage tanks, except that outdoor aboveground
storage tanks shall not be installed at gasoline service stations or garages.
Storage in containers shall conform to the limitations specified in Sections
383.05,
383.17,
383.18 and
383.27.
   (b)   No outlet from a discharge system from a stationary or fixed tank for
storing or handling Class I or Class II liquid shall be within a building
unless such discharge outlet is within a room which conforms to the provisions
of Section 3129.43(c), or is connected to an approved system of piping equipped
with approved manual and automatic safety devices which will prevent the
continued flow of liquid in case of fire or breakage of piping.
   (c)   Except as provided in subsection (d) hereof, no containers exceeding
five (5) gallon capacity shall be opened or used in buildings not devoted
primarily to the manufacturing or processing of flammable liquid, except within
a room conforming to the provisions of Section 3129.43(c).
   (d)   In manufacturing plants, where necessary for the processes involved,
and in garages, the Fire Chief may authorize the storing and handling of Class
I and Class II liquids in portable wheeled tanks conforming to Class C of NFPA
Standard No. 30 entitled “Flammable and Combustible Liquids Code” or in closed
containers not exceeding sixty (60) gallon capacity. In plants devoted
primarily to the manufacture or processing of flammable liquid the Chief may
authorize the handling of Class I or Class II flammable liquid in approved
covered portable or wheeled containers not exceeding one hundred fifty (150)
gallon capacity.
   (e)   So far as practicable, the use of flammable liquids shall be from
approved safety cans or by pumping from sealed containers.
   (f)   Flammable liquid in kettles, vats or tanks and being processed in a
plant which processes or manufactures flammable liquid shall not be deemed to
be in storage.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 383.20 Tanks for Class I or Class II Liquid Buried Within Buildings
   (a)   No storage tank for Class I or Class II liquid shall be buried within
a building except under special permit from the Division of Fire, and no such
permit shall be issued where such tank can practicably be located on the
premises outside the building.
   (b)   No storage tank for Class I or Class II liquid shall be buried within
a building except in buildings of storage occupancy, high hazard occupancy or
industrial occupancy classification, and all such storage tanks shall be so
located and protected as to present the minimum practicable hazard to the
occupants.
   (c)   In such buildings, two (2) storage tanks for Class I or Class II
liquid, not exceeding five thousand (5,000) gallon aggregate capacity, may be
installed under a concrete floor construction at the lowest floor level
provided they are so located and installed that any seepage or leakage
therefrom will not drain into the basements or cellars of adjacent properties.
   (d)   All tanks buried within buildings shall be not less than three (3)
feet below the floor, measured from the top of the tank to the floor level
directly above.
   (e)   The floor directly above such tanks, and for a distance of not less
than two (2) feet on all sides above such tanks, shall be of reinforced
concrete not less than six (6) inches in thickness, properly constructed and
anchored to the floor construction to resist uplift.
   (f)   Gauge openings of such tanks shall be protected against vapor release
and liquid overflow by means of spring loaded check valves, and against vapor
release by extending the gauge wells to within three (3) inches of the bottoms
of the tanks. All such tanks shall have approved fill and vent connections
extended to an approved outdoor location.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 383.21 Storage Tanks for Class III Liquids Within Buildings
   (a)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to buildings each
occupied by one (1) tenant and used for the processing or manufacturing of
flammable liquid, provided such buildings are adequately isolated from other
premises and do not present a conflagration hazard to the community.
   (b)   Except as provided in subsection (a) hereof, tanks for Class III
liquid larger than sixty (60) gallon capacity shall not be located above the
lowest story of any building. No inside storage tank for Class III liquid shall
be located within seven (7) feet horizontally of any open flame.
   (c)   In buildings of Class III, exterior protected construction, or Class
IV, wood construction, the nominal aggregate capacity of such tanks for Class
III liquid shall not exceed five thousand (5,000) gallons unless installed as
provided in subsection (e) hereof.
   (d)   In buildings of Class I, fireproof, or Class II, incombustible
construction, the nominal aggregate capacity of such tanks for Class III liquid
shall not exceed fifteen thousand (15,000) gallons unless installed as provided
in subsection (e) hereof.
   (e)   In any building, if within or buried below a fire-resistive detached
room cut off vertically and horizontally in an approved manner by means of an
incombustible separation having a fire resistance rating of not less than four
(4) hours, the nominal aggregate capacity of such tanks for Class III liquid
shall not exceed fifty thousand (50,000) gallons, with no individual tank
capacity extending twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallon capacity. Such room
shall be so constructed and openings to such room shall be so located that the
room will serve as a dike to retain any leakage or seepage.
   (f)   Except as provided in subsection (a) hereof, tanks for Class III
liquid located inside buildings shall not exceed two hundred seventy-five (275)
gallons individual capacity or five hundred fifty (550) gallons aggregate
capacity in one (1) building or fire area unless installed at least three (3)
feet below a concrete floor of the lowest floor level, or installed in the
lowest story within or below a fire-resistive detached room as provided in
subsection (a) hereof, or in an enclosure or casing constructed as follows:
      (1)   The walls of the enclosure shall be constructed of reinforced
concrete at least six (6) inches thick or of brickwork at least eight (8)
inches thick, and shall be bonded to the floor. The space between the tank and
the enclosure shall be completely filled with sand or well tamped earth. When
the floor or other construction immediately above the tank is of fire-resistive
construction capable of safely sustaining a load of one hundred fifty (150)
pounds per square foot, the walls of the enclosure shall be carried to a height
not less than one (1) foot above the tank and the space above the tank filled
with sand or well tamped earth to the top of the wall; otherwise the enclosure
shall have a top of reinforced concrete at least five (5) inches thick, or a
top of equivalent construction.
      (2)   Instead of the enclosure described in subsection (f)(1) hereof, the
tank may be encased in reinforced concrete not less than six (6) inches in
thickness, applied directly to the tank so as to completely eliminate any air
space.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 383.22 Underground Tanks Outside Buildings
   (a)   Underground tanks outside buildings used for the storage of flammable
liquid shall conform to the provisions of this section.
   (b)   Individual underground tanks for flammable liquid located outside of
buildings shall not exceed thirty thousand (30,000) gallon capacity.
   (c)   The distance from any underground tank outside buildings to a lot line
or a building shall be not less than three (3) feet.
   (d)   No underground tank for liquid with flash point of one hundred degrees
Fahrenheit (100°F) or less shall be installed under any street, alley or other
public thoroughfare.
   (e)   The shells of underground storage tanks for Class I or Class II
flammable liquid shall be located not less than three (3) feet horizontally
from the nearest outside wall of any basement, pit or cellar with floor lower
in elevation than the top of such tank, except that a lesser distance may be
approved when the tank is enclosed, encased or otherwise protected against
injury in an approved manner. Where deemed necessary by the Division of Fire to
provide a means of guarding against leakage, tanks for such liquids shall be
encircled by a line of open-jointed or perforated drainage tile laid in an
approved manner in porous material at a level below the lowest adjoining tank,
with inspection wells extending from the drainage tile to the grade level,
where directed by the Division. Such inspection wells shall have tight-fitting,
easily removable plugs or caps at the grade level.
   (f)   The distance between underground tanks shall be not less than two (2)
feet.
   (g)   Tanks buried underground outside buildings shall have the top of the
tank below the level of any piping to which the tanks may be connected and not
less than three (3) feet below the surface of the ground, except that:
      (1)   In lieu of three (3) feet earth cover, tanks may be buried under
twenty-four (24) inches of earth plus a slab of reinforced concrete not less
than six (6) inches in thickness extending at least one (1) foot beyond the
shell of the tank in all directions.
      (2)   When tanks are buried under driveways, the total coverage shall be
not less than three (3) feet when the uppermost six (6) inches of such coverage
is reinforced concrete extending at least one (1) foot beyond the shell of the
tanks in all directions, and four (4) feet total coverage in other cases.
   (h)   Where a tank located outside of buildings cannot be entirely buried,
it shall be covered over with earth to a depth of at least three (3) feet. Any
sloped surfaces of earth cover shall not be steeper than the angle of repose of
the cover material.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 383.23 Installation of Underground Tanks
   (a)   Underground tanks shall be bedded in and surrounded by approved
noncorrosive backfill, such as clean sand. Clay or cinder backfill shall not be
used. Where concrete paving is the finished surface above a tank, such concrete
shall be placed upon well tamped backfill. All underground tanks shall be so
located and installed as not to endanger any foundation.
   (b)   No underground storage tank or piping thereto shall be backfilled or
covered until it has been inspected and approved by an authorized
representative of the Division of Fire. A request for inspection shall be made
when the work is ready for inspection and such inspection shall be made within
two (2) working days after receipt of such request by the Division.
   (c)   Where subsurface water conditions exist or are likely to develop,
tanks shall be securely anchored or weighted to prevent floating.
   (d)   Piping to or from underground tanks shall be pitched to drain back to
the tanks and all such piping installed outside buildings and carrying
flammable liquid shall, unless otherwise specifically approved by the Fire
Chief, be installed underground with sufficient cover for protection from
damage.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 383.24 Above-Ground Storage in Tanks of Class I, II or III Liquid
   (a)   The location of tanks for above-ground storage of flammable liquid
shall conform to the following requirements:
      (1)   Minimum Distance to Common Property Lines. The distance from a tank
to a common property line shall be not less than the diameter or height of the
tank, whichever is greater, but shall not be less than the following distances.
However, when adjoining premises are used for a similar purpose, the Fire Chief
may permit storage arranged as permitted when such premises are in one (1)
ownership.
 
Capacity of Tank (Gallons) Minimum Distance to Common Property Line (Feet)
Up to 1,100                5
1,101 to 15,000            10
15,001 to 30,000           20
Over 30,000                30
 
      (2)   Minimum Distance to Building on Same Premises. The distance from a
tank to a building on the same premises as the tank shall be not less than the
diameter or height of the tank, whichever is greater; but shall in no case be
less than twenty (20) feet or less than the height of the building, whichever
is greater, when the building is used for the processing or manufacturing of
flammable liquid or other highly flammable or explosive products; or less than
ten (10) feet or one-half (1/2) the height of the building, whichever is
greater, in other cases.
      (3)   Minimum Distance to Street, Alley or Other Public Thoroughfare. The
distance from a tank to a street line, alley line or property line abutting a
public thoroughfare, shall be such that the tank shall be distant from all
premises on the opposite sides of such streets, alleys or public thoroughfares
a distance equal to the diameter or height of the tank, whichever is greater;
provided that no tank shall be less than ten (10) feet from a street line,
alley line or property line abutting a public thoroughfare, or less than thirty
(30) feet from premises on the opposite side of such street, alley or public
thoroughfare.
      (4)   Minimum Distance to Railroad.
         A.   The distance from a tank to a railroad main track over which
passenger trains or cars or through freight trains operate shall not be less
than the distance to a common property line specified in subsection (a)(1)
hereof.
         B.   The distance from a tank to the right-of-way of a railroad shall
be not less than one-half (1/2) the diameter or height of the tank, whichever
is greater, but shall be not less than ten (10) feet.
      (5)   Maximum Number of Tanks in One (1) Group or Battery. Not more than
six (6) tanks shall be included in one (1) group or battery.
      (6)   Minimum Distance Between Tanks.
         A.   The grouping of tanks shall be such that each tank shall be
accessible on at least one (1) side or end for fire fighting. The minimum clear
ground level distance deemed to provide such accessibility shall be twenty (20)
feet.
         B.   The minimum clear distance between separate groups or batteries
of tanks shall be not less than twice the diameter or height, whichever is
greater, of the largest tank abutting on such clear distance; except that when
such required distance exceeds forty (40) feet the minimum clear distance shall
not be required to be more than one and one-half (1-1/2) times the diameter or
height, whichever is greater, of the largest tank abutting on such clear
distance.
         C.   The minimum distance between adjacent tanks in the same group or
battery with capacities not exceeding thirty thousand (30,000) gallon each
shall be three (3) feet.
         D.   Except as permitted in subsection (a)(6)C. hereof, the minimum
distance between adjacent tanks in the same group or battery of capacities up
to five hundred thousand (500,000) gallons shall be one-half (1/2) the diameter
or height of the larger tank, whichever is greater; and three-fourths (3/4) the
diameter or height of the larger tank, whichever is greater, for tanks
exceeding five hundred thousand (500,000) gallon capacity.
      (7)   Liquids Subject to Boil-Over. Tanks used for the storage of crude
petroleum or other flammable liquid subject to boil-over, other than gathering
tanks in oil fields, shall be located at distances twice those specified in
subsections (a)(1) to (4) and (6) hereof, provided that such distance shall in
no case be less than fifty (50) feet. Gathering tanks in oil fields shall be
located, constructed, arranged and equipped in conformity with the rules
therefor of the Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals.
   (b)   All above-ground tanks shall be set upon firm foundations and shall be
effectively grounded. Telephone poles or other projections liable to act as
lightning discharge points shall be kept as far as practicable from tanks.
Steel reinforcing of reinforced concrete tanks shall be interconnected and
grounded.
   (c)   Supports for outside above-ground tanks shall be of concrete, masonry
or protected steel having a fire resistance rating of not less than three (3)
hours. Material used for support or for fire protection shall be either weather
resistant or shall be protected against damage by frost or weather action.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 383.25 Fire Extinguishing Equipment for Above- Ground Storage Tanks
   Whenever the capacity of a tank or the aggregate capacity of tanks in one
(1) location and in one (1) ownership exceeds one million (1,000,000) gallons,
such tank or tanks shall be protected by approved fire extinguishing equipment
utilizing foam or other approved extinguishing medium maintained on or adjacent
to the premises by the owner of such tanks. An adequate supply of foam-
producing material or other approved fire-extinguishing material, sufficient to
extinguish a fire in the largest storage tank on the premises, shall be kept
available on the premises at all times.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 383.26 Dikes
   (a)   All above-ground storage tanks for flammable liquid which exceed two
thousand (2,000) gallon individual or aggregate capacity shall be enclosed
within liquid-tight dikes constructed of reinforced concrete, masonry or earth,
except that dike walls shall not be required where the contour of the ground
surface provides the approved equivalent thereof. Earthen dike walls shall have
a flat section at the top not less than thirty-six (36) inches in width, and
shall have slopes consistent with the angle of repose of the material of which
they are constructed. Concrete or masonry dikes shall not be less than thirty
(30) inches in height and earthen dikes shall not be less than three (3) feet
in height. The height of the dike and the distance from the inner surface of
the dike to the shell of the tank shall be such as to assure the scouring
action of the wind and prevent the accumulation of combustible vapors within
the dike. Where ground area permits, the maximum height of the dike walls shall
be four (4) feet, and the maximum height under any conditions shall be six (6)
feet.
   (b)   A dike surrounding a tank used for storing crude petroleum or other
flammable liquid subject to boil-over shall have a capacity not less than one
and one-half (1-1/2) times the capacity of the tank contained within the dike.
   (c)   Tanks containing flammable liquid subject to boil-over shall be
separately and individually diked.
   (d)   When a dike surrounds a tank containing crude petroleum or other
flammable liquid subject to boil-over it shall have, in addition to the
required capacity, suitable copings or deflectors pointing inward constructed
so as to minimize the effect of boil-over waves. Dikes surrounding large crude
oil tanks shall not be less than fifty (50) feet from the shell of the tank
surrounded.
   (e)   A dike surrounding tanks used for storing flammable liquids not
subject to boil-over shall have a capacity equal to that of the largest tank
contained within the dike plus ten percent (10%) of the aggregate capacity of
all other tanks contained within the dike.
   (f)   Whenever tanks are interconnected within the diked area or so
interconnected that they cannot be individually controlled and emptied from a
safe location outside the diked area, such tanks shall be deemed to be one (1)
tank in determining the required capacity of the dike.
   (g)   Up to, but not exceeding six (6) tanks containing flammable liquid not
subject to boil-over may be contained within one (1) dike.
   (h)   Whenever outside above-ground tanks erected prior to June 27, 1949, do
not fully conform to the provisions of this Fire Prevention Code governing
material, construction and equipment of tanks, and such tanks are contained
within one (1) dike, the Fire Chief may require that each tank within the diked
area be isolated from every other tank within such diked area by division walls
arranged to provide a separated space within the dike for each tank. Such
division walls shall be approximately six (6) inches less in height than the
enclosing dike wall. The location, arrangement and height of such division
walls shall be as directed or approved by the Division of Fire.
   (i)   Dike walls and division walls shall have stairs for access to and
egress from the diked areas.
   (j)   Where necessary for the removal of surface or ground water, diked
areas shall have approved provisions for drainage. All drains located within a
diked area which discharge directly or indirectly into the public sewer system
or into natural watercourses shall have shut-off valves, normally kept closed,
installed in the drainage piping at accessible locations outside the diked
area.
   (k)   The surfaces within dikes and around dikes shall be kept free of all
brush and debris.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 383.27 Above-Ground Outdoor Storage of Flammable Liquids in Barrels, Drums or
Other Containers
   (a)   Barrels, drums or other containers containing flammable liquid stored
above-ground outdoors shall not be less than five (5) feet from a common
property line, street line, alley line, property line abutting a public
thoroughfare or railroad right-of-way; nor less than ten (10) feet from any
building wall having a fire resistance rating of less than two (2) hours, nor
less than ten (10) feet from any opening in the exterior wall of a building;
provided that when such containers are arranged in piles, such distance shall
in no case be less than twice the height of the pile. No such barrel, drum or
other container shall be placed under any door, window or other opening in an
exterior wall, and no barrels, drums or other containers shall be piled one on
top of another without provisions for maintaining the piles in a stable
condition by the use of pallets or other suitable supports. No open flame shall
be permitted in any area where such barrels, drums or other containers of
flammable liquid are stored, nor shall any means of access or egress be
obstructed.
   (b)   Such barrels, drums or other containers shall be arranged in groups
separated by aisles not less than twelve (12) feet wide. No group or pile of
barrels or drums shall include more than three hundred twenty (320) barrels or
drums of capacities of sixty (60) gallons each, or other containers aggregating
more than seventeen thousand six hundred (17,600) gallons in capacity, and no
pile shall be more than twelve (12) feet in height above grade level.
   (c)   Unless specifically approved by the Fire Chief, no container stored
outdoors shall exceed sixty (60) gallon capacity, and all such containers shall
be examined daily for signs of leakage. All leaking containers shall be
immediately removed to a safe location and any flammable liquid that may have
been discharged shall be removed or covered with sand or earth.
   (d)   Section
385.74(g) shall govern storage of empty barrels and drums.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 383.28 Materials, Construction and Equipment of Storage Tanks and Containers
   (a)   The materials, construction and equipment of tanks and containers for
storing or handling flammable liquid shall conform to the applicable provisions
of statutes and rules or regulations promulgated by authority of statutes, the
provisions of this Fire Prevention Code and accepted safe practice. When deemed
necessary, the Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals may promulgate
rules or regulations supplementary to this Code to further define accepted safe
practice. In the absence of such rules or regulations, conformity with the
requirements and recommendations of NFPA Standard No. 30 entitled “Flammable
and Combustible liquids Code” for the materials, construction, connections,
piping, venting and protection of tanks and containers for flammable liquids
shall be accepted as conformity with accepted safe practice.
   (b)   When deemed necessary for safety to life or property, the Fire Chief
may require compliance with any requirement or recommendation of NFPA Standard
No. 30.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 383.29 Tank Car and Tank Truck Loading Docks
   (a)   Where liquid with a flash point of one hundred twenty degrees
Fahrenheit (120°F) or less is loaded or unloaded, loading or unloading docks
for tank cars and loading docks for tank trucks shall be located distant from
all sources of ignition and so that the distance from the tank on the car or
truck to buildings other than the dock itself, above-ground storage tanks or to
lot lines, except lot lines that form the inner boundary of a railroad siding
or private siding right-of-way, shall be not less than twenty-five (25) feet.
   (b)   All tank cars and tank trucks shall be effectively grounded when
loading or unloading.
   (c)   Bottom discharge from tank cars of flammable liquid with a flash point
of one hundred twenty degrees Fahrenheit (120°F) or less, when top discharge is
safe and feasible, is prohibited.
   (d)   A thirty (30) pound carbon dioxide first-aid fire extinguisher, or
equivalent first-aid extinguishers approved by the Division of Fire, shall be
provided and maintained available for immediate use at all loading and
unloading docks.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 383.30 Processing Equipment
   Kettles, vats, saturators and other process vessels used in manufacturing
processes, containing more than five (5) gallons of flammable liquid having a
flash point of one hundred degrees Fahrenheit (100°F) or less before, during or
after processing, or in which materials of higher flash point are heated to or
above their flash point, shall not be located within five (5) feet of
combustible material nor within five (5) feet of any exit. All combustible
flooring thereunder within a radius of ten (10) feet shall be protected with
incombustible covering. All kettles and other open process vessels used for
such flammable liquid shall be provided with substantial covers arranged to
close automatically in case of fire, or which can be easily placed in position,
or shall have approved attached automatic fire extinguishing equipment.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 383.31 Processing Room Ventilation
   (a)   Rooms in which Class I or II liquid is used in open vats, pans or
other vessels, or in which Class I, II or III liquid is heated or otherwise
treated in such a manner as to produce flammable vapor, shall be well
ventilated either by ample natural ventilation or by approved mechanical
exhaust ventilation adequate to prevent fire and health hazards and as approved
by the Fire Chief and the Commissioner of Air Pollution Control. Ventilation
shall be such that the percentage of flammable vapor present in any room or
exhaust duct at any time shall not exceed one-fifth (1/5) the lower explosive
limit and that toxicity will be reduced by dilution to a safe concentration.
Exhaust openings shall be located at or adjoining the floor level near each
open receptacle containing such liquid, or near each heated receptacle from
which vapor may escape, and remote from any door or other air inlet.
   (b)   All discharge outlets of vent ducts shall be so located that they will
neither be fire-hazardous to surrounding property nor create a nuisance.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 383.32 Piping, Valves and Pumps
   (a)   Piping used for flammable liquid shall be suitable for the pressure to
which it will be subjected. For working pressures in excess of one hundred
(100) psi, approved heavy fittings shall be used.
   (b)   Before being placed in service, all piping shall be tested at a
pressure not less than twice the pressure to which it will be subjected in use,
and such tests shall be made in the presence of an authorized representative of
the Division of Fire.
   (c)   Defective or leaking piping shall be made tight immediately or
replaced.
   (d)   All piping shall be firmly supported. Outside exposed piping shall be
protected against mechanical injury and shall be so located and arranged or
diked that a break in the piping or leakage will be unlikely to result in
flammable liquid flowing onto adjacent property, streets, alleys,
thoroughfares, railroads, streams or into public sewers or against buildings.
   (e)   All piping and pumps shall be effectively grounded. All flanged
gasketted connections which would otherwise prevent effective grounding of the
pipe shall be jumpered and electrically bonded across the flange. The
resistance to earth of any grounding connection shall not exceed five (5) ohms.
   (f)   Piping carrying flammable liquid with a flash point of one hundred
degrees Fahrenheit (100°F) or less, unless without joints or connections, shall
not extend through any room in which there is an open flame.
   (g)   The ends of filling pipes for underground or inside storage tanks for
flammable liquid with a flash point of one hundred degrees Fahrenheit (100°F)
or less shall be in approved locations outside of any building and not less
than ten (10) feet from any entrance door or cellar opening, and shall be
closed by a tight sealing cap.
   (h)   The terminals of vent pipes from tanks containing flammable liquid
with a flash point of one hundred degrees Fahrenheit (100°F) or less shall be
located outdoors above the liquid level of the highest reservoir from which the
tank may be filled and not less than twelve (12) feet above grade level for
outside underground tanks and not less than twelve (12) feet above the fill
opening for other tanks, shall not discharge downward, and when deemed
necessary by the Fire Chief, shall be equipped with approved flame arresters or
with approved normally-closed vacuum and pressure relief devices.
   (i)   The terminals of vent pipes from tanks containing flammable liquid
with a flash point over one hundred degrees Fahrenheit (100°F) shall be located
in a safe location above the liquid level of the highest reservoir from which
the tank may be filled, and may be equipped with a return bend or approved
weather cap or flame arrester. Unless otherwise specifically approved by the
Chief, such vent terminal shall be located outdoors.
   (j)   All vent pipe terminals located outdoors shall be not less than six
(6) feet from and not directly below any door, window or other opening in the
exterior wall of a building and shall not be located where flammable vapor may
be trapped under eaves or other projections.
   (k)   Deliveries of flammable liquid of Class I or Class II, wherever
practical, shall be made directly to the storage tank through the filling pipe
by means of a hose or pipe between the filling pipe and the barrel, tank truck
or tank car from which such liquid is drawn.
   (l)   Except as permitted in subsection (n) hereof, or by special ruling of
the Chief, flammable liquid shall be drawn for discharge from tanks only by
means of approved pumps so constructed as to prevent leaking or splashing, with
controlling apparatus and piping so arranged as to allow control of the amount
of discharge and prevent leakage. When inside a building, the pump or other
approved drawing-off device for Class I or II liquid shall, wherever
practicable, be above the grade level, and preferably near an entrance or other
source of positive ventilation.
   (m)   Except as permitted in subsection (n) hereof, no tank, drum or other
container inside a building, or discharging inside a building, shall be
provided with a faucet or other bottom-drawing device which will permit the
gravity flow of liquid inside the building, and the discharge pipes shall not
terminate at a point lower than the level of the source of supply.
   (n)   In specific instances, where deemed necessary for the manufacturing
process, the Chief may approve the gravity discharge of flammable liquid in
refineries and in manufacturing or jobbing plants when adequate and approved
safeguards are provided. In any plant, when approved safeguards are provided,
the Chief may also approve the gravity discharge of Class II or Class III
liquid of a nature which does not permit pumping.
   (o)   Where gravity discharge of Class I liquid from tanks or containers
located within a building is permitted, the contents of such tanks or
containers shall be sufficient only for one (1) day’s operations. Such tanks or
containers shall be stored and drawn from in a room conforming to the
applicable provisions of Section 3129.43(c). However, the limitations and
restrictions of this subsection (o) shall not apply in a building adequately
isolated from adjacent buildings and occupied by only one (1) tenant, and used
for manufacturing or processing flammable liquid.
   (p)   All drawing-off pipes from underground tanks and from outside above-
ground tanks terminating inside of any building shall have valves at the
discharge end, and a second valve located at a suitable remote point in the
line for use in an emergency.
   (q)   Where tanks are above ground there shall be a valve located near the
tank in each pipe. In case two (2) or more tanks are cross-connected there
shall be a valve near each tank in each cross-connection.
   (r)   Except where specifically permitted and approved by the Chief, tanks
containing flammable liquids of different classifications shall not be
interconnected, or connected into a common header.
   (s)   At each pipeline connected below the liquid level to an above-ground
storage tank for flammable liquid there shall be, in addition to the valves
required by subsection (q) hereof, an emergency internal check valve installed
on the inside of the tank and operable both manually and by an effective heat
releasing device which will automatically prevent the flow of liquid from the
tank in the event of fire even when pipe lines are broken from the tank.
However, the Chief may permit the omission of such valves on tanks at
refineries, on tanks equipped with an approved swing line, tanks where the
transfer of products between tanks in the event of fire is practical and tanks
where such valves would interfere with operation of the planned emergency
procedure approved by the Chief.
   (t)   Whenever practicable, all valves on or adjacent to tanks for flammable
liquid and located below the normal liquid level in the tank shall be of steel.
Whenever steel valves cannot be used because of the character of the flammable
liquid, valves which have less resistance to fire than steel valves shall be
insulated and protected against fire as directed or approved by the Division.
   (u)   All gate valves on or adjacent to tanks used to control the flow of
liquid to or from tanks shall be of the outside-screw-and-yoke type.
   (v)   Pumps delivering to or taking supply from above-ground storage tanks
shall be provided with valves on both suction and discharge of pump, and when
delivering to tanks, a check valve to prevent backflow of liquid. No internal
combustion engines, and no electric motors except approved explosion-proof
motors, shall be placed beneath tanks or elsewhere within the line of vapor
travel.
   (w)   Compressed air or gas shall only be used for transporting flammable
liquid when suitable approved safeguards are provided and then only when
specifically approved by the Chief.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 383.33 Marking and Labeling Storage Areas
   All rooms or other spaces and all tanks or containers used for storing
flammable liquid shall be suitably marked with a warning sign when and as
directed by the Division of Fire.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 383.34 Yard Hydrant Systems
   Yard hydrant systems shall be provided where and as required by Section
389.20.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 383.35 Storage of Flammable Liquids Subject to Drug Abuse
   (a)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, certain forms are defined
as follows:
      (1)   “Storage” for the purposes of this section means the regular
storage of flammable liquids in containers in excess of fifty-five (55) gallon
capacity which are equipped, intended or used for stationary storage.
      (2)   “Police Chief” means the Police Chief or any designated
representative of the Chief.
      (3)   “Person” means any natural person or business entity.
      (4)   “Commercial storage” means storage in fifty-five (55) gallon steel
containers or containers of size and construction that are standard for the
industry.
   (b)   Upon receipt of information as set forth in Section
383.02, the Police Chief or his or her designated representative shall take
whatever action he or she deems reasonably necessary to protect the health,
safety and welfare of the populace including but not limited to promulgating
the following orders in writing to the person or persons in control of such
storage tank to prevent the abuse of the liquid:
      (1)   Requiring underground storage of such containers;
      (2)   Requiring locking mechanisms on such containers;
      (3)   Requiring security for the storage of such substance which may
include guards, dogs, sensing cables, motion detection systems, photoelectric
beams, or contacts on access gates;
      (4)   Requiring the erection of an adequate fence and installation of
gate locking mechanisms;
      (5)   Requiring the outlet for an outdoor storage tank to be placed
inside a building meeting the requirements of the Building Code.
   (c)   Notice of an order of the Chief shall be sent by certified mail return
receipt requested, and shall notify the addressee of his or her rights to
appeal to the Board of Building Standards and the time within which such appeal
must be filed.
   (d)   In issuing a permit pursuant to Section
383.04, the Fire Chief shall review the storage of any liquid subject to drug
abuse prior to the issuance of a permit and shall order a person applying for a
permit to meet any requirement necessary to prevent drug abuse of the liquid
prior to issuing a permit.
   (e)   The Fire Chief may revoke the permit of any person who fails to comply
with an order issued pursuant to this section.
(Ord. No. 2865-78. Passed 1-29-79, eff. 1-30-79)
§ 383.36 Appeal
   (a)   Any person adversely affected by any order, requirement, decision or
determination by the Fire Chief, Police Chief or their designated
representatives with respect to the storage of flammable liquids subject to
drug abuse may appeal to the Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals
pursuant to Charter Section
76-6. An appeal shall stay the action appealed. The Board shall commence to
hear the merits of an appeal within fifteen (15) days after the filing of such
appeal or at the next scheduled meeting closest in time thereto in the office
of the Board. Thereafter, the Board shall hear the final arguments and shall
reach a decision on such appeal without unreasonable or unnecessary delay.
   (b)   Any person, property owner, or member of the general public shall be
permitted by the Board to intervene when such intervention is timely and the
person, property owner, or member of the general public claims an interest
relating to the matter and/or the person is so situated that the disposition of
the matter by the Board may impair or impede his or her ability to protect an
interest. For the purpose of this subsection “timely” means prior to the
commencement of a hearing by the Board on the merits of the appeal before the
Board.
   (c)   Any appeal from an order, requirement, decision or determination of
the Chief must be filed with the Board within fifteen (15) days after dispatch
of notice of the action of the Chief.
   (d)   The Chief shall be a party to all appeals brought under this Code and
shall be required to file a statement for the basis of the order appealed with
the Board within seven (7) days of receipt of the notice of appeal. The
statement shall contain facts and findings upon which the Chief promulgated the
order appealed. The Board may also require any other party or intervenor to
file a summary of his or her position prior to the hearing. The Board shall
cause notice of any hearing on an appeal to be published in the City Record.
   (e)   In the event that any term or provision of Sections
383.02,
383.35 and
383.36, with respect to flammable liquids subject to drug abuse is held
invalid, illegal or unenforceable in any respect, such illegality or
unenforceability shall not affect any other term or provision thereof.
(Ord. No. 2865-78. Passed 1-29-79, eff. 1-30-79)
CHAPTER 385 – FLAMMABLE MATERIALS AND GASES
Spray Booths, Dip Tanks and Bake Ovens
385.01   Scope and Application of Provisions
385.02   Permits and Plans Required
385.03   Storage and Mixing of Flammable Finishing Material
385.04   Containers for Flammable Finishes
385.05   Dope in Hangar
385.06   Ventilation
385.07   Lighting and Electrical Equipment
385.08   Maintenance and Construction
385.09   Open Flames and Heating
385.10   Grounding
385.11   Fire Extinguishing Equipment
385.12   Motor Vehicles
385.13   Spraying and Booth Requirements
385.14   Dip Tanks
385.15   Drying Ovens
385.16   Fire and Explosion Venting
385.17   Supplementary Rules and Regulations
Liquified Petroleum Gases
385.18   Scope and Application of Provisions; Permits; Certificates of
Qualification
385.19   Rules and Regulations
Moisture Hazard Substances
385.20   Definition and Specification; Scope of Provisions
385.21   Storage and Handling
Calcium Carbide and Acetylene
385.22   Permits Required
385.23   Prohibited Uses and Methods of Storage
385.24   Storage of Calcium Carbide
385.25   All Storage to Be Above Grade Level
385.26   Retail Sale of Calcium Carbide
385.27   Marking of Doors
385.28   Acetylene Manufacturing for Sale
385.29   Conformity to Recognized Standards
Combustible and Explosive Dusts
385.30   Scope and Application of Provisions; Technical Standards
385.31   General Requirements for Buildings
385.32   Dust Collectors and Dust Removal Systems
385.33   Explosion Venting
385.34   Existing Buildings and Structures
385.35   Flammable or Explosive Dusts
Combustible Fibers
385.36   Scope and Application of Provisions
385.37   Definition
385.38   Storage in Connection with Farming
385.39   Storage of Loose Fiber up to 500 Cubic Feet
385.40   Storage of Loose Fiber in Excess of 500 Cubic Feet
385.41   Isolated Storage Buildings for Loose Fiber
385.42   Prohibited Outdoor Storage of Loose Fiber
385.43   Storage Warehouses and Rooms for Baled Fiber
385.44   Storage of Baled Fiber in Storage Warehouses or Rooms
385.45   Required Fire Extinguishing Equipment
Corrosive Liquids, Fume Hazard Gases and Compressed Gases
385.46   Scope and Application of Provisions
385.47   Quantity Storage of Corrosive Liquids
385.48   Handling and Use of Corrosive Liquids
385.49   Quantity Storage and Use of Poisonous, Irritant, Corrosive or Fume
Hazard Gases
385.50   Liquefied Chlorine
385.51   Containers for Compressed Gases
Pyroxylin Plastics
385.52   Scope and Application of Provisions
385.53   Buildings for Manufacture
385.54   Storage in Process of Manufacture
385.55   Storage Cabinets for Pyroxylin Plastic in Process of Manufacture
385.56   Cooling Pyroxylin Plastic in Process of Manufacture
385.57   Dust, Scraps and Other Refuse Material
385.58   Flammable Liquids in Manufacture
385.59   Separations Between Workmen and Material Being Worked Upon
385.60   Clearance from Hot Surfaces
385.61   Fire Extinguishing Equipment
385.62   Protection at Heating Equipment
385.63   Storage of Finished Products Contained in Boxes, Cartons, Etc.
385.64   Display of Pyroxylin Plastic Products for Sale
385.65   Supplementary Rules and Regulations
Tire Retreading or Rebuilding Plants
385.66   Permit Required
385.67   Classification as High Hazard Occupancy
385.68   Rooms for Hazardous Processes
385.69   Automatic Fire Extinguishing Equipment
Motion Picture Film
385.70   Cellulose Nitrate Motion Picture Films
Dry Cleaning and Dyeing
385.71   Storage and Use of Liquids and Solvents
Fuel Oil, Oil Burners and Oil Burning Equipment
385.72   Storage and Handling
385.73   Oil-Fired Appliances
Combustible Waste and Ashes
385.74   Storage and Handling
385.75   Debris from Demolition
385.76   Outdoor Storage of Combustibles
385.77   Combustible Material Used on Signs
385.78   Hazardous Substances
Displays
385.79   Christmas and Temporary Displays
Matches
385.80   Manufacture and Storage
Flammable Finishes
385.81   Bowling Alley Resurfacing and Pin Refinishing
Vehicle Impact Protection
385.82   Guard Posts
Cross-reference:
   Fire Chief approval required, CO
3105.11
   Tank truck delivery of LP gases, CO
381.13
Statutory reference:
   Underground storage tanks, RC 3737.87 et seq.
SPRAY BOOTHS, DIP TANKS AND BAKE OVENS
§ 385.01 Scope and Application of Provisions
   (a)   Except as provided in subsection (c) hereof, the provisions of
Sections
385.01 to
385.17 shall apply to equipment, installations and storage for, and the
application of, flammable finishes by spraying or dipping, and shall also apply
to the processes incidental to the application of flammable finishes, such as
drying or baking.
   (b)   Except as provided in subsection (c) hereof, the applicable provisions
of Sections
385.01 to
385.17 shall also govern the equipment, installations and storage for, and the
application of flammable finishes by brushing, flow coating or roller coating
whenever the volatility or flammability of the finishing material, or the
manner or extent of the application of the finishing material, creates a fire
or health hazard comparable to or greater than that created by spraying or
dipping.
   (c)   The provisions of Sections
385.01 to
385.17 shall not apply to the interior or exterior finishing of buildings or
other structures, nor to the occasional use in a safe manner of small portable
spraying equipment where the quantity of finishing material used on any working
day does not exceed one (1) gallon.
   (d)   As used in this Fire Prevention Code, “finishing room” means a room in
which flammable finishes are applied to objects by spraying or dipping or in
which highly flammable finishes are applied to objects by brushing, flow
coating or roller coating.
   (e)   Sections 3155.46 to 3155.69 shall govern blower and exhaust systems
installed for the purpose of removing or conveying flammable vapors, including
paint spraying residues, by means of air either under positive pressure or
exhaust suction.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.02 Permits and Plans Required
   (a)   A permit from the Fire Chief shall be required whenever flammable
finishes are applied to objects by spraying or dipping or highly flammable
finishes are applied by brushing, flow coating or roller coating, and more than
one (1) gallon of flammable finishing material is used on any working day, or
more than five (5) gallons of flammable finishing material are stored for use.
   (b)   Whenever a permit is required for installations made or installations
altered after June 27, 1949, and before a permit is issued, floor plans showing
the proposed arrangement of all equipment, storage rooms and mixing rooms, and
the provisions for ventilation and fire protection, shall first be submitted to
and approved by the Chief and the Commissioner of Air Pollution Control.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.03 Storage and Mixing of Flammable Finishing Material
   (a)   The storage of flammable finishing material not in actual use, within
finishing rooms, shall be restricted as follows:
      (1)   Not to exceed twenty (20) gallons, with no container exceeding one
(1) gallon capacity, may be stored on a substantial shelf with suitable guard
strips to prevent containers from falling at a height not less than four (4)
feet above the floor level; provided that in no case shall the quantity so
stored exceed that required for one (1) day’s operations.
      (2)   Not more than fifty (50) gallons, with no container exceeding five
(5) gallons capacity, may be stored within a standard storage cabinet as
specified in Section 3129.43(d).
   (b)   Quantities in excess of those permitted in subsections (a)(1) and (2)
hereof shall be stored outside the finishing room in separate rooms conforming
to the provisions of Section 3129.43(c), or in another approved manner
permitted by this Fire Prevention Code.
   (c)   Containers with a total capacity not exceeding five (5) gallons may be
opened and their contents mixed in a finishing room during such times as the
ventilating system is in operation; the mixing of flammable finishes from
containers exceeding a total capacity of five (5) gallons shall be done only in
rooms conforming to the provisions of Section 3129.43(c), or in special mixing
rooms of equivalent construction, except that flammable liquid may be added to
dip tanks, or to pressure tanks used for spraying, by pumping from approved
containers not exceeding sixty (60) gallon capacity.
   (d)   Receptacles containing flammable finishes shall be kept tightly
covered whenever practicable.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.04 Containers for Flammable Finishes
   (a)   All storage containers of flammable finishes shall be of metal
suitably constructed to prevent leakage.
   (b)   Containers used as part of spraying equipment shall be of metal except
that glass containers not exceeding one (1) pint capacity, and properly guarded
containers with glass inner linings not exceeding one (1) gallon capacity, may
be used.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.05 Dope in Hangar
   Application of dope or other flammable finishes indoors shall be only in
separate isolated buildings and under approved safeguards.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.06 Ventilation
   (a)   Unless suitable ventilated spray booths are used for all finishing
operations, finishing rooms shall be continuously ventilated mechanically when
in use. Ventilation shall be adequate to prevent fire and health hazards and
the provisions therefor shall be subject to the approval of the Fire Chief and
the Commissioner of Air Pollution Control. Ventilation shall be such that the
percentage of flammable vapor present in any room or exhaust duct at anytime
shall not exceed one-fifth (1/5) the lower explosive limit and that toxicity
will be reduced by dilution to a safe concentration.
   (b)   Exhaust outlets in finishing rooms shall be located at the level where
flammable vapors accumulate and generally not more than five (5) feet above the
floor level, and shall discharge directly outside the building in an approved
location. Stacks and ducts shall be of incombustible material and constructed
so that there will be no leakage of flammable vapor therefrom. Exhaust ducts of
metal shall be constructed of not lighter than twenty (20) U.S. gauge. Exhaust
ducts shall be kept not less than six (6) inches from combustible surfaces and
shall have approved incombustible ventilating thimbles where passing through
combustible floor, wall or roof construction. Where such exhaust ducts extend
through other stories of a building, they shall be enclosed with incombustible
enclosures having a fire resistance rating of not less than two (2) hours. The
discharge outlets of exhaust ducts shall be located so that the discharge of
vapors or residue therefrom or, in the event of fire, the discharge of flame,
hot gases or smoke, shall not create a hazardous fire, fume or smoke condition
or nuisance. All such exhaust systems shall be independent of all other
ventilating systems and shall conform to the applicable provisions of Sections
3155.75 to 3155.77.
   (c)   So far as practicable, all exhaust ducts shall be installed without
ledges or crevices in which paint residue may lodge. Provisions shall be made
to permit cleaning the interiors of such exhaust ducts. Such provisions shall
include access openings at the bottom of every vertical riser and access
openings, spaced not more than twenty (20) feet on centers, in horizontal
sections.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.07 Lighting and Electrical Equipment
   (a)   Artificial lighting in finishing rooms, spray rooms, spray booths and
dipping rooms shall be by electricity only. Except as provided in subsection
(b) hereof, all electric wiring and equipment in rooms where flammable
finishing materials are applied shall be in conformity with the provisions of
Chapter 3161, governing installations in hazardous locations.
   (b)   Where spraying is done in properly arranged and ventilated spray
booths, portions of the finishing room more than twenty (20) feet from such
booths need not be considered as hazardous locations in determining
requirements for electrical installations unless such portions are so
classified as the result of other operations. In the area within twenty (20)
feet of properly arranged and ventilated spray booths, provisions governing
electrical installations in hazardous locations may be modified to allow motors
of the totally enclosed type or of the open-induction type having no brushes,
make or break contacts, collects or other arcing or sparking parts, and to
allow lamps of the enclosed vapor-tight type.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.08 Maintenance and Construction
   (a)   Finishing rooms in which flammable finishes are applied shall be kept
free from all unnecessary combustible material and refuse.
   (b)   Floors of finishing rooms shall be of incombustible material. Floors
of finishing rooms, drain boards and the interiors of spray booths, shall be
thoroughly cleaned at least once a day, and all fans, ducts, side-walls and
ceilings kept as clean as practicable at all times. In cleaning, care shall be
taken to use implements which will not create sparks. Wherever practicable,
surfaces to be cleaned shall be sprayed or otherwise wetted down with water
before cleaning. Sweepings or deposits from spray booths or rooms, ducts or
stacks shall be immediately removed from the building and safely disposed.
   (c)   Metal waste cans with self-closing covers shall be provided for all
waste and rags which have come in contact with flammable finishing material.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.09 Open Flames and Heating
   For heating purposes, indirect systems only, such as steam, forced warm air
or hot water, shall be used and no open flame shall be permitted in storage
cabinets, finishing rooms, dipping rooms, spray rooms or spray booths, except
that when approved by the Chief of Fire, direct-fired drying ovens or other
drying ovens, and direct-fired unit heaters installed not less than eight (8)
feet above the floor level and of a type approved for use in garages and
airplane hangars, may be installed in finishing rooms where proper safeguards
are provided to prevent flammable vapor travel to a source of ignition. Gravity
warm air systems shall not be used.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.10 Grounding
   All metal spray booths, dip tanks, bake ovens, mixers, filters, pumps,
motors and shafting shall be electrically grounded in an effective and approved
manner.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.11 Fire Extinguishing Equipment
   (a)   Sprinklers.
      (1)   Whenever a building containing rooms in which flammable finishes
are applied is classified as a high hazard occupancy, such building shall be
equipped throughout with approved automatic sprinklers or other approved
automatic fire- extinguishing equipment.
      (2)   In buildings equipped throughout with automatic sprinklers, all
areas within finishing rooms and dipping rooms, including ceilings, walls and
interiors of spray rooms and booths, shall be thoroughly protected by automatic
wet-pipe sprinklers, or by a system of open sprinklers connected to an approved
quick-operating valve actuated by an approved thermostatic system. In buildings
not equipped throughout with approved automatic sprinkler systems or other
approved automatic fire extinguishing equipment, spray rooms and booths shall
be equipped with sprinklers supplied by a pipe of not less than one (1) inch in
diameter connected to the domestic water system and installed in conformity
with the provisions of Section
389.32.
      (3)   Sprinkler heads shall be located so that they will not become
covered with paint and shall be kept clean.
   (b)   Hand Fire Extinguishing Equipment. Hand fire extinguishing equipment
shall be provided in or immediately outside finishing rooms, and near storage
cabinets, spray rooms, and booths, and shall be of such type and in such number
as determined by the Fire Chief.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.12 Motor Vehicles
   Unless approved adequate safeguards are provided, motor vehicles shall not
be moved by their own power while in finishing rooms or within spray rooms or
booths.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.13 Spraying and Booth Requirements
   (a)   All spraying with flammable finishes of objects, manufactured
articles, motor vehicles, etc., shall be done in an approved spray room or
spray booth conforming to the provisions of this section.
   (b)   When spraying is done outside of spray booths, the room or rooms in
which such spraying is done shall be separated from the remainder of the
building by walls, floors and ceiling construction having a fire resistance
rating of not less than three- fourths (3/4) hour, and all openings in such
enclosure shall be equipped with self-closing or automatic closing opening
protectives having a fire resistance rating of not less than three-fourths (3/
4) hour. Floor surfaces in such rooms shall be of incombustible material.
Ventilation shall be provided as specified in Section
385.06.
   (c)   Spray booths shall be of metal or other approved incombustible
material and shall be of ample size to accommodate the object to be sprayed.
   (d)   Spray booths shall be provided with exhaust systems of sufficient
capacity to adequately remove vapors and residues. The average face velocity at
the booth shall be not less than one hundred (100) feet per minute, and greater
velocities shall be provided, as approved or directed by the Fire Chief or the
Commissioner of Air Pollution Control, for continuous heavy spraying using
flammable or toxic material. The supply of air entering the room where spray
booths are located shall be substantially equivalent to the exhaust capacity
provided for such room and shall be from an uncontaminated source. Each spray
booth shall have an independent stack or vent, except that not more than three
(3) booths, each with less than six (6) square feet face area, may connect to
one (1) stack. Exhaust ducts and their installation shall conform to the
applicable provisions of Sections
385.06 and 3155.75 to 3155.77.
   (e)   Ventilating fans for spray rooms and booths shall be kept in
continuous operation while spraying is being done and shall not be stopped
until all flammable vapor has been removed.
   (f)   Pails or receptacles for gravity feed to a spray gun shall not exceed
ten (10) gallons capacity, shall be kept covered with tight fitting
incombustible covers and shall be securely and substantially supported. Where
cables are used for support of gravity feed pails, only wire cables, or ropes
containing stranded wire cores, shall be used.
   (g)   Pails or receptacles containing flammable finishes shall be returned
to storage cabinets or fire resistive storage rooms or other approved storage
places at the close of each day.
   (h)   No portable lamps except those specifically approved for the purpose
shall be used inside spray rooms or booths. No lighting installation shall be
made so that it is possible for the spray to come into contact with a lamp or
with hot surfaces of a lighting fixture.
   (i)   Electric motors shall not be placed within spray rooms or booths, or
in exhaust ducts from spray rooms or booths.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.14 Dip Tanks
   (a)   Dip tanks having an area in excess of ten (10) square feet shall be
provided with approved fixed automatic fire extinguishing equipment or approved
incombustible manually operative proper fitting covers arranged to close
automatically in case of fire. Dip tanks ten (10) square feet or less in area
shall be provided with suitable incombustible covers or with asbestos blankets
which can be placed over the tanks, or with approved automatic fire
extinguishing equipment.
   (b)   All rooms in which dip tanks are installed shall conform to the
applicable provisions of Section 3129.43(c), and the enclosures of such rooms
shall have not less than the minimum fire resistance specified therein.
   (c)   All rooms in which dip tanks are installed shall be located above
grade level. During nonoperating periods all dip tanks shall be covered, or
drained and cleaned.
   (d)   All dip tanks having a liquid surface of twenty-five (25) square feet
or over shall be provided with trapped drainpipes and manually operative valves
arranged to operate automatically in case of fire to drain the contents of the
dip tanks into drain tanks installed in an approved location, preferably
outside of the building.
   (e)   Whenever the liquid used in a dip tank and the exposed face area
thereof are such that a fire or health hazard is created, the ventilation
specified in Section
385.06 shall be provided at the dip tank or tanks.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.15 Drying Ovens
   Drying ovens and drying rooms used in drying or baking flammable material
shall not be installed in contact with combustible material. Drying ovens and
rooms shall be so located that no fire-hazardous condition shall be created and
shall be ventilated as required for finishing rooms in Section
385.06.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.16 Fire and Explosion Venting
   All finishing rooms, spray rooms, drying ovens and drying rooms, in which
flammable or explosive vapor may accumulate, and all dipping rooms, shall have
provisions for fire and explosion venting as required in Section 3129.43(c).
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.17 Supplementary Rules and Regulations
   (a)   Installations for the application of flammable finishes within
finishing rooms, spray booths or rooms, and in dip tanks, and the installation
and use of drying ovens and other equipment in connection with the application
of flammable finishes shall conform to the applicable provisions of statutes
and rules and regulations promulgated by authority of statute, to the
applicable rules and regulations of the Commissioner of Air Pollution Control,
the provisions of this Fire Prevention Code, and accepted safe practice. When
deemed necessary the Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals may
promulgate rules or regulations supplementary to this Code to further define
accepted safe practice. In the absence of such supplementary rules or
regulations, conformity with the requirements and recommendations of NFPA
Standard No. 33 entitled “Spray Finishing Using Flammable and Combustible
Liquids” and NFPA Standard No. 34 entitled “Dip Tanks Containing Flammable or
Combustible Liquids” shall be accepted as conformity with accepted safe
practice.
   (b)   When deemed necessary for safety to life or property the Fire Chief
may require compliance with any requirement or recommendation of NFPA Standard
No. 33 and 34.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
LIQUIFIED PETROLEUM GASES
§ 385.18 Scope and Application of Provisions; Permits; Certificates of
Qualification
   (a)   The provisions of this section and Section
385.19 shall apply to the storage and handling of liquefied petroleum gas and
the design, construction, location, installation and operation of liquefied
petroleum gas systems.
   (b)   As used in this Fire Prevention Code, “liquefied petroleum gas” means
any material which is composed predominantly of any of the following
hydrocarbons or mixtures of them: propane, propylene, butanes (normal butane or
isobutane) and butylenes.
   (c)   A permit from the Fire Chief shall be required for all storing,
handling or use of liquefied petroleum gas.
   (d)   No person, firm or corporation shall store or handle liquefied
petroleum gas for sale or transport, or connect or install liquefied petroleum
gas cylinders as a business, without a certificate of qualification from the
Chief, and such certificate shall only be issued to responsible persons
cognizant of the hazards inherent in such gases and skilled in the safe
handling thereof. Every such certificate may be revoked by the Chief whenever
he or she deems such revocation to be in the interest of public safety.
(Ord. No. 520-53. Passed 4-5-54, eff. 4-12-54)
§ 385.19 Rules and Regulations
   The Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals shall formulate rules
and regulations for the storage, handling and use of liquefied petroleum gases
and for the design, construction, location, installation and operation of
liquefied petroleum gas systems which substantially conform to the recognized
standards of safety to persons and property and to the standards of design,
construction and safety of the American Insurance Association and the National
Fire Protection Association. Nothing contained herein shall be construed so as
to permit the use or storage of liquefied petroleum gas where prohibited by the
Zoning Code.
(Ord. No. 520-53. Passed 4-5-54, eff. 4-12-54)
MOISTURE HAZARD SUBSTANCES
§ 385.20 Definition and Specification; Scope of Provisions
   (a)   Substances which, when in contact with moisture or water, react so as
to create an explosion or fire hazard shall be classified as moisture hazard
substances.
   (b)   The provisions of this section and Section
385.21 shall, however, apply only to moisture hazard substances normally stored
and handled in solid, granular or powder form.
   (c)   Moisture hazard substances subject to the provisions of this section
shall include, among others, the following:
   Aluminum powder;
   Barium peroxide;
   Calcium carbide;
   Metallic calcium;
   Cyanides;
   Magnesium powder;
   Phosphorous pentasulphide;
   Metallic potassium;
   Potassium peroxide;
   Metallic sodium;
   Sodium peroxide;
   Strontium peroxide;
   Zinc powder.
   (d)   Provisions governing the use and handling of calcium carbide are
included in Sections
385.22 to
385.29. Provisions governing storage and handling of certain corrosive liquids
which are also moisture hazardous, such as nitric acid and sulphur acid, are
included in Sections
385.46 to
385.51.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.21 Storage and Handling
   (a)   A permit from the Fire Chief shall be required for the storage of more
than five (5) pounds of any moisture hazard substance.
   (b)   Moisture hazard substances shall be stored so as to preclude the
possibility of contact with water or moisture. No moisture hazard substance
shall be stored in a basement or cellar and all such material shall be stored
in rooms with floors above the adjacent grade level. Containers of such
substances shall be stored at least six (6) inches above floor level.
   (c)   Rooms in which moisture hazard substances are stored shall be dry and
all such substances shall be protected from the weather.
   (d)   All such substances shall be stored in suitable closed containers
opened only for removing material and closed immediately thereafter.
   (e)   Metallic sodium, potassium and calcium shall, in all cases, be
separately stored in noncombustible cabinets and shall not be stored in the
same cabinet with other combustible or flammable material. The doors to such
cabinets shall be plainly marked with a warning sign giving the name of the
material stored within and the word “DANGEROUS.”
   (f)   Moisture hazard substances other than metallic sodium, potassium or
calcium, kept in wholesale drug establishments, retail drug establishments,
laboratories or similar establishments where their storage is incidental to
general drug and chemical storage, or in manufacturing plants or industrial
plants where their storage and use are incidental to the industrial process, in
quantities exceeding an aggregate of twenty-five (25) pounds but not exceeding
an aggregate of two hundred (200) pounds, shall be stored separately in
combustible cabinets marked, “MOISTURE HAZARD SUBSTANCE - KEEP DRY.”
   (g)   Moisture hazard substances other than calcium carbide, kept in
quantities exceeding an aggregate of two hundred (200) pounds in manufacturing
plants or industrial plants where their storage and use are incidental to the
industrial process, or in wholesale drug establishments, retail drug
establishments, laboratories or similar establishments, shall be stored in
suitable containers in fire-resistive rooms conforming to the applicable
provisions of Section 3129.43(c). The door to each room shall be marked in
bright red letters not less than six (6) inches high, with the principal
strokes not less than three- fourths (3/4) inch wide, “MOISTURE HAZARD
SUBSTANCE – KEEP DRY.” No sprinkler heads, hose, hot water radiators or fire-
extinguishing apparatus using water shall be installed in any storage room in
which moisture hazard substances in quantity are stored. Each such room shall
have within or immediately outside it an adequate quantity of inert granular
material or powder for use as an extinguishing medium, as directed or approved
by the Chief.
   (h)   Moisture hazard substances other than calcium carbide, which are the
end product or major by-product of a manufacturing plant or process, shall be
subject to the rules and regulations, restrictions and requirements of the
Chief as deemed necessary for safety to persons or property.
   (i)   Materials of especially toxic nature, such as cyanides, or which may
produce toxic gases when mixed with other materials, shall be stored and used
in an approved safe manner as approved or directed by the Commissioner of Air
Pollution Control.
   (j)   All cyanide storage, except for one (1) day’s supply, shall be in
locked cabinets or rooms with adequate approved ventilation, isolated from
locker and washrooms and from areas where eating is permitted.
   (k)   Processes involving the use of cyanides shall be so arranged that
there can be no mixing of cyanides with acids. Areas where cyanides are used
shall be restricted to authorized personnel.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
CALCIUM CARBIDE AND ACETYLENE
§ 385.22 Permits Required
   (a)   No person shall store or keep calcium carbide in excess of five (5)
pounds without a permit from the Fire Chief.
   (b)   No person shall operate an acetylene generator without a permit from
the Chief.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.23 Prohibited Uses and Methods of Storage
   (a)   Calcium carbide and acetylene generated therefrom shall not be used
for interior lighting, room or space heating or cooking.
   (b)   No person shall generate, transport, store or sell acetylene
compressed to a pressure greater than fifteen (15) pounds to the square inch
except when it is dissolved in acetone or other suitable medium and confined in
a cylinder conforming to the specifications of the Interstate Commerce
Commission. All such cylinders shall be, or shall have been, tested at the time
of manufacture, and no cylinders shall be used which do not meet such test
requirements.
   (c)   No person shall compress and dissolve acetylene so that the solution
pressure exceeds two hundred fifty (250) psi at seventy degrees Fahrenheit
(70°F), or transport, store or sell dissolved acetylene when the solution
pressure exceeds such pressure at seventy degrees Fahrenheit (70°F).
   (d)   No person shall transfer any portion of the contents of one (1)
acetylene cylinder into another acetylene cylinder or mix any other gas with
acetylene in an acetylene cylinder.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.24 Storage of Calcium Carbide
   (a)   No calcium carbide shall be stored except in approved metal
containers.
   (b)   Calcium carbide contained within approved metal containers up to an
aggregate quantity of six hundred (600) pounds may be stored or kept within one
(1) building or fire area on shelves or in cabinets or in other approved manner
in safe locations approved by the Fire Chief.
   (c)   Calcium carbide stored within any building or fire area in excess of
an aggregate quantity of six hundred (600) pounds shall be stored or kept in
fire- resistive rooms conforming to the provisions of Section 3129.43(c), as
modified in subsections (h) and (i) hereof, provided that the maximum quantity
stored in any such room shall be five thousand (5,000) pounds, and provided
further that such storage room is within a one (1) story building without
cellar or basement underneath the same. Such storage room may also be used for
storage of acetylene cylinders.
   (d)   Not to exceed five thousand (5,000) pounds of calcium carbide may also
be stored within a fire- resistive generator room located in a one (1) story
building without cellar or basement underneath such room, constructed in
conformity with the provisions of Section 3129.43(c), as modified in
subsections (h) and (i) hereof.
   (e)   The maximum quantity of calcium carbide stored within one (1) building
shall be an aggregate of five thousand (5,000) pounds unless such building is
an isolated one (1) story building of Class I, fireproof or Class II,
incombustible construction without cellar or basement, located either in the
Second Fire District or in the Urban District, used only for the storage of
calcium carbide and/or acetylene cylinders and/or the generation of acetylene,
and located not less than twenty (20) feet from any other building and from any
line on adjoining premises on which buildings may be built.
   (f)   Exterior openings in walls of rooms used for the storage of calcium
carbide in quantities in excess of six hundred (600) pounds shall not be less
than twenty (20) feet from any other building and from lines on adjoining
premises on which buildings may be built.
   (g)   All rooms in which calcium carbide is stored shall be dry with walls
and roof of thoroughly weather- resistant construction. All such rooms and all
rooms where acetylene is generated or stored shall be well- ventilated by means
of natural ventilation.
   (h)   The fire resistance ratings of enclosures of fire-resistive rooms in
which calcium carbide is stored or kept under the provisions of subsections (c)
or (d) hereof shall be not less than the following:
      (1)   Walls or partitions: two (2) hours.
      (2)   Ceilings: one (1) hour.
      (3)   Interior doors: one and one-half (1-1/2) hours.
   (i)   The glass or free vent area provided for fire and explosion venting of
storage or generator rooms constructed under the provisions of subsections (c),
(d) or (e) hereof shall be not less than ten percent (10%) of the combined
areas of the enclosing walls.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.25 All Storage to Be Above Grade Level
   The floors of all rooms in which calcium carbide is stored shall be not less
than ten (10) inches above the adjoining outside grade level.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.26 Retail Sale of Calcium Carbide
   Calcium carbide sold at retail shall be sold only in full unbroken packages.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.27 Marking of Doors
   All doors to buildings, rooms, cabinets or compartments within which calcium
carbide is kept or stored shall be plainly marked “CALCIUM CARBIDE – KEEP DRY;”
“CALCIUM CARBIDE – USE NO WATER IN CASE OF FIRE;” or other equivalent approved
wording by means of approved durable signs or the approved equivalent thereof.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.28 Acetylene Manufacturing for Sale
   (a)   After June 27, 1949, any building or other structure used for
acetylene manufacturing for sale, or for compression and dissolving of
acetylene, or for storage of charged cylinders in connection therewith, and not
previously used for such purpose prior to June 27, 1949, shall be distant not
less than one hundred fifty (150) feet from every other building not in the
same ownership and not in use for a similar or accessory purpose, and not less
than one hundred fifty (150) feet from any line on adjoining property on which
a building or other structure may be built.
   (b)   Every building or part of a building used for acetylene manufacturing
for sale or for the charging of cylinders for the storing of charged cylinders
in connection therewith, shall be separated from any part of such building used
for any other purpose by an occupancy separation having a fire resistance
rating of not less than four (4) hours.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.29 Conformity to Recognized Standards
   (a)   The storage of calcium carbide and the generation and use of acetylene
shall conform to the provisions of this Fire Prevention Code and other
applicable ordinances and accepted safe practice. When deemed necessary the
Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals may promulgate rules or
regulations supplementary to this Code to further define accepted safe
practice. In the absence of such supplementary rules or regulations conformity
with the applicable provisions of NFPA Standard No. 51 entitled “Welding and
Cutting, Oxygen-Fuel Gas” shall be accepted as conformity with accepted safe
practice.
   (b)   When deemed necessary for safety to life or property, the Fire Chief
may require compliance with any requirement or recommendation of NFPA Standard
No. 51.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
COMBUSTIBLE AND EXPLOSIVE DUSTS
§ 385.30 Scope and Application of Provisions; Technical Standards
   (a)   The intent and purpose of Sections
385.30 to
385.34 are to prescribe requirements for safety to life and property in
connection with manufacturing processes or storage in which combustible or
explosive dust may be present or may result from manufacturing or storage.
   (b)   Wherever combustible or explosive dusts may accumulate, measures for
the prevention of dust fires or explosions and safety measures for minimizing
the effects of explosions shall be taken in conformity with the provisions of
Sections
385.30 to
385.34 and with generally recognized standards for safety to persons and
property. When deemed necessary, the Board of Building Standards and Building
Appeals may promulgate supplementary rules and regulations. In the absence of
such rules and regulations, conformity with the standards listed in Section
3101.07 of the Building Code shall be accepted as conformity with generally
recognized standards for safety to persons and property.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.31 General Requirements for Buildings
   (a)   After June 27, 1949, all buildings or parts of buildings in which
materials producing flammable dust or explosive dust are stored or handled
which were not used for such purpose on June 27, 1949, shall be of Type I,
fireproof construction or Type II, incombustible construction and shall be
either independent buildings or separated from other occupancies by occupancy
separations designed to withstand probable explosion pressures and having a
fire resistance rating of not less than four (4) hours.
   (b)   All buildings where magnesium, aluminum or other specially hazardous
powder is manufactured, processed or handled in unsealed containers, shall be
isolated buildings located not less than three hundred (300) feet from other
buildings not part of the same plant, and not less than three hundred (300)
feet from lines on adjacent premises where buildings may be built.
   (c)   Buildings liable to explosion pressure from explosive dust and
constructed of light incombustible construction shall, except as provided in
subsection (b) hereof, be located not less than seventy-five (75) feet from all
adjoining buildings and from all lines on other premises on which buildings may
be built.
   (d)   The construction and interior finish of rooms or places where dust may
accumulate shall be such as to eliminate, so far as possible, surfaces, ledges
or other places where dust may settle or accumulate.
   (e)   So far as possible all equipment shall be and shall be maintained
dust-tight. Equipment in which explosive dust may accumulate shall be provided
with approved explosion vents. Equipment which may accumulate charges of static
electricity shall be suitably grounded.
   (f)   Equipment, bins and vaults in which dusty material is produced,
processed or handled shall, so far as practicable, be equipped with devices or
systems for removing the dust in a safe manner to a safe location or with
systems of inert gas for fire and explosion prevention installed in conformity
with the applicable code listed in Section
385.30.
   (g)   No open flames and no motors or other electrical devices which may
emit sparks shall be permitted within rooms or spaces where combustible or
explosive dust may accumulate. All motors and switches which are not of
approved dust-proof types shall be located outside of the room, space or
equipment in which dust may accumulate. No construction or repair work
involving the use of welding equipment or of open flames or of sparking
devices, shall be performed within any room or space which is not dust-free or
in which dust-producing equipment is in operation.
   (h)   Whenever there is the possibility of ferrous metal being present in
material processed, approved separators for the removal of such metal shall be
provided and operated.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.32 Dust Collectors and Dust Removal Systems
   (a)   Dust collectors, other than water-spray type collectors, shall be
located in separate fire-resistive and explosion-resistive vented rooms or
shall be placed outside of buildings.
   (b)   Sections 3155.75 to 3155.77 shall govern blower and exhaust systems
installed for the purpose of removing or conveying dust, stock and refuse by
means of air either under positive pressure or exhaust suction.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.33 Explosion Venting
   (a)   All rooms or spaces in which combustible or explosive dust may
accumulate shall have provisions for explosion venting in conformity with the
following minimum requirements:
   Minimum Requirements for Explosion Venting
 
Type of Building or Structure          Cu. ft. of Building Content for each sq.
                                       ft. of Vent Area Provided
Heavy reinforced concrete construction 80
Light reinforced concrete or steel
construction, with masonry exterior    65
walls
Light steel frame or incombustible
construction having little explosion   50
resistance
 
   (b)   The requirements prescribed in subsection (a) hereof shall apply to
dust having explosion characteristics similar to grain dust. For dust which
produces greater explosion pressures, larger vent areas shall be provided as
specified in the applicable standard listed in Section
385.30 and as approved by the Fire Chief.
   (c)   In enclosed processing equipment, spray drying chambers and dust
collectors, vent areas shall be not less than one (1) square foot for each
thirty (30) cubic feet of volume unless such equipment, chambers or collectors
are designed and constructed to resist explosion pressures. When such
equipment, chambers or collectors are designed to resist explosion pressures,
the specified vent areas may be reduced but shall be in no case less than one
(1) square foot for each fifty (50) cubic feet of volume vented.
   (d)   Rooms or spaces in which dust may accumulate shall have provisions for
venting consisting of hinged sash, thin glazing or light incombustible
construction, installed so as to relieve explosion pressures.
   (e)   Where explosive dust may accumulate, all enclosures of belt conveyors,
galleries and roofs over storage bins shall be of light incombustible
construction installed so that they will serve to relieve explosion pressures.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.34 Existing Buildings and Structures
   No building or other structure or part thereof shall be maintained in use
for any manufacturing process which produces combustible or explosive dust, or
for the storage of any material involving explosive or combustible dust, for
more than one (1) year after June 27, 1949, unless:
   (a)   All elevator legs, spouts, hoppers, and other conveyors are reasonably
dust-tight and are so maintained;
   (b)   A suitable and approved dust removal system is provided, maintained
and operated wherever dust may accumulate within the interior of a building, or
a system of inert gas for fire and explosion prevention is installed in
conformity with the applicable code listed in Section
385.30;
   (c)   No open flame or spark-producing equipment is provided or maintained
within rooms where dust may accumulate;
   (d)   Separators for the removal of ferrous particles are provided and
operated ahead of all grinding or pulverizing machines whenever ferrous
particles may be present;
   (e)   All crushing, drying, pulverizing and conveying equipment and systems,
and all other equipment which may accumulate static charges, are effectively
grounded.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.35 Flammable or Explosive Dusts
   (a)   Electrical Work. Wherever flammable or explosive vapors, mists, gases
or dusts may be present, all electrical devices and equipment and all wiring
shall be of the type prescribed for the hazard in Chapter 3161.
   (b)   Flames, Sparks and Grounding. No open flame or spark producing device
shall be installed or used in any room or space where flammable vapors, mists,
gases or dusts may be present, or where flammable or highly combustible
substances are used or stored. All motors, machines, mixers, vats, tanks,
pumps, filters and other similar pieces of equipment shall be effectively
grounded. Except as provided in subsection (c) hereof, all flame sources,
including boilers and direct-fired heaters, shall be in separate rooms at an
adequate distance and in a suitable location so as not to present a potential
source of ignition.
   (c)   Room and Space Heating Devices.
      (1)   Wherever flammable or explosive vapors, mists or gases may be
present, heating shall be by low pressure steam or hot water or other approved
methods deemed safe for the hazard, except that direct- fired unit heaters
tested and approved for installation in garages and airplane hangars may be
used when installed in conformity with the conditions of approval. For the
purposes of this subsection low pressure steam shall be deemed to be five (5)
pounds or less. The temperature of hot water used for heating shall not exceed
that which corresponds with fifteen (15) pounds gauge.
      (2)   Highly combustible solids with low ignition temperatures shall be
stored and used at a safe distance from radiators, pipes and other parts of
heating systems which might cause ignition. Where deemed necessary by the Fire
Chief, hot surfaces shall be suitably guarded.
   (d)   Smoking Prohibited. Smoking shall be prohibited in all buildings or
parts of buildings and in all locations where fire or explosion-hazardous
substances are stored or handled, and “NO SMOKING” signs shall be prominently
displayed, except that the Chief may designate safe areas where smoking may be
permitted.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
COMBUSTIBLE FIBERS
§ 385.36 Scope and Application of Provisions
   (a)   The provisions of Sections
385.36 to
385.45 shall govern the storing or handling of combustible fibers either as a
manufactured or natural end product, or as a material used in manufacturing
processes.
   (b)   After June 27, 1949, all newly-instituted storage of combustible fiber
shall be in conformity with this Fire Prevention Code.
   (c)   When storage of combustible fiber existing on June 27, 1949, does not
conform to the provisions of this Code and is deemed unusually hazardous to
life or to adjacent property by the Fire Chief, such storage shall be made to
conform substantially with the provisions of this Code or shall be
discontinued.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.37 Definition
   “Combustible fibers” means fibrous materials which are highly flammable such
as hay, straw, broomcorn, hemp, tow, jute, sisal, moss, paper, rags, excelsior,
hair, kapok, oakum, cotton, henequen, ixtle, cocoa fiber, and wheat straw.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.38 Storage in Connection with Farming
   Hay or straw and other agricultural products may be stored in or near barns
or similar farm buildings within the Urban District, provided that no hazard to
adjoining property is created thereby. Such storage shall not be subject to the
provisions of other sections or Sections
385.36 to
385.45.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.39 Storage of Loose Fiber up to 500 Cubic Feet
   (a)   Quantities of loose combustible fiber exceeding one hundred (100)
cubic feet, but not exceeding five hundred (500) cubic feet, shall be stored in
rooms or compartments having floors, walls and ceilings of fire-resistive
construction, having a fire- resistance rating of not less than three-fourths
(3/4) hour and with interior openings to such rooms or compartments equipped
with self-closing or automatic closing opening protectives having a fire
resistance rating of not less than three-fourths (3/4) hour.
   (b)   Quantities of loose combustible fiber of one hundred (100) cubic feet
or less shall be stored in fire resistive rooms as provided in subsection (a)
hereof, or shall be stored in incombustible or metal-lined bins equipped with
self-closing incombustible or metal-lined covers.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.40 Storage of Loose Fiber in Excess of 500 Cubic Feet
   (a)   Quantities exceeding five hundred (500) cubic feet of loose
combustible fiber shall be stored in fire-resistive storage rooms conforming to
the applicable provisions of Section 3129.43(c), having incombustible floor,
wall and ceiling construction with a fire resistance rating of not less than
two (2) hours. However, when the quantity of combustible fiber stored in such
rooms exceeds one thousand (1,000) cubic feet, the required fire resistance
rating shall be not less than four (4) hours for walls and partitions and not
less than three (3) hours for floor and ceiling construction.
   (b)   All such fire-resistive rooms shall have provisions for venting gas
and smoke to the outer air as specified in Section 3129.43(c), except that the
required vent area need not exceed one (1) square foot for each two hundred
(200) cubic feet of room volume.
   (c)   All interior openings within enclosures of such fire-resistive storage
rooms shall have self-closing or automatic opening protectives. Enclosures
required to have a fire resistance rating of two (2) hours shall have opening
protectives with a fire resistance rating of not less than one and one-half (1-
1/2) hours. Enclosures required to have a fire resistance rating greater than
two (2) hours shall have openings protected with opening protectives on both
sides of the opening. Such opening protectives shall have a combined fire
resistance rating of not less than four (4) hours.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.41 Isolated Storage Buildings for Loose Fiber
   Isolated storage buildings for the storage of loose combustible fiber shall
be not less than fifty (50) feet from other buildings not on the same property
and not less than fifty (50) feet from lines on adjacent property where
buildings may be built. Such isolated storage buildings shall be not less than
twenty (20) feet from buildings on the same property and shall in all cases be
suitably located where approved by the Fire Chief, with openings properly
protected against the entrance of sparks. The maximum quantity of loose
combustible fiber stored in one (1) isolated storage building shall be two
thousand five hundred (2,500) cubic feet.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.42 Prohibited Outdoor Storage of Loose Fiber
   Loose combustible fiber not in suitable bales or packages shall not be
stored in the open within one hundred (100) feet of any building or any line on
adjacent premises on which buildings may be built. Combustible fiber in bales
or packages stored outdoors shall conform to Section
385.76.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.43 Storage Warehouses and Rooms for Baled Fiber
   (a)   Storage warehouses and rooms for baled combustible fiber shall be
classified as high hazard occupancy and all such warehouses and rooms shall be
of Class I-A, fireproof construction.
   (b)   No piles of baled combustible fiber in such storage warehouse or room
shall exceed nine (9) feet in height and no single storage compartment shall
exceed five thousand (5,000) square feet in floor area.
   (c)   Floors shall be designed to support safely the water-saturated weight
of the combustible fiber to be stored thereon.
   (d)   All interior walls of storage rooms shall have fire resistance ratings
of not less than four (4) hours and all openings in such walls shall have
opening protectives installed on both sides of the opening. Such opening
protectives shall have a combined fire resistance rating of not less than four
(4) hours.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.44 Storage of Baled Fiber in Storage Warehouses or Rooms
   (a)   Blocks or piles of baled fiber stored in storage warehouses or rooms
shall be separated from adjacent storage by aisles not less than five (5) feet
wide; or by flash fire barriers consisting of continuous sheets of
incombustible material extending from the floor to a height of at least one (1)
foot above the highest point of the piles and projecting at least one (1) foot
beyond the sides of the piles.
   (b)   Sisal and other fibers in bales bound with combustible tie ropes, and
jute and other fibers liable to swell when wet, shall be stored to allow for
expansion in any direction to the extent of twenty percent (20%) of their bulk
without endangering building walls, ceilings or columns. Not less than three
(3) feet clearance shall be maintained between sprinkler pipes and the tops of
piles. Not less than three (3) feet clearance shall be left between walls and
sides of piles. However, when the storage compartment is not more than thirty
(30) feet in width, one (1) foot clearance at side walls shall be approved when
a center aisle not less than five (5) feet wide is maintained.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.45 Required Fire Extinguishing Equipment
   (a)   Whenever the quantity of loose combustible fiber stored within a
storage room within a building exceeds one thousand (1,000) cubic feet, such
storage room shall be equipped with approved automatic sprinklers or other
approved automatic or manually operated fire extinguishing equipment.
   (b)   Except when the quantity stored within any one (1) fire area is less
than three hundred (300) cubic feet of baled combustible fiber, all storage
rooms and warehouses for the storage of baled combustible fiber shall be
equipped with approved automatic sprinklers or other approved automatic fire
extinguishing equipment.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
CORROSIVE LIQUIDS, FUME HAZARD GASES AND COMPRESSED GASES
§ 385.46 Scope and Application of Provisions
   (a)   The provisions of Sections
385.46 to
385.51 shall govern the storage and handling of corrosive liquids and fume
hazard gases. However, such provisions shall not apply, and no permit shall be
required, for the storage or handling of such liquids or gases in small
quantities in research laboratories, hospitals, chemical or educational
laboratories, retail drug stores or similar establishments, except that such
liquids and gases shall, wherever practicable, be kept in containers which
conform to the requirements specified in Sections
385.46 to
385.51.
   (b)   The storing and handling of liquefied petroleum gas and acetylene
shall be governed by the provisions of Sections
385.18 and
385.19 and
385.22 to
385.29. All other gases compressed beyond the pressures specified in Section
385.51 shall be stored in containers prescribed in that section.
   (c)   Corrosive liquids shall include hydrochloric, nitric, sulphuric,
perchloric, hydrofluoric and other similar acids; alkaline caustic liquids; and
other corrosive liquids which react chemically with common materials such as
wood or iron, or which may emit hazardous or irritant fumes, or generate heat
and cause fire when in contact with organic matter or water, or cause severe
damage when in contact with living tissue, or are otherwise similarly hazardous
to life or property.
   (d)   Fume hazard gases include ammonia, chlorine, phosgene, sulphur-dioxide
and other similar poisonous, irritant, corrosive or fume hazard gases.
   (e)   Except as provided in subsection (a) hereof, a permit from the Fire
Chief shall be required for the storage or use of fume hazard gases, and for
the storage of corrosive liquids in excess of one (1) carboy or an aggregate of
five (5) gallons.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.47 Quantity Storage of Corrosive Liquids
   (a)   Bulk storage of corrosive liquid out-doors shall be in above-ground
tanks sufficiently isolated from adjacent premises so as not to endanger such
adjacent premises.
   (b)   Except in buildings devoted primarily to the manufacturing or
processing of corrosive liquid, storage of corrosive liquid within buildings
shall be in carboys or containers constructed and protected as required by the
Interstate Commerce Commission regulations. Storage in quantity shall be at the
lowest floor of the building within a fire-resistive storage room equipped with
adequate natural or mechanical ventilation and conforming to the applicable
provisions of Section 3129.43(c).
   (c)   Buildings devoted primarily to the manufacture or processing of
corrosive liquid shall be of Type I-A, I-B or I-C, fireproof construction, and
the arrangement, location and protection of such buildings shall be subject to
the approval of the Fire Chief. All storage tanks shall be installed within
diked areas arranged to receive and retain the contents of the tanks in the
event of rupture or leakage.
   (d)   Corrosive liquids shall be stored over safety catch basins or similar
devices so that leakage of such liquids shall not endanger life or property.
Corrosive liquids shall be stored so that unauthorized persons shall not have
ready access thereto. None shall be stored in proximity to any substance in
combination with which toxic vapors or gases will be produced.
   (e)   Containers of nitric acid or perchloric acid, or of other corrosive
liquid which reacts dangerously in a similar manner, shall be stored only on
brick, concrete or asphalt floors, or other approved acid-resistive floor or
support. No sawdust, hay, excelsior or other organic substance, or other acids,
chemicals, copper or brass, shall be stored in close proximity.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.48 Handling and Use of Corrosive Liquids
   (a)   The storage, handling and use of corrosive liquids shall be such as
not to endanger life or property or to be hazardous in the event of fire or
fire-fighting operations.
   (b)   Except in buildings devoted primarily to the manufacturing or
processing of corrosive liquid, the quantity of corrosive liquid kept or
maintained above the lowest floor level within one (1) room or fire area shall
not exceed that required for one (1) day’s operations.
   (c)   A sufficient quantity of inert absorbent material suitable for the
material stored shall be provided for absorbing all spilled liquids from floors
where corrosive liquids are stored or used. Where corrosive liquids are of such
nature that flushing with water is the proper procedure for clearing away
spillage or leakage, first-aid hose or other approved adequate water supply
shall be maintained in close proximity to the place of storage or usage.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.49 Quantity Storage and Use of Poisonous, Irritant, Corrosive or Fume
Hazard Gases
   (a)   Ammonia may be stored in outside above- ground tanks in isolated
locations where the fumes from such storage or resulting from leakage will not
create a nuisance or endanger life.
   (b)   Except as provided in subsection (a) hereof, and except as otherwise
specifically permitted under conditions deemed by the Fire Chief to provide
adequate safety for life and property, all poisonous, irritant, corrosive or
fume hazard gases shall be stored in cylinders conforming to the specifications
of the Interstate Commerce Commission and bearing the ICC label of approval,
and periodically retested as required by the ICC regulations. The storage of
such cylinders shall be subject to the rules and regulations of the Division of
Fire, and to their direction, so as to insure safety to life and property and
prevent hazards in the event of fire or fire-fighting operations.
   (c)   Such ICC cylinders may be stored outdoors in enclosed lots or yards in
sparsely settled sections at the discretion of the Chief and under such
restrictions as he or she may deem necessary.
   (d)   When such ICC cylinders are stored within buildings, they shall be
stored at the ground floor only, in a well-ventilated room or compartment
conforming to the applicable provisions of Section 3129.43(c), readily
accessible from the street or from an open space leading to a street, and
equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler system and with provisions so
that the room or compartment may be readily flooded with water from an outside
controlled source. However, storage rooms or compartments for lighter-than-air
gases, such as ammonia, may be in the top stories of buildings in locations
from which such gases can readily diffuse into the atmosphere and as approved
by the Chief.
   (e)   No poisonous, irritant, corrosive or fume hazard gas, except such
gases permitted in refrigerating systems, shall be used above the ground floor
of any building except in a building equipped with an automatic sprinkler
system or other approved automatic fire extinguishing equipment and occupied
exclusively by the person, firm or corporation using such gas.
   (f)   No poisonous, irritant, corrosive or fume hazard gas, except such
gases permitted in refrigerating systems, shall be stored or used in any Class
A or Class B multiple dwelling or dwelling house or in any building, lot or
enclosure located within fifty (50) feet of the nearest wall of a building
occupied so as to come under the occupancy classifications of Institutional
Occupancy, Educational Occupancy or Assembly Occupancy. (Note exceptions under
Section
385.46(a)).
   (g)   The Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals may by rule
prescribe the maximum quantity of any fume hazard gas to be kept upon any
premises or in connection with any occupancy and the manner of storage and use
thereof.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.50 Liquefied Chlorine
   (a)   No person shall store, sell, use or transport any liquefied chlorine
without a permit from the Fire Chief.
   (b)   Chlorine shall not be compressed or liquefied, nor shall any plants
for such purpose be constructed, erected or placed in operation after June 27,
1949, unless a separation of not less than 250 feet is provided between any
building used for such purpose and every lot line, street line or alley line
forming a boundary of the premises on which such building is located. No such
operation shall be carried on within two hundred fifty (250) feet of a building
upon the same premises intended for human occupancy and not used for the
compression or liquefaction of chlorine.
   (c)   All storage buildings and storage spaces where liquefied chlorine is
stored shall be readily accessible from the exterior of the building and when
deemed necessary by the Chief, such rooms shall be equipped with approved
automatic sprinkler systems, or the cylinders of chlorine gas shall be placed
in a receptacle approved by the Chief, so arranged as to be automatically
flooded with cold water from a reliable source in case of fire or leakage.
   (d)   The provisions of this chapter and Chapters
383 and
3129 shall not be interpreted to preclude or prevent the use of chlorine or
chlorine-generating chemicals for water purification purposes and other
purposes by qualified persons under proper safeguards and within rooms provided
with adequate natural ventilation.
   (e)   No liquefied chlorine shall be sold except to persons who hold permits
from the Chief for the use or storage of liquefied chlorine.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.51 Containers for Compressed Gases
   (a)   Except as provided in subsection (b) hereof, no person shall store,
sell or transport any gas compressed to a pressure greater than twenty-five
(25) psi at seventy degrees Fahrenheit (70°F) or any flammable liquid having a
Reid (ASTM D 323) vapor pressure exceeding forty (40) psi absolute at one
hundred degrees Fahrenheit (100°F) unless it is contained in a metal cylinder
or other container conforming to the specifications of the Interstate Commerce
Commission and bearing the ICC label of approval. All such containers shall be
filed, used and maintained in conformity with the rules and regulations of the
Interstate Commerce Commission and shall be plainly marked with the name of the
owner and manufacturer and identified by serial number.
   (b)   For a period not exceeding three (3) years after June 27, 1949, the
Fire Chief may permit the continued use of cylinders which are not ICC
cylinders and which were in use on June 27, 1949, when their continued use is
deemed by him or her not to create a hazard to life or property.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
PYROXYLIN PLASTICS
§ 385.52 Scope and Application of Provisions
   (a)   The provisions of Sections
385.52 to
385.65 shall govern the fabrication, handling and storage of pyroxylin plastic
in factories or other manufacturing plants, whether in the form of raw
material, stock in process of manufacturing, unfinished or finished product or
scrap, and the storage, handling and display for sale of pyroxylin products.
   Such provisions shall also apply to other plastics and products of similar
characteristics and of similar fire hazard.
   (b)   As used in the Fire Prevention and Building Codes, “pyroxylin plastic”
means any plastic product, substance, material or compound, other than
nitrocellulose photographic film, having soluble cotton or similar
nitrocellulose as a base, including pyralin, celluloid, fiberloid, viscoloid,
zylonite and similar products, materials or compounds by whatever name known,
whether in the form of raw material or finished product.
   (c)   The Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals may classify any
other plastic material or substance or compound having similar or corresponding
fire-hazardous characteristics as of the same type as pyroxylin plastic and
subject to the provisions of Sections
385.52 to
385.65.
   (d)   A permit from the Fire Chief shall be required for the fabrication,
handling, storage or possession of pyroxylin plastic in excess of twenty-five
(25) pounds in one (1) fire area in factories or other manufacturing plants, or
in storage rooms or storage buildings, or other rooms, spaces or premises.
However, no permit shall be required for the storage, handling and display for
sale of limited quantities of finished pyroxylin products in stores or other
mercantile establishments.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.53 Buildings for Manufacture
   (a)   No building or part of a building shall be used for the manufacture of
pyroxylin plastic products when such building is located within fifty (50) feet
of the nearest wall of any building occupied as a school, theater or other
place of public assembly or amusement, or occupied as a dwelling house or
multiple dwelling.
   (b)   Every building and part of a building used for the manufacture of
pyroxylin plastic products shall be classified as high hazard occupancy.
   (c)   Every building and part of a building used for manufacturing pyroxylin
plastic products shall be equipped with approved automatic sprinklers.
   (d)   All artificial lighting in connection with pyroxylin plastic
manufacture shall be by electricity and all electrical installations shall
conform to the applicable provisions of Chapter 3161.
   (e)   No building or part of a building used for manufacturing articles of
pyroxylin plastic shall house manufacturing processes or storage involving
flammable liquid, combustible fiber or other fiber or other fire-hazardous
substance not necessary for the manufacture of the pyroxylin plastic articles,
unless separated from the space used for manufacturing articles of pyroxylin
plastic by an unpierced three (3) hour occupancy separation.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.54 Storage in Process of Manufacture
   Pyroxylin plastic in excess of an aggregate of twenty-five (25) pounds,
either in the raw state or as a manufactured product and intended for use in
further manufacturing processes, shall be stored as follows:
   (a)   Pyroxylin plastic up to five hundred (500) pounds shall be stored in
an approved vented “standard storage cabinet” conforming to the applicable
provisions of Section 3129.43(d). No such storage cabinet shall have an
aggregate interior volume of more than thirty (30) cubic feet nor shall any
cabinet be used to store more than five hundred (500) pounds of pyroxylin
plastic or more than two hundred fifty (250) pounds in any one (1) compartment
of such cabinet. Not more than five hundred (500) pounds of pyroxylin plastic
stored as specified in this subsection (a) shall be contained within any one
(1) room, and every such room containing in excess of twenty-five (25) pounds
of pyroxylin plastic shall be separated from other rooms or spaces by fire-
resistive walls or partitions and floor and ceiling construction having a fire
resistance rating of not less than three-fourths (3/4) hour. Interior door
openings in such walls or partitions shall be equipped with self-closing fire
doors having fire resistance ratings of not less than three-fourths (3/4) hour.
   (b)   Pyroxylin plastic stored in excess of five hundred (500) pounds in any
one (1) establishment shall be stored within a room conforming to the
applicable provisions of Section 3129.43(c), and conforming to the following
additional requirements:
      (1)   Such fire-resistive rooms shall not exceed one thousand five
hundred (1,500) cubic feet capacity and shall not contain more than ten
thousand (10,000) pounds of pyroxylin plastic.
      (2)   Walls or partitions shall be of incombustible material having a
fire resistance rating of not less than four (4) hours.
      (3)   The floor and ceiling construction shall be of incombustible
material and shall have a fire resistance rating of not less than three (3)
hours.
      (4)   All door openings shall be equipped with two (2) fire doors, with
one (1) fire door provided on each face of the wall at each door opening. The
interior door shall be automatic closing and the outer door shall be of the
self-closing swinging type. The aggregate fire resistance rating of the two (2)
doors shall not be less than four (4) hours.
      (5)   Each such room shall be separately fire vented to the outer air
with vent or vents having a minimum effective cross-sectional area in the ratio
of one hundred forty (140) square inches for each one thousand (1,000) pound
capacity. A fire-resistive room of one thousand five hundred (1,500) cubic feet
capacity shall have vent openings not less than one thousand four hundred
(1,400) square inches in area. Such vents shall be either in the exterior
walls, the ceiling or the roof. When located in the ceiling they shall be
extended to a safe location above the roof level. All vent openings which face
on a street, court or other open space shall be at least fifty (50) feet from
other openings not in the same plane.
      (6)   Horizontal or vertical vent flues inside of a building shall be of
construction having a fire resistance rating of not less than four (4) hours;
except that vent flues for pyroxylin plastic not exceeding two hundred fifty
(250) pounds in aggregate weight may be of sheet metal riveted or otherwise
assembled in an approved manner so as to be gas-tight, not lighter than
eighteen (18) U.S. gauge, covered with not less than one (1) inch of approved
heat insulating material and maintained not less than nine (9) inches from any
combustible construction or material.
      (7)   Each vent opening directly through an exterior wall shall be
protected against the weather by a single thickness of glass painted or colored
a dark color or by other incombustible fragile material mounted in a sash
arranged to open automatically in case of fire, through the operation of an
approved releasing device placed inside the sash. The effective cross-section
area of a vent opening in an exterior wall shall be deemed to be the total area
of glass surface. No pane of glass shall be smaller than two hundred (200)
square inches.
      (8)   Fire-resistive storage rooms shall be equipped with at least one
(1) automatic sprinkler for each eight hundred thirty-four (834) pounds of
pyroxylin plastic capacity. Whenever such room is divided into two (2) or more
compartments at least one (1) automatic sprinkler shall be provided in each
compartment. A vault of one thousand five hundred (1,500) cubic feet capacity
shall have at least twelve (12) sprinkler heads.
      (9)   All lights within fire-resistive storage rooms shall be at the
ceiling level and shall be operated by a switch located outside of such rooms.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.55 Storage Cabinets for Pyroxylin Plastic in Process of Manufacture
   (a)   Storage cabinets for the storage of pyroxylin plastic in process of
manufacture shall be vented and shall conform to the requirements specified in
Section 3129.43(d). Cabinets having a capacity in excess of two hundred fifty
(250) pounds of such products shall be divided into at least two distinct
compartments, each compartment provided with an independent door and vent. The
separating partition shall be practically air- tight.
   (b)   Cabinet vents shall have an area of not less than thirty-six (36)
square inches for each two hundred fifty (250) pounds capacity and shall
conform to Section
385.54(b)(6).
   (c)   Cabinets holding over fifty (50) pounds of pyroxylin products shall be
equipped with at least one (1) automatic sprinkler for each two hundred fifty
(250) pounds capacity or fraction thereof. If divided into two (2) or more
compartments, each compartment shall have a least one (1) automatic sprinkler
head.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.56 Cooling Pyroxylin Plastic in Process of Manufacture
   Whenever in the process of manufacturing pyroxylin plastic products, saws,
abrasives or cutting tools are used which are likely to heat the material to
the ignition point, a jet of water shall be continuously played upon the
surface so heated.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.57 Dust, Scraps and Other Refuse Material
   (a)   Except as otherwise permitted in specific instances by the Fire Chief,
all scrap cuttings and shaving, sawdust and other refuse material resulting
from the manufacture of pyroxylin plastic products shall be collected at
frequent intervals and placed in an incombustible receptacle in which it shall
be kept continuously immersed in water until removal from the premises.
   (b)   All refuse material shall be promptly removed from the premises, and
not more than three hundred fifty (350) pounds of such material shall be on the
premises at any one time.
   (c)   Sections
385.30 to
385.34 shall govern required safeguards relating to dust in plastic
manufacture.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.58 Flammable Liquids in Manufacture
   (a)   Any flammable liquid stored upon the premises for use in connection
with manufacturing pyroxylin plastic products shall be stored in conformity
with the provisions of this Fire Prevention Code governing flammable liquids
and in conformity with this section. The storage of flammable liquids shall be
isolated from the storage of pyroxylin plastic.
   (b)   Flammable liquids stored or kept inside a building shall not exceed
twenty-five (25) gallons within one (1) fire area stored either in safety cans,
sealed containers or approved metal cabinets, except that quantities in excess
of that amount may be stored in fire resistive rooms for the storing or
handling of hazardous substances constructed as specified in Section 3129.43
(c).
   (c)   Cementing of sheets and other extensive cementing processes, where
considerable quantities of flammable cement are used, and dipping and spraying
in, or with, flammable liquid shall be done in well ventilated rooms devoted
exclusively to such work and separated from the remainder of the building by
vapor- tight walls or partitions having a fire resistance rating of not less
than three-fourths (3/4), hour. Spraying and dipping shall be conducted in
conformity with the provisions governing such operations included in Sections
385.01 to
385.17.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.59 Separations Between Workmen and Material Being Worked Upon
   Whenever operations include cutting, turning, shaping, beading, sanding,
molding, hubbing, artificial softening or heating, or the use of mechanical
equipment which introduces friction or is specially fire hazardous, operators
shall be stationed not closer than three (3) feet apart and the amount of
material per operator shall not exceed one-half (1/2) day’s supply or the
quantity actually in process of manufacture, and shall be limited to the
capacity of three (3) standard tote boxes, including material awaiting removal
or use.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.60 Clearance from Hot Surfaces
   Pyroxylin plastics shall be kept or stored at least two (2) feet from steam
pipes, radiators and other room or space heating devices or hot surfaces.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.61 Fire Extinguishing Equipment
   (a)   Fire extinguishing equipment shall be provided in conformity with the
provisions of Fire Prevention and Building Codes deemed necessary by the Fire
Chief.
   (b)   All buildings and parts of buildings used for manufacturing pyroxylin
plastic or for storing pyroxylin plastic in process of manufacture, or except
as provided in Section
385.63, used for storing more than fifty (50) pounds of pyroxylin plastic in
one (1) fire area, shall be equipped with approved automatic fire extinguishing
equipment.
   (c)   In all manufacturing rooms at least one (1) fire pail, kept
continuously full of water, shall be provided for every two (2) persons engaged
in manufacturing articles from pyroxylin plastic.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.62 Protection at Heating Equipment
   All radiators, heating coils and uncovered pipes or returns used for heating
that are near the floor or are so located as to permit combustible material,
waste or dirt to come in contact with them shall be guarded with one-fourth (1/
4) inch mesh galvanized steel wire cloth, twenty (20) U.S. gauge or approved
equivalent. The tops of such enclosures shall be sloped so as to prevent their
use as shelves.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.63 Storage of Finished Products Contained in Boxes, Cartons, Etc.
   (a)   The provisions of this section shall apply only to the storage of
pyroxylin plastic products in packages, boxes, cartons or similar containers
where such products are adequately separated and insulated by the method of
packaging or by the boxes, cartons or similar containers in which they are
contained, and when only limited small quantities are contained in one (1)
package, box, carton or container.
   (b)   Whenever the storage space required for the storage of finished
pyroxylin products in packages, boxes, cartons or similar containers exceeds
three hundred fifty (350) cubic feet in one (1) fire area, such products shall
be stored in a separate storage room used for pyroxylin plastic articles only.
Such separate storage rooms shall conform to the applicable provisions of
Section 3129.43(c), and walls, partitions, doors and other elements thereof
shall have not less than the minimum fire resistance ratings specified therein.
   (c)   All separate storage rooms which exceed three hundred fifty (350)
cubic feet in volume used for the storage of finished pyroxylin plastic
products shall be equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler system with at
least one (1) sprinkler head for each sixty-four (64) square feet of floor area
or with other approved automatic fire extinguishing equipment. All such rooms,
irrespective of volume, shall have approved provisions for fire venting. No
such room shall exceed five hundred (500) square feet in floor area or five
thousand (5,000) cubic feet in volume.
   (d)   Each storeroom in which finished pyroxylin plastic products are stored
shall be provided with adequate ventilation equivalent to a clear opening of at
least one-half (1/2) square inch per cubic foot of room content. Such
ventilation shall be natural ventilation by means of sash glazed with thin
glass and equipped for automatic opening as specified for the storage of
pyroxylin products in process of manufacture, in Section
385.54(b)(7), or when approved fire-venting is otherwise provided, shall be
approved mechanical ventilation.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.64 Display of Pyroxylin Plastic Products for Sale
   (a)   For the purposes of this Fire Prevention Code, pyroxylin plastic
products shall be divided into two (2) classes as follows:
      (1)   Class “A” articles shall be those made from material over one-tenth
(1/10) of an inch thick and not finely divided during manufacture into teeth,
scroll work or projections.
      (2)   Class “B” articles shall be those not coming within the above Class
“A,” and shall include articles of an individual weight of one-half (1/2) ounce
or less, regardless of the thickness of material from which they are made.
   (b)   All display for sale of pyroxylin plastic products in stores or other
mercantile establishments, and in wholesale jobbing establishments, warehouses
or elsewhere, shall be in showcases or show windows except as follows:
      (1)   Articles may be placed on tables not more than four (4) feet wide
and ten (10) feet long spaced not less than three (3) feet apart. Where
articles are displayed on counters they shall be arranged in like manner.
      (2)   The spaces underneath such tables or counters shall be kept free of
storage of any kind and of accumulations of paper, refuse or other combustible
material.
      (3)   Class “A” articles shall be arranged in single layers with at least
one (1) inch separation between each article. Articles consisting of two (2) or
more pieces shall be considered as a single article.
      (4)   Class “B” articles shall not be arranged on display tables in more
than two (2) layers except in case of articles which are tied together such as
bundles of combs. Such latter articles shall be limited to a single layer of
individual packages.
      (5)   No sales or display table shall be located so that in the event of
fire at such table, the table will interfere with free exit from the room in at
least one (1) direction.
   (c)   Lighting shall be so arranged that radiated heat will not cause
dangerous increases in temperature of the displayed articles, and lamps shall
be protected so that hot particles will not fall upon the plastic products
should a lamp or lamps be broken.
   (d)   Wherever pyroxylin plastic products are displayed for sale there shall
be a sign, prominently placed, marked “PYROXYLIN – FLAMMABLE” in letters not
less than three-fourths (3/4) inch in height.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.65 Supplementary Rules and Regulations
   (a)   The fabrication, handling, storage and display for sale of pyroxylin
plastic products shall conform to the provisions of this Fire Prevention Code
and of these Codified Ordinances, and with accepted good practice. When deemed
necessary, the Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals may promulgate
rules and regulations supplementary to the provisions of this Code and these
Codified Ordinances to establish standards of accepted good practice. In the
absence of such supplementary rules and regulations, conformity with NFPA
Standard No. 42 entitled “Storage, Handling and Use of Pyroxylin Plastics in
Factories” and NFPA Standard No. 43 entitled “Pyroxylin Plastics in Warehouses
Wholesale and Retail Stores,” shall be accepted as conformity with accepted
good practice.
   (b)   When deemed necessary for safety to life or property, the Fire Chief
may require compliance with any requirement or recommendation of NFPA Standard
Nos. 42 and 43.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
TIRE RETREADING AND REBUILDING PLANTS
§ 385.66 Permit Required
   A permit from the Fire Chief shall be required for all tire retreading or
rebuilding plants.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.67 Classification as High Hazard Occupancy
   Tire retreading or rebuilding plants shall be classified as high hazard
occupancy and shall have approved occupancy separations from other occupancies
in the building.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.68 Rooms for Hazardous Processes
   (a)   Buffing machines shall be located in a separate room used for no other
purpose. Each buffing machine shall be connected to an approved blower or dust
collecting system.
   (b)   Each room in which rubber cement is used or mixed or flammable solvent
is applied shall be equipped with natural or mechanical ventilation adequate to
prevent fire or health hazards as approved by the Fire Chief and the
Commissioner of Air Pollution Control. Each such room shall conform to the
applicable provisions of Section 3129.43(c).
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.69 Automatic Fire Extinguishing Equipment
   Approved automatic sprinklers or other approved automatic fire extinguishing
equipment shall be provided above every buffing machine, and in each room in
which rubber cement is used or mixed or flammable solvent is applied. In
buildings which are not equipped throughout with approved automatic sprinklers,
sprinklers installed under the provisions of this section may be connected to
the domestic water supply with supply piping not less than one (1) inch nominal
diameter. Sprinkler systems connected to the domestic water supply shall
conform to the provisions of Section
389.32.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
MOTION PICTURE FILM
§ 385.70 Cellulose Nitrate Motion Picture Films
   (a)   Scope and Standard. This section applies to the storage and handling
of cellulose nitrate motion picture film hereinafter referred to as “nitrate
film.” Film having a cellulose acetate or other approved slow- burning base,
marked safety film, is exempt from these provisions.
   When deemed necessary for safety to life or property, the Fire Chief may
require compliance with any requirement or recommendation of NFPA Standard No.
40 entitled “Cellulose Nitrate Motion Picture Film.”
   (b)   Permit Required.
      (1)   No person shall store, keep or have on hand more than twenty-five
(25) pounds (for thirty-five (35) millimeter film about five thousand (5,000)
feet) of nitrate motion picture film without a permit from the Chief.
      (2)   No person shall sell, lease or otherwise dispose of any nitrate
motion picture film to any person not having a permit to handle, use or display
such film.
   (c)   Storage of Film. Storage of nitrate motion picture film, not in
process or being worked on, shall be in accordance with the following:
      (1)   Except as provided in subsection (c)(3) hereof, amounts in excess
of twenty-five (25) pounds (five (5) standard rolls) but not in excess of one
thousand (1,000) pounds (two hundred (200) standard rolls) shall be kept in
approved cabinets or in vaults.
      (2)   Amounts in excess of one thousand (1,000) pounds shall be kept in
vaults.
      (3)   Unexposed nitrate film enclosed in the original, unbroken, shipping
case, conforming to ICC regulations shall be kept in a room equipped with
approved automatic fire sprinkler system.
      (4)   If the amount exceeds seven hundred fifty (750) pounds (one hundred
fifty (150) standard rolls), it shall be stored in a room used for no other
purpose.
   (d)   Film Cabinets.
      (1)   Cabinets shall be of approved construction and shall have a
capacity not in excess of three hundred seventy-five (375) pounds (seventy-five
(75) standard rolls).
      (2)   Every cabinet having a capacity of over fifty (50) pounds of film
shall be provided with a vent to the outside of the building. The vent shall
have a minimum effective section area of fourteen (14) square inches per one
hundred (100) pounds of film capacity. Vent flues shall be of construction
equivalent to No. 18 U.S. gauge riveted sheet steel, and where inside the
building shall be covered with one (1) inch of approved heat insulating
material.
      (3)   Cabinets holding over seventy-five (75) pounds of film shall be
provided with at least one (1) automatic sprinkler; provided that a cabinet
constructed so that each roll is in a separate compartment and will burn out
without communicating fire to film in any other compartment, need not be
provided with an automatic sprinkler.
      (4)   Film in cabinets shall be in individual roll containers or in ICC
shipping containers. Materials other than film shall not be stored in the same
cabinet with film. Where cabinets are provided with individual insulated
compartments for each roll, the individual rolls stored therein need not be in
cans or other containers.
   (e)   Film Vaults.
      (1)   Film vaults shall be constructed, vented and sprinklered in
accordance with the Building Code.
      (2)   All film in vaults shall be in containers, either in single or
double roll containers, cardboard boxes conforming to ICC Specification 12-B or
ICC shipping containers.
   (f)   Handling of Nitrate Film.
      (1)   All nitrate film shall be kept in closed containers except during
the actual time it is being worked upon or examined.
      (2)   Nitrate film shall not be placed or kept under benches, tables or
other surfaces which would shield it from the discharge of sprinklers.
      (3)   Scrap nitrate film shall be kept separate from wastepaper, safety
film and other rubbish, and shall be kept under water at all times. It shall be
collected from workrooms at least once daily, and removed to a room used for no
other purpose, where it shall be kept underwater in steel drums or metal
containers with tight covers. Scrap film shall be disposed of at frequent
intervals. Discarded film in full or part rolls shall be kept in containers in
vaults. Scrap film shall not be baled or burned.
   (g)   Enclosures for Motion Picture Projectors. Motion picture projectors
shall not be operated with cellulose nitrate motion picture film except when
located in enclosures constructed, equipped and maintained in accordance with
the Building Code.
   (h)   Handling in Motion Picture Theaters and Other Occupancies.
      (1)   Rewinding of nitrate films shall be performed either in a special
rewind room at an approved location, or in the projection room. An approved can
or scrap film having a self-closing hinged cover shall be provided.
      (2)   Nitrate film in any projection room or rewinding room shall kept as
follows:
         A.   Up to forty (40) pounds of film (eight thousand (8,000) feet of
thirty-five (35) millimeter film) may be kept in ICC shipping containers, or an
approved cabinet in each room;
         B.   If the amount of film on hand exceeds forty (40) pounds, an
approved cabinet shall be provided, in which the amount of film in excess of
forty (40) pounds shall be kept.
   (i)   Motion Picture Film Exchanges. Nitrate motion picture film exchanges
shall be located in buildings or portions thereof equipped with an approved
automatic fire sprinkler system.
   (j)   Institutional Occupancy Buildings. Nitrocellulose film shall not be
stored in any building or part of a building of institutional occupancy
classification except in vaults equipped with explosion vents conforming to the
applicable provisions of this section.
   (k)   Compliance. The handling, use and storage of motion picture films,
except cellulose-acetate or other specifically approved films of slow burning
character, whether in the form of negatives, raw stock, finished products,
discarded scrap or used film, and of other nitrocellulose films used in
photography or in radiography, and the regulation of certain matters related
thereto, shall be as prescribed in this section.
   (l)   Using Safe Film. No film exchange or other establishment handling
nitrocellulose motion picture films shall directly or indirectly issue any such
motion picture film for projection until it has ascertained by unreeling and
detailed examination that such film is in such undamaged condition to be safe
for immediate projection. However, film which has not been previously projected
need not be so examined if it is believed to be in undamaged, safe condition.
All films found to be damaged shall be repaired and made safe for use before
being issued.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
DRY CLEANING AND DYEING
§ 385.71 Storage and Use of Liquids and Solvents
   (a)   Dry cleaning and dyeing liquids and solvents shall be stored and used
in dry cleaning and dry dyeing establishments in conformity with the statutes
governing dry cleaning and dyeing establishments, the rules and regulations
therefor promulgated by the State Fire Marshal and the provisions of this Fire
Prevention Code governing the storage of flammable liquids.
   (b)   Buildings for and installation of Class I, II or III systems of dry
cleaning or dyeing as defined in the statutes shall be classified as high
hazard occupancy and shall conform to the provisions of the Ohio Building Code
and of this Fire Prevention Code, and the rules and regulations of the
Commissioner of Air Pollution Control. In cases of conflict in applying
provisions more restrictive than those contained in statutes or in rules or
regulations promulgated by authority of statute, the provisions ruled
applicable by the Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals shall
govern.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
FUEL OIL, OIL BURNERS AND OIL BURNING EQUIPMENT
§ 385.72 Storage and Handling
   Chapter 3155 shall govern the storage and handling of fuel oil in connection
with oil burning equipment and the installation of fuel oil tanks, oil burners
and oil burning equipment in connection therewith.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.73 Oil-Fired Appliances
   (a)   Section 3155.29 shall govern approved standards for oil burning
equipment.
   (b)   Except as provided in subsections (c) and (d) hereof, and in Section
3155.29(b), the installation of oil burning equipment shall conform to NFPA
Standard No. 31 entitled “Installation of Oil Burning Equipment.” This standard
shall be deemed to define accepted safe practice, as provided in Section
3155.29.
   (c)   The storage and handling of fuel oil for oil- fired small cooking and
heating appliances installed in buildings of residential occupancy shall
conform to the provisions of subsections (h) to (m) hereof.
   (d)   Outside above-ground fuel oil storage tanks shall be installed in
conformity with the provisions governing outside above-ground storage of Class
III liquids included in Section
385.24. When exceeding two thousand (2,000) gallons individual or aggregate
capacity, outside above-ground tanks for the storage of fuel oil shall be
enclosed within dikes as prescribed in Section
383.26.
   (e)   Tanks for fuel oil, and all fill lines, supply lines, vent piping and
the piping from such tanks to oil burners, and the installation of the same,
shall be subject to the permits, inspections and approval of the Division of
Fire.
   (f)   Oil burning equipment and the installation of the same, except oil
burning equipment installed in dwelling houses or in appliances serving only
one (1) dwelling unit, shall be subject to the permits, inspections and
approval of the Commissioner of Air Pollution Control.
   (g)   Oil burning equipment and the installation of the same in dwelling
houses or where installed in appliances serving only one (1) dwelling unit
shall be subject to the permits, inspections, and approval of the Division of
Building.
   (h)   The provisions of subsections (h) to (m) hereof shall govern the
storage and handling of fuel oil for oil-fire space heaters or other oil-fired
small heating or cooking appliances installed in buildings or parts of
buildings of residential occupancy classification, where a supply of fuel oil
is maintained on the premises in barrels, drums or other containers separate
from the tanks integral with the heating or cooking appliances and not
connected to the heating or cooking appliances by an approved system of piping
or tubing. They shall also apply to all such storage or handling regardless of
the date of installation of the space heater or other oil- fired small heating
or cooking appliance.
   (i)   The provisions of this section shall supersede any conflicting
provisions included in approved standards specified in this Fire Prevention
Code.
   (j)   The quantity of fuel oil stored within any building or part of a
building or on premises of residential occupancy classification shall not
exceed five (5) gallons unless a permit for storage in excess of that quantity
has been secured from the Fire Chief. Fuel oil contained within tanks integral
with the heating or cooking appliances or directly connected thereto, and not
exceeding ten (10) gallons capacity, shall not be deemed to be in storage.
   (k)   When not stored or kept in rooms conforming to the provisions of
Section 3129.43(c), in the manner prescribed for storage in such fire-resistive
rooms in Chapter
383, or stored in fixed tanks installed and connected to the heating or cooking
appliance as prescribed in NFPA Standard No. 31, the quantity stored within any
building or part of a building of residential occupancy classification shall
not exceed five (5) gallons per dwelling unit, and shall be kept in sealed
containers or safety cans of not more than five (5) gallons capacity each. Such
sealed containers or safety cans shall be kept in a safe, cool place where they
will not constitute a fire-hazard, and shall not be kept within or adjacent to
any required means of egress.
   (l)   Containers, barrels or drums of capacity in excess of five (5) gallons
shall be stored outside of such buildings and, when not buried underground,
shall be on racks not less than ten (10) feet from any building or part of a
building of human occupancy and not less than five (5) feet from any common lot
line, and not within any front yard or side street yard space. The quantity
stored outside above-ground on premises occupied by buildings of residential
occupancy classification shall not exceed three (3) fifty-five (55) gallon
drums for each dwelling unit on the premises, or the approved equivalent
thereof. The aggregate stored on any such premises shall not exceed ten (10)
fifty- five (55) gallon drums or the approved equivalent thereof. Such
containers shall be of incombustible material, and each such container shall be
equipped with an approved lock-type fill cap which shall also serve as a vent
and, when the draw-off from such containers is by gravity flow into portable
containers, with an approved self-closing, non-drip, lock-type faucet.
   (m)   The filling of fuel reservoirs on oil-fired small heating cooking
appliances shall be done from safety cans of approved type. Fuel oil shall not
be transported from any barrel, drum or container in portable containers other
than approved safety cans not exceeding five (5) gallons capacity.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
COMBUSTIBLE WASTE AND ASHES
§ 385.74 Storage and Handling
   (a)   No combustible waste material such as wood, paper, discarded
combustible containers or packing material shall be stored in any building
except in an approved fire-resistive room or incombustible container. All such
accumulated materials shall be removed or destroyed at regular intervals.
   (b)   Packing rooms shall be located as remotely as possible from large
stocks of combustible goods and shall be kept free of combustible waste
material.
   (c)   Ashes shall not be deposited or kept in anything other than an
incombustible container. When placed outdoors, such containers shall be closed
containers or shall be covered.
   (d)   Highly flammable wastes such as pyroxylin scrap or dust, sawdust,
paint or flammable liquid residue or oil or paint saturated rags and waste,
shall be placed and kept in approved safety cans and receptacles until removal
or destruction.
   (e)   Empty combustible containers stored outdoors shall be placed at least
ten (10) feet from any building or other structure. When stored in large
quantities they shall be securely and compactly piled so that no pile exceeds
two hundred twenty-five (225) square feet in area or twelve (12) feet in
height. Aisles not less than six (6) feet wide shall be maintained between
piles.
   (f)   No combustible waste material shall be kept or stored outdoors except
in approved incombustible containers. All combustible litter, dried vegetation
or waste flammable liquid, stored outdoors and deemed to be a fire hazard by
the Fire Chief, shall be promptly removed.
   (g)   Empty barrels, drums or containers of a capacity in excess of five (5)
gallons from which flammable liquid was drawn shall not be stored in any
building or on any premises unless entirely freed of flammable vapor, or filled
with water, unless kept in a safe location outdoors in conformity with the
provisions of Section
383.27 or in an isolated storage building approved by the Chief.
   (h)   No material shall be stored outdoors in violation of any provision of
the Zoning Code.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.75 Debris from Demolition
   (a)   All waste materials and debris shall be removed promptly and shall not
be stored in any location where they may create a fire hazard or obstruct
access for fire fighting or obstruct the use of a sidewalk or roadway beyond
the extent authorized by permit. Dry material and rubbish shall be wetted down
when necessary to lay dust or prevent it from being blown about.
   (b)   Salamanders and similar heating devices, shall be used in conformity
with statutes and the provisions of ANSI Standard A 10.21 entitled “Safety Code
for Building Construction.”
   (c)   No combustible material shall be stored in such quantity and in such
location that unprotected steel or concrete supported by combustible formwork
would be endangered thereby in the event of fire.
   (d)   Whenever combustible concrete forms are used and whenever combustible
material is stored at any floor level, approved hand fire extinguishing
equipment or approved connected first-aid hose, as directed by the Fire Chief,
shall be provided and maintained at all floors where such combustible materials
are in use or stored.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.76 Outdoor Storage of Combustibles
   (a)   Combustible material stored outdoors shall be not less than ten (10)
feet from any building or common lot line.
   (b)   When the quantity of combustible material so stored exceeds the
quantity deemed safe by the Fire Chief, or when such material is piled to a
height exceeding twelve (12) feet, such storage shall be not less than thirty
(30) feet from any building or common lot line.
   (c)   Lesser distances than those specified in subsections (a) and (b)
hereof may be approved by the Chief when such material is stored behind an
approved fire wall.
   (d)   Material shall be piled so as to preclude, so far as possible,
ignition by spontaneous combustion.
   (e)   When deemed necessary to reduce the conflagration hazard or to
facilitate fire fighting, piles of combustible material may be limited in size
by the Chief. Adjacent piles shall be separated by open aisle not less than
four (4) feet wide.
   (f)   When the premises used for outdoor storage of combustible material
exceeds fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet in ground area the Chief may
require the installation of yard hydrants, hose and hose houses specified in
Section
389.20.
   (g)   Section 3129.18 shall govern lumber storage outdoors.
   (h)   Section
385.42 shall govern loose combustible fiber stored outdoors.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.77 Combustible Material Used on Signs
   The use of combustible material for decorative or display purposes or for
signs, shall be kept to a minimum, and may be specifically limited when deemed
hazardous by the Division of Fire. Any such combustible material used for
decorative purposes, temporary booths or for display or sign purposes,
including all curtains, cloths, draperies, fiber boards of open cellular
structure and the wood framing therefor, shall be rendered flameproof in an
approved manner. Such flameproofing, unless certified by the Underwriters
Laboratories, Inc. or other approved laboratory as being of a permanent nature,
shall be tested at intervals of not more than six (6) months, and shall be
renewed whenever found necessary, or when directed by the Division. No material
shall be used which cannot be effectively flameproofed.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 385.78 Hazardous Substances
   None of the hazardous substances listed in Section 3129.34 shall be stored
or handled in any building of miscellaneous occupancy classification. However,
flammable liquid in containers kept tightly sealed when not in actual use may
be stored up to an aggregate of five (5) gallons, and isolated buildings of
miscellaneous occupancy classification may be used for the storage of paints,
varnishes, oils and similar finishing materials in limited quantities not
exceeding an aggregate of fifty-five (55) gallons when a permit therefor has
been issued by the Fire Chief, except that fuel oil may be stored as permitted
by Section
385.73(l).
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
DISPLAYS
§ 385.79 Christmas and Temporary Displays
   Christmas displays and similar temporary displays erected without
advertising shall not be subject to the provisions of this chapter but shall be
subject to rules and regulations for fire safety promulgated by the Division of
Fire with approval by the Commissioner of Building.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
MATCHES
§ 385.80 Manufacture and Storage
   (a)   Permit Required.
      (1)   No person shall manufacture matches without a permit from the Fire
Chief.
      (2)   No person shall store matches exceeding in aggregate sixty (60)
matchman’s gross (fourteen thousand four hundred (14,400) matches each gross)
without a permit from the Chief.
   (b)   Wholesale Storage.
      (1)   At wholesale establishments and wherever matches exceeding sixty
(60) matchman’s gross are stored, shipping containers containing matches shall
be arranged in piles not exceeding ten (10) feet in height nor one thousand
five hundred (1,500) cubic feet in volume with aisles at least four (4) feet
wide.
      (2)   Where other materials or commodities are stored on the same floor
with matches, a portion of the room shall be devoted to match storage
exclusively, and a clear space of not less than four (4) feet maintained
between match storage and such other materials or commodities.
   (c)   Storage Not to Be Near Vertical Openings. No matches shall be stored
within ten (10) feet of any open elevator shaft, elevator shaft opening, open
stairway or other vertical opening.
   (d)   Bins Required. Where shipping containers containing matches are
opened, the contents of such broken containers shall be removed and stored in
metal or metal-lined bins equipped with self-closing metal or metal-lined
covers.
   (e)   Storage by Retailers. Where matches are sold at retail, original
sealed packages may be stored on shelves. When such packages are broken,
individual boxes shall be stored in metal or metal-lined bins as described in
subsection (d) hereof.
(Ord. No. 778-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
FLAMMABLE FINISHES
§ 385.81 Bowling Alley Resurfacing and Pin Refinishing
   (a)   No person, firm or corporation shall conduct bowling pin refinishing
or bowling alley resurfacing and refinishing operations involving the use of
flammable or combustible liquids or materials without first obtaining a permit
from the Fire Chief.
   (b)   No person shall conduct bowling alley resurfacing and refinishing
operations while the establishment is open for business. The owner or operator
of any bowling alley, or an agent thereof, shall notify the Fire Division at
least twenty-four (24) hours prior to commencing alley resurfacing and
refinishing operations. Approved ventilation shall be provided. No person shall
operate heating, ventilating or cooling systems employing recirculation of air
during resurfacing and refinishing operations or within one (1) hour following
the application of flammable or combustible finishes. All electric motors or
other equipment in the area which may be a source of ignition shall be shut
down. No person shall smoke or use open flame during the application of
flammable finishes or within one (1) hour following such application.
   A metal waste can with self-closing cover shall be provided for the disposal
of waste rags and materials and the contents shall be removed daily.
   (c)   Pin refinishing involving the application of flammable or combustible
finishes shall be conducted only in a room conforming to the requirements of
Section 3129.43(c) and the following:
      (1)   All power tools shall be effectively grounded. All sanding and
buffing machines shall be provided with approved equipment for collecting dust
during such operations. The contents shall be removed daily and disposed of
safely.
      (2)   The storage of flammable or combustible liquids in such rooms shall
not exceed a combined aggregate of sixty (60) gallons in original metal
containers or approved safety containers not exceeding a five (5) gallon
individual capacity. A metal waste can with self-closing cover shall be
provided for all waste materials and rags, and the contents shall be removed
daily. No person shall smoke or use open flame in finishing rooms at any time.
(Ord. No. 778-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
VEHICLE IMPACT PROTECTION
§ 385.82 Guard Posts
   (a)   Vehicle impact protection required by this code shall be provided by
physical guard post barriers that comply with all of the following
requirements:
      (1)   Constructed of steel not less than six (6) inches (152.4 mm) in
diameter and concrete filled;
      (2)   Spaced not more than fourt (4) feet (1219 mm) between posts on
center;
      (3)   Set not less than three (3) feet (914 mm) deep in a concrete
footing of not less than a fifteen (15) inch (381 mm) diameter;
      (4)   Set with the top of the posts not less than three (3) feet (914 mm)
above ground; and
      (5)   Located not less than three (3) feet (914 mm) from the equipment
requiring protection.
   (b)   Other Barriers. Barriers, other than posts designed to resist, that
deflect or visually deter vehicular impact commensurate with an anticipated
impact scenario shall be permitted where approved by the Fire Chief and/or Fire
Marshal.
   (c)   No person shall install vehicle impact protection guard posts that do
not comply with the requirements set forth in this section without being
subject to penalties provided at Section
381.99.
(Ord. No. 1117-2024. Passed 11-25-24, eff. 12-3-24)
CHAPTER 387 – EXPLOSIVES, INCLUDING THE INDOOR AND OUTDOOR DISPLAY OF
PYROTECHNICS, FLAME EFFECTS, AND LASERS
387.01   Definitions
387.02   Adoption and Incorporation of Regulations and Standards
387.03   Prohibitions
387.04   Exceptions to Provisions
387.05   Operational and Other Requirements
387.06   Permit Registration For Use and/or Storage Required; Fee
387.07   Use/Storage Permit Application and Issuance
387.08   Use/Storage Permit Application Contents
387.09   Permit Revocation; Ceasing Operations
387.10   Permit for Receipt or Shipping of Explosives and Pyrotechnic
Materials; Fee
387.11   Magazines for Explosives
387.12   Storage Requirements for Small Arms Ammunition
387.13   Change of Distance Requirements
387.14   Containers Required; Articles Not to Remain Outside
387.15   Seizure and Confiscation of Explosives
387.16   Insurance
387.17   Severability
387.18   Inspections and Investigations
387.99   Penalty and Enforcement
   Note: Former Chapter 387 was repealed by Ord. No. 1253-07, passed 11-19-07,
eff. 11-21-07.
Cross-reference:
   Fire Chief approval required, CO
3105.11
   Weapons and explosives, CO
Ch. 627
Statutory reference:
   Power to regulate, RC 715.60 et seq.
   State law provisions, RC Ch. 3743
§ 387.01 Definitions
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   “Artificial barricade” means any artificial mound or properly revetted
wall of earth of minimum thickness of not less than three (3) feet or an
equivalent protection.
   (b)   “Binary system” means a two (2) component system for mixing certain
pyrotechnic materials on site. The items are commonly shipped as separate
ingredients: an oxidizer typically labeled “A”; and a fuel, typically labeled
“B”. These ingredients do not become a pyrotechnic material until they are
mixed.
   (c)   “Black powder” means a low explosive consisting of an intimate mixture
of potassium or sodium nitrate, charcoal, and sulfur.
   (d)   “Blaster” means a qualified person in charge of and responsible for
the loading and firing of an explosive.
   (e)   “Blasting agent” means an explosive material that meets prescribed
criteria for insensitivity to initiation.
   For storage, a blasting agent is any material or mixture, consisting of fuel
and oxidizer, intended for blasting and not otherwise defined as an explosive;
if the finished product, as mixed for use or shipment, cannot be detonated by
means of a No. 8 test blasting cap when unconfined. 27 C.F.R. 55.11 (Bureau of
Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives regulation).
   For transportation, a Class 1, Division 1.5 blasting agent is a substance
that is a mass explosion hazard, but is so insensitive that there is very
little probability of initiation or of transition from burning to detonation
under normal conditions of transport. 49 C.F.R. 173.50 (U.S. Department of
Transportation (DOT)).
   (f)   “Consumer fireworks” or “common fireworks” mean any small fireworks
device designed primarily to produce visible effects by combustion or
deflagration that complies with the construction, chemical composition, and
labeling regulations of the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, as set
forth in 16 C.F.R. Parts 1500-1507. Consumer fireworks include small devices
designed to produce audible effects, such as whistling devices, and ground
devices containing fifty (50) mg (two thousandths (0.002) g) or less of
explosive composition (salute powder) per explosive unit and aerial devices
containing one hundred thirty (130) mg or less of explosive material. Consumer
fireworks are classified as fireworks UN 0336 and UN 0337 by the DOT, at 49
C.F.R. 172.101. This term does not include fused setpieces containing
components that together exceed fifty (50) mg of salute powder. Consumer
fireworks, as used in this chapter, are considered pyrotechnic material and
pyrotechnics.
   (g)   “Deflagration” means an explosive reaction such as a rapid combustion
that moves through an explosive material at a velocity less than the speed of
sound in the material.
   (h)   “Detonation” means an exothermic reaction that moves through an
explosive material at a velocity greater than the speed of sound.
   (i)   “Display fireworks” means firework devices intended for use in
fireworks display that are designed to produce visible or audible effects for
entertainment purposes by combustion, deflagration, or detonation. The term
“display fireworks” includes consumer fireworks to be used in fireworks
displays, larger devices of similar construction and chemical composition that
are classed as Explosives 1.3G and described as Fireworks UN0333, UN 0334, and
UN 0335 by the DOT, and other devices that produce visible or audible effects
for entertainment purposes that are classed as Explosives 1.3G, 1.4G, or 1.4S,
and described as pyrotechnics and pyrotechnic material by the DOT. This term
also includes fused setpieces containing components that together exceed fifty
(50) mg of salute powder.
   (j)   “DOT and “DOTn” mean U.S. Department of Transportation.
   (k)   “Exhibitor” means an Ohio exhibitor licensed under the requirements of
Ohio Rev. Code Ann. Section 3743.50 to 3743.55.
   (l)   “Explosive” means:
      (1)   Any chemical compound, mixture or device, the primary or common
purpose of which is to function by explosion, i.e., with substantially
instantaneous release of gas and heat. This includes, but is not limited to,
dynamite and other high explosives, black powder and pellet powder, slurries,
emulsions, water gels, initiating explosives, detonators (blasting caps),
safety fuses, squibs, detonating cord, igniter cord, igniters, fireworks, and
pyrotechnics.
      (2)   The term “explosive” includes any material determined to be within
the scope of 18 U.S.C. Chapter 40, Importation, Manufacture, Distribution and
Storage of Explosive Materials, issued at least annually by the Director of the
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives of the Department of the
Justice, and also includes any material classified as an explosive by the
hazardous material regulations of the DOTn (49 C.F.R.)
      (3)   The term “explosive” must also include all of the following
categories in 49 C.F.R. Parts 1-199, as follows:
      Division 1.1 - Mass exploding (Class A explosives).
      Division 1.2 - Projection hazard (Class A or B explosives).
      Division 1.3 - Fire hazard, minor blast (Class B explosives) - or
projection hazard or both.
      Division 1.4 - Minor explosion hazard (Class C explosive) - not mass
detonating.
      Division 1.5 - Insensitive explosives. (blasting agents) - very little
probability of initiation or transition from burning to detonation under normal
conditions of transport.
      Division 1.6 - Extremely Insensitive Detonating Substances.
      (EIDS) that must pass DOTn criteria as such.
   The requirements of this chapter pertaining to the use, storage, and
handling of explosives, including the permit required by Section
387.06, applies to explosives as defined in divisions (l)(1), (l)(2), or (l)(3)
of Section
387.01 of this chapter. The requirements of this chapter pertaining to the
transportation of explosives apply only to explosives as defined in division
(l)(3) of Section
387.01 of this chapter.
   (m)   “Explosives interchange lot” means a specially designated safe area of
a motor vehicle terminal where less-than-truckload lots of explosives can be
held for transfer from one (1) vehicle to another for continuance in
transportation.
   (n)   “Explosives motor vehicle facility” means a designated area where
motion vehicles transporting explosives can be parked, pending further movement
in transportation.
   (o)   “Fireworks” means any composition or device prepared for the purpose
of producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or
detonation, and meeting the definition of Consumer Fireworks or Display
Fireworks as defined in this section, or as defined in other NFPA standards.
For purposes of this chapter, all fireworks are considered pyrotechnic material
or pyrotechnics.
      (1)   “Fireworks” does not include toy caps for use in toy pistols, toy
canes, toy guns, and novelties, and trick noisemakers, not containing more than
an average of twenty-five hundredths (0.25) grains (sixteen (16) mg) of
explosive composition per cap, provided they are so constructed that the hand
cannot come in contact with the cap when it is in place for explosion.
      (2)   “Fireworks” does not include model rockets and model rocket motors
designed, sold, and used for the purpose of propelling recoverable aero models.
   (p)   “Fireworks exhibition” means any presentation or discharge of
fireworks. A fireworks exhibition includes, but is not limited to, those
displays conducted in accordance with the provisions of RC Chapter 3743 or any
variance issued under it, this rule, and NFPA 1123 listed in OAC 1301:7-7-44.
   (q)   “1.4G Fireworks” means “Consumer Fireworks” consistent with
regulations of DOTn (49 C.F.R.).
   (r)   “1.3G Fireworks” means “Display Fireworks” consistent with regulations
of DOTn (49 C.F.R.).
   (s)   “1.4S Fireworks” means pyrotechnic devices for professional use in the
performing arts in conjunction with theatrical, musical or other productions
that are similar to “consumer fireworks” in chemical composition and
construction, but not intended for consumer use. Those fireworks shall be
classified as “Article Pyrotechnic 1.4S” and marked and labeled in conformance
with 49 C.F.R.
   (t)   “Fixed facility” means any building or property where materials or
articles are received, shipped, stored, transferred, picked up, or delivered,
and includes without limitation, a terminal, storage facility, explosives
interchange lot, explosives motor vehicle terminal, and intermodal facility.
   (u)   “Flame effects” has the meaning as defined in NFPA Standard 160. An
indoor or outdoor flame effect resulting from the combustion of flammable
solids, liquids, or gases to produce thermal, physical, visual, or audible
phenomena before an audience. Flame effects for entertainment, exhibition,
demonstration, or simulation before an audience, and/or as determined by the
Fire Chief, shall be defined as regulated by this chapter.
   (v)   “Highway” means any interstate, public street, public alley, public
road or other public thoroughfare.
   (w)   “Interstate highway” means the highways in the City of Cleveland
identified as Interstates 71, 77, 90, 480, 176 and 490.
   (x)   “Inhabited building” means any building regularly occupied in whole or
part as a habitation for human beings, or any church, school-house, railroad
station, store, or other structure where people are accustomed to assemble,
except any building or structure occupied in connection with the manufacture,
transportation, storage or use of explosives.
   (y)   “Intermodal facilities” means any designated area where truck
trailers, storage containers, and other vehicles used in the transportation of
hazardous materials are received, shipped, loaded onto, unloaded from, or
stored in connection with two (2) or more modes of transportation.
   (z)   “Laser” means a device that produces an intense, coherent, directional
beam of light by stimulating electronic or molecular transitions to lower
energy levels. It also means an acronym for light amplification by simulated
emission of radiation (ANSI Z136.1). As used in this section, lasers must mean
Class III or IV lasers, as defined by the Bureau of Radiological Health, when
used in front of a proximate audience for purposes of visual or special
effects.
   (aa)   “Lycopodium” means the spores produced by the genus of mosses called
lycopodium. This powdery, organic, yellow, material can be agitated and
dispersed mechanically into a cloud and then ignited by a spark, pilot flame,
or electrical heating device. Although not a pyrotechnic material, this
material is used by special effects operators to produce fire effects or in
conjunction with other pyrotechnics to create a special effect.
   (bb)   “Magazine” means any building, structure, or container, other than an
explosives manufacturing building, approved for the storage of explosive
materials.
   (cc)   “Motor vehicle” includes a vehicle, machine, tractor, trailer, or
semi trailer, or a combination of them, propelled or drawn by mechanical power
and used on the highways in the transportation of passengers or property. It
does not include a vehicle, locomotive, or car operated exclusively on a rail
or rails, or a trolley bus operated by electric power derived from a fixed
overhead wire, furnishing local passenger transportation similar to street
railway service.
   (dd)   “Natural barricade” means natural features of the ground, such as
hills, or timber of sufficient density that the surrounding exposures that
require protection cannot be seen from the magazine when the trees are bare of
leaves.
   (ee)   “NFPA” means National Fire Protection Association.
   (ff)   “Operator” means a person with overall responsibility for the safety,
setup and discharge of an outdoor fireworks display.
   (gg)   “Permit” means written authority issued by the City of Cleveland Fire
Chief or his or her duly authorized representative.
   (hh)   “Person” means an individual, association, corporation, business,
partnership or other legal entity or group of individuals.
   (ii)   “Proximate audience” means an audience closer to pyrotechnic devices
than allowed by NFPA 1123, Code for Fireworks Display. This definition is also
applicable to the indoor or outdoor use of pyrotechnic materials in the
performing arts in conjunction with theatrical, musical, or similar productions
or the filming of television, radio, or movie productions before a proximate
audience, performers, or support personnel. It also applies to all use of
lasers in indoor or outdoor displays unless otherwise determined by the City of
Cleveland Fire Chief.
   (jj)   “Pyrotechnic display” means a display or performance of pyrotechnic
material.
   (kk)   “Pyrotechnic material” means a chemical mixture used in the
entertainment industry to produce visible or audible effects by combustion,
deflagration, or detonation, when the mixture predominantly consists of solids
capable of producing a controlled, self- sustaining, and self-contained
exothermic chemical reaction that results in heat, gas, sound, light, or a
combination of these effects, and when the chemical reaction functions without
external oxygen. For purposes of this chapter, all fireworks are considered
pyrotechnic material or pyrotechnics, and all pyrotechnics are considered
explosives.
   (ll)   “Railway” means any steam, electric, diesel, electric or other
railroad or railway.
   (mm)   “Receive” means to accept delivery, or to take possession of
materials or articles; a “receiver” may include, without limitation, a
consignee, a terminal, storage facility, or other fixed facility.
   (nn)   “Ship” means to turn over possession of materials or articles for
transport; a “shipper” may include, without limitation, a manufacturer,
consignor, terminal, storage facility, or other fixed facility or operation
that has possession of explosives prior to transport.
   (oo)   “Small arms ammunition” means any cartridge for shotgun, rifle,
pistol, revolver, and cartridges for propellant-actuated power devices and
industrial guns. Military-type ammunition containing explosive bursting charges
or any incendiary, tracer, spotting, or pyrotechnic projectile is excluded from
this definition.
   (pp)   “Special Effects” means a visible or audible effect for entertainment
purposes. Frequently an illusion: that is, something that appears to be other
than what it really is. For example, smoke may be created to give an audience
the impression of fog being present. Or a puff of smoke, a flash of light, and
a loud sound may be produced to give an audience the impression that a cannon
has been fired, when in reality a cannon has not been fired.
   (qq)   “Terminal” means a fixed facility used by transporters for the
receipt, shipment, transfer, storage, pick-up or delivery of articles or
materials.
   (rr)   “Transporter” means a person engaged in the transport, movement or
carrying of explosives by a motor vehicle on a highway.
   (ss)   “Vessel” means every description of watercraft, used or capable of
being used, as a means of transportation on the water.
(Ord. No. 1253-07. Passed 11-19-07, eff. 11-21-07)
§ 387.02 Adoption and Incorporation of Regulations and Standards
   (a)   The following laws and regulations and their successor regulations are
adopted and incorporated into this code as such laws and regulations exist at
the time of passage of this chapter or as they may be amended to ensure the
application of these requirements to activities within the City limits. Any
violation of these rules and regulations within the City limits is a violation
of this chapter:
      (1)   49 C.F.R. Subchapter C – Hazardous Materials Regulations are
adopted and incorporated into this Fire Prevention Code: Part 171 – General
Information, regulations, and definitions; Part 172 – Hazardous materials
table, special provisions, hazardous materials communications, emergency
response information, and training requirements; Part 173 – Shippers - general
requirements for shipments and packagings; Part 174 – Carriage by rail; Part
175 – Carriage by aircraft; Part 176 – Carriage by vessel; Part 177 – Carriage
by public highway; Part 178 – Specifications for packagings; Part 179 –
Specifications for tank cars; and Part 180 – Continuing qualification and
maintenance of packagings; and Part 397 – Transportation of Hazardous
Materials, Driving and Parking Rules.
      (2)   NFPA Standard 115 – Laser Fire Protection; NFPA Standard 495 –
Explosive Materials Code; NFPA 498 – Explosives Motor Vehicles Terminal; NFPA
Standard 1123 – Code for Fireworks Display; NFPA Standard 1124 – Code for the
Manufacture, Transportation and Storage of Fireworks; NFPA Standard 1126 – Use
of Pyrotechnics Before a Proximate Audience; and NFPA Standard 160 – Flame
Effects Before An Audience.
      (3)   Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives, Department of
the Justice – 27 C.F.R. Chapter I, Part 555, Commerce in Explosives, Safe
Explosives Act.
      (4)   ANSI Z136 – Safe Use of Lasers.
      (5)   RC Chapter 3743 and OAC 1301:7-7-30 and 1301:7-7-33.
      (6)   U.S. Food and Drug Administration, U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services standards for lasers at 21 C.F.R. Chapter I, Part 1040.
      (7)   Consumer Product Safety Commission (“CPSC”) 16 C.F.R. Chapter II,
Part 1507.
   (b)   When considered necessary for safety to life or property, the City of
Cleveland Fire Chief may also require compliance with any explanatory material
and recommended regulations appended to the laws and regulations in division
(a) of this section. When any provision of this chapter is found to be in
conflict with the regulations adopted in division (a) of this section, the
provision that establishes the stricter standard for the promotion and
protection of the safety and welfare of the public must prevail.
(Ord. No. 1253-07. Passed 11-19-07, eff. 11-21-07)
§ 387.03 Prohibitions
   (a)   A person shall not manufacture any gunpowder, fireworks, explosive
compounds or detonating or deflagrating substances within the corporate limits
of the City except the manufacture of fireworks as permitted in accordance with
RC Chapter 3743, and OAC 1301:7:7-33, and applicable provisions of the NFPA,
and any stricter rules of the City Fire Marshal to protect the public health
and safety. This division does not apply to the mixing of binary systems,
providing the mixing is done in conformity with all federal, State and City
laws, and regulations and the mixing is associated with a pyrotechnic display,
which has been permitted under this chapter.
   (b)   A person shall not sell, purchase for, give away to, or otherwise
dispose of, or deliver to, any person less than eighteen (18) years of age, any
explosives, including fireworks, whether the person is acting on their own
behalf or for any other person.
   (c)   A person shall not knowingly acquire, have, carry, or use any
dangerous ordnance as defined in Section
627.01 of these Codified Ordinances (“Weapons and Explosives”) unless excepted
by RC 2923.17 (“Dangerous Ordnance and Explosives Strictly Regulated”) or the
person is the holder of a license or temporary permit issued and in effect
under RC 2923.18.
   (d)   A person shall not discharge any firearms or fireworks at, or against,
any magazine or a vehicle transporting explosives.
   (e)   A person shall not ship, receive, store, possess, sell, use, or
discharge any explosives, pyrotechnics, fireworks, lasers, or flame effects
within the City except as permitted under Sections
387.06,
387.09, and
387.10 of this chapter, and in compliance with all applicable federal, State
and City laws, and regulations.
   (f)   A person shall not sell, offer for sale, or have in his or her
possession or custody, any squib, rocket, cracker, roman candle, or fire
balloon, or any other combustible fireworks, or any article for the making of a
pyrotechnic display, within the City, except as authorized by a permit issued
by the City Fire Chief under Sections
387.06 and
387.07 of this chapter.
   (g)   A vessel shall not operate in the Cuyahoga River or elsewhere in the
City with explosives aboard, whether for loading or unloading explosives,
unless such vessel is in conformity with 49 C.F.R. Part 176 and the regulations
of the United States Coast Guard.
   (h)   A person shall not transport explosives through the City unless they
are in compliance with all applicable federal, State, and City laws and
regulations.
(Ord. No. 1253-07. Passed 11-19-07, eff. 11-21-07)
§ 387.04 Exceptions to Provisions
   (a)   This chapter does not apply to: the regular military or naval forces
of the United States; the duly- authorized militia of the State; the police, or
fire divisions of the City, County, or State, provided they are acting within
their official capacity and in the proper performance of their duties; or the
laboratories, hospitals, schools, colleges, and similar institutions when
confined to the purpose of demonstration, instruction, or research; or to
explosives in the forms authorized and procured by the official United States
Pharmacopoeia.
   (b)   This chapter does not apply to the manufacture, sale, possession,
transportation, or use, in emergency situations of pyrotechnic signaling
devices and distress signals for marine, aviation, or highway use.
   (c)   This chapter does not apply to the manufacture, sale, storage,
possession, or transportation of blank cartridges in connection with theaters
or shows or movie productions, or blank cartridges in connection with athletics
as signals or for ceremonial purposes. Exception: The use of blank cartridges
in conjunction with theaters or shows or movie productions shall be subject to
review and approval by the Fire Marshal as to any applicable permitting and/or
restrictions.
   (d)   This chapter does not apply to the manufacture, sale, possession,
transportation, storage, or use of sparklers on a wire stick, as defined under
DOTn.
(Ord. No. 1253-07. Passed 11-19-07, eff. 11-21-07)
§ 387.05 Operational and Other Requirements
   (a)   In blasting operations as described by NFPA 495, ground vibrations,
airblast, and flyrock must be monitored by a competent person who is not in the
employment of the blaster, unless otherwise specified by the City Fire Chief. A
“competent person” must be an adult individual who is properly trained to
monitor the operations.
   (b)   To use any materials regulated under this chapter within the City, a
Certified Fire Safety Inspector(s) (CFSI) from the Cleveland Fire Prevention
Bureau must be on the premises as prescribed by the City of Cleveland Fire
Marshal, unless otherwise allowed by the City Fire Chief.
   (c)   At all permitted explosives, pyrotechnic, Class III or IV laser
displays, or flame effects associated with a proximate audience, the City Fire
Chief or his or her duly authorized representative shall be allowed to be
present and position themselves in any place and manner they consider necessary
for the protection of the public during any performance in which the items are
used.
   (d)   When any permitted explosives or pyrotechnic display in the City
requires special communication, for the safety of the public, the permit
holder, blaster, exhibitor, and operator is required to provide all necessary
communications equipment to all safety forces requiring the equipment.
   (e)   The permitting requirement set forth in Section
387.06 of this chapter shall not apply to “storage incidental to
transportation” as that term has been defined under 49 U.S.C. 5102(12) and
related regulations, court and administrative decisions.
(Ord. No. 1253-07. Passed 11-19-07, eff. 11-21-07)
§ 387.06 Permit Registration For Use and/or Storage Required; Fee
   (a)   Permits for Explosives and Pyrotechnic Materials. A person shall not
store, possess, use, sell, give away, or otherwise dispose of, any explosive,
including without limitation, pyrotechnic material, consumer or display
fireworks, as defined in this chapter, without first obtaining a written permit
from the City Fire Chief. This division is not applicable to the use,
possession, or control of less than fifteen (15) pounds of smokeless powder,
fifty (50) pounds or less of black powder, or less than one thousand (1,000)
pounds shipping weight of small arms ammunition, except as required under
division (c) of Section
387.04 of this chapter. This division does not apply to a transporter of
explosives on highways, railways, or waterways. For purposes of this section,
the term “storage” does not include “storage incidental to transportation” when
defined as preempted by 49 U.S.C. 5125 or related regulations by federal
administrative determinations or court opinions. The fee for any permit
required by this section shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00).
   (b)   Permits for Lasers. A person shall not use any Class III or IV laser
in front of a proximate audience without first obtaining a separate permit from
the Fire Chief. The fee for laser permits shall be seventy-five dollars
($75.00).
   (c)   Permits for Flame Effects. A permit must be obtained from the City of
Cleveland Fire Prevention Bureau for the use of all indoor and outdoor flame
effects before an audience. The permit must be obtained at least ten (10)
business days in advance of the production, exhibition, demonstration, or
simulation using the flame effects. Failure to submit the permit application
prior to ten (10) business days in advance of the production, or failure to
comply with the requirements of NFPA Standard 160 listed in OAC 1301:7-7-44 may
result in denial or revocation of the permit. The fee for a permit for flame
effects shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00).
   (d)   Permits for Dangerous Ordnance. Each person handling explosives in
conjunction with a blasting operation shall obtain a dangerous ordnance permit.
The permit shall expire on the date specified on it. All permits expire no
later than one (1) year from the date of issuance. The City Fire Marshal or the
City Fire Marshal’s designee may issue a temporary permit for the casual use of
explosive devices, and other consumable dangerous ordnance, and it shall expire
within thirty (30) days of its issuance. The cost of a permit shall be seventy-
five dollars ($75.00) under this section. A person must not perform blasting
without possession of a dangerous ordnance permit under this section. Every
person involved in the blasting operation that will handle or use the explosive
shall be listed on a separate dangerous ordnance permit application.
   (e)   Applications for each permit required by this section shall be made to
the City Fire Chief in the form and detail as the Chief prescribes. The Chief
may require a separate permit for use of explosives and a separate permit for
storage of explosives from each applicant. Each permit granted by the Chief
shall be for the period of time as the Chief may determine, but not to exceed
one (1) year. The permit must, at all times, be subject to inspection by any
officer of the Fire and/or Police Divisions. In addition to the permit fees,
the Division of Fire may charge the person obtaining a permit under this
section the actual cost to the City of providing plan review, inspection and
oversight services by Division of Fire officials. The costs may include,
without limitation, the actual cost to the City of paying overtime wages to
fire officials.
   (f)   All permit applications that are covered by this section shall be
submitted to the City Fire Chief with accurate information and within a
reasonable time frame to accommodate the handling and processing of the permit
applications. All permit applications containing complete information, as
required by this chapter, must be delivered to the Division of Fire no later
than ten (10) business days before the date the permit is needed by the
applicant, or by an earlier date, as needed, for the Division to make
arrangements to observe all areas where materials subject to the permit are to
be used or stored.
(Ord. No. 1253-07. Passed 11-19-07, eff. 11-21-07)
§ 387.07 Use/Storage Permit Application and Issuance
   On receipt of any application for a permit submitted under Section
387.06 and the required fee, the City Fire Chief must make or cause to be made
an investigation to determine if all applicable conditions of this chapter are
fulfilled. If it is found that the application is complete and the fee has been
paid, and that the applicable conditions of this chapter are or will, as
required, be fulfilled, the permit shall be issued. When the Fire Chief
determines that the information in a permit application is not complete or well
defined, the Chief or the Chief’s designee may elect to request further or more
complete information from the permit applicant or others associated with the
permit process. This may include, but is not limited to, information regarding
the knowledge, expertise and experience of individuals, as that information is
applicable to the referenced standards and rules adopted in this chapter.
Further information may be requested by the Division of Fire in the form of
oral or written questions. The overall evaluation of whether the permit will be
issued must be determined by the City Fire Chief based on the Chief’s
determination of whether the responses are complete and all applicable
conditions of this chapter will be fulfilled.
(Ord. No. 1253-07. Passed 11-19-07, eff. 11-21-07)
§ 387.08 Use/Storage Permit Application Contents
   (a)   Generally. Every permit required by Section
387.06 must contain the name of the responsible person to whom the permit is to
be issued, a description of the place or building and part of a building or
premises that the permit is being applied for, the signature of the applicant,
and all other particulars that may be required as necessary and proper by the
City Fire Chief.
   (b)   Pyrotechnic Permits. Prior to issuance of a permit pertaining to the
use of pyrotechnics within the boundaries of the City, the permit applicant
must develop a plan that, at a minimum, contains information consistent with
applicable laws and regulations including, without limitation, OAC 1301:7-7-33
or its successor regulation(s), plus additional or more restrictive information
as determined to be pertinent by the City Fire Chief. Pyrotechnic permits
(including fireworks) must include at a minimum:
      (1)   The name of the person, group, or organization sponsoring the
production;
      (2)   The date and time of day of the production;
      (3)   The exact location of the production;
      (4)   The name of the exhibitor and/or operator actually in charge of
creating the pyrotechnic special effect;
      (5)   The number, names, and ages of all assistants who will be present;
      (6)   The qualifications of the exhibitors and/or operators;
      (7)   The experience of the exhibitor and/or operator in using
pyrotechnics;
      (8)   Proof of a valid exhibitor license issued by the Division of State
Fire Marshal;
      (9)   Evidence of the permit holder’s insurance carrier or financial
responsibility under Section
387.16 of this chapter;
      (10)   The number and types of pyrotechnic devices and materials to be
used, including the sequence in which the materials will be fired, for example,
the performance times of the exhibit such as the opening, finale, etc., the
exhibitor’s experience with the devices and effects, and a definition of the
general responsibilities of assistants;
      (11)   A diagram of the grounds or facilities where the production will
be held. The diagram must show the point at which the pyrotechnic devices are
to be fired from, the fallout radius for each pyrotechnic device used in the
performance, and the lines behind which the audience shall be restrained;
      (12)   The point of on-site assembly of pyrotechnic devices, and in the
case of outdoor displays, the manner in which mortars are installed and secured
(for example, in drums, boxes, racks, buried, troughs, etc.);
      (13)   The manner and place of storage of the pyrotechnic materials and
devices;
      (14)   The manufacturer of the material to be used;
      (15)   A Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) for the effects to be used;
      (16)   Certifications that the set, scenery, and rigging materials are
treated with appropriate flame retardant;
      (17)   The location and rating of all fire extinguishers;
      (18)   Contingency plans that will, at no cost to the City, detail the
method that will be used to return the site of the pyrotechnic display to the
condition it was prior to the performance, (for example, include street
cleaning, debris removal, etc., as necessary);
      (19)   The operator shall be responsible for operations, storage, and
use, of explosives, pyrotechnics, and special effects as covered by this
chapter, including all safety issues related to the adopted rules and standards
of this chapter. In events where the operator and the exhibitor are the same
person, that person must assume the responsibilities of both positions.
      (20)   Applications for all permits for the use or storage of
pyrotechnics or the use of lasers or flame effects, will be made to the City
Fire Chief by the party who is providing the liability insurance for the event,
and/or the Ohio licensed exhibitor in charge of the display, as considered
appropriate by the Fire Chief. The applicant must provide proof of insurance
under Section
387.16 prior to permit issuance.
   (c)   The operator/exhibitor must have the original permit in their
possession for inspection purposes by the Fire official. All information
required in this chapter must be maintained on the premises.
   (d)   The City Fire Chief, prior to the event, must approve the issuance of
the permit before any pyrotechnic effects are added to a performance, or the
firing or the firing location of any pyrotechnic effects are altered.
   (e)   All laser displays must require a separate permit and an overall
effects plan before issuance of a permit unless otherwise approved by the Fire
Chief. This plan must include:
      (1)   The scope and use of the laser;
      (2)   The classification of the laser (for example, Class III-IV);
      (3)   The qualifications of the laser safety officer (LSO);
      (4)   The times that the laser will be used;
      (5)   A diagram of placement of mirrors or other materials that may
produce hazardous specular reflections and their termination points;
      (6)   Audience proximity, including distances from the beams to the
audience;
      (7)   FDA variance number and a copy of the docket, as well as, any
applicable attachments;
      (8)   Safety factors and any other information required by the Fire
Chief. Safety factors include placement of fire extinguishers, appropriate
display of warning labels and signs, ratings of fire extinguishers and stand-by
safety personnel. All laser usage must be documented that it is in conformity
with the safety requirements of ANSI Z136, NFPA 115, and 21 C.F.R. Chapter I,
Part 1040. The laser safety officer or operator must sign applications for
laser permits.
   (f)   Flame Effects. Before the performance of any production, the permit
applicant must submit a plan for the use of flame effects to the City of
Cleveland Fire Prevention Bureau. The plan must be made in writing or other
form that is acceptable to the City Fire Marshal and must demonstrate
compliance with NFPA Standard 160 listed in OAC 1301:7-7-44. The plan must
include, but is not limited to include the following:
      (1)   The name of the person, group, or organization sponsoring the
production;
      (2)   The date and time of day of the production;
      (3)   The exact location of the production;
      (4)   The name of the flame effect exhibitor and proof of a valid flame
effect exhibitor license issued by the Fire Marshal;
      (5)   The number, names, and ages of all assistants that will be present;
      (6)   The qualifications and experience of the flame effect exhibitor;
      (7)   The flame effect classification and design criteria in accordance
with NFPA 160 listed in OAC 1301:7-7-44;
      (8)   A diagram of the site indicating the location of all flame effect
devices, the areas affected by each device, location of the audience and
separation distances, means of egress, and information on all fuels and
ventilation for each effect;
      (9)   A narrative description of the flame effect, controls, and control
sequences of all devices and emergency response procedures;
      (10)   A valid Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) for each fuel utilized;
      (11)   Documentation that the set, scenery, and rigging materials are
treated with the appropriate flame retardant;
      (12)   After a permit has been granted, the person who obtained the
permit must keep the plan available at the site for safety inspectors or other
designated agents of each authority having jurisdiction;
      (13)   A permit holder must not add flame effects to any performance in a
different manner than described in the plan submitted with the application for
a permit unless the City Bureau of Fire Prevention first approves of it.
   (g)   It is the responsibility of the party seeking the permit to comply
with all applicable federal, State or City laws and regulations under the
permit. This includes, but is not limited to, the requirements of the Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA), Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and
Explosives (BATFE), Public Utilities Commission of Ohio (PUCO), and State of
Ohio.
   (h)   The operator is responsible for operations, storage, and use of
explosives, including pyrotechnics and special effects as covered by this
chapter, including all safety issues related to the adopted rules and standards
of this chapter. In events where the operator and the exhibitor are the same
person, that person must assume the responsibilities of both positions.
   (i)   The exhibitor must ensure that all rules and standards governing the
use of explosives including pyrotechnics and special effects, are being
maintained to the current standards and rules adopted in this chapter,
demonstrate compliance to the City Fire Chief or the Fire Chief’s designee. It
is the responsibility of the exhibitor, to the best of their professional
judgment, to demonstrate to the City Fire Chief or the Fire Chief’s designee
that all aspects of the performance are being performed in a manner consistent
with good work practices, as it applies to this chapter. In events where the
exhibitor and operator is the same person, that person must assume the
responsibilities of both positions.
(Ord. No. 1253-07. Passed 11-19-07, eff. 11-21-07)
§ 387.09 Permit Revocation; Ceasing Operations
   (a)   Any permit granted, may be revoked by the City Fire Chief and
automatically becomes void if any of the conditions on which it was granted are
violated.
   (b)   If the permit holder fails to ensure the restoration of the site of a
display to a condition free of debris, equipment, and other material from the
display, the City may clean the site and charge the permit holder with the
costs of the cleanup.
   (c)   Ceasing operations. A fire official may order a pyrotechnic display,
laser exhibition, the handling or use of explosives, or flame effects, to be
postponed or cancelled due to unsafe conditions or operations, or inclement
weather, or unsafe spectator conditions, or for any other condition in
violation of this fire code or of any regulation or standard adopted in this
chapter or of any other chapter of the fire code. In such a case, operations
must immediately cease.
(Ord. No. 1253-07. Passed 11-19-07, eff. 11-21-07)
§ 387.10 Permit for Receipt or Shipping of Explosives and Pyrotechnic
Materials; Fee
   (a)   Except as provided in division (d) of this section, every person who
receives or ships explosives including pyrotechnic materials within the City
must obtain an annual permit issued by the City Fire Chief for that receipt or
shipment of explosives. This division applies to any fixed facility and land-
based operation, person or entity that receives or ships explosives by motor
vehicle, railway, or other mode of transportation, including, without
limitation, explosive interchange lots and explosive motor vehicle facilities,
terminals, and intermodal facilities. This division does not apply to
transporters of explosives while in transportation on highways, railways, or
waterways.
   (b)   The permit application must be in writing and contain information
describing the general storage conditions of explosives shipped or received,
loaded, unloaded, or temporarily retained at the facility, including separation
and secondary containment provisions, and must specify the classification and
maximum quantity of explosive materials that are expected to be shipped,
received, loaded, unloaded, or temporarily retained on an annual basis at each
location where the operations are permitted.
   The Fire Chief must decide either to issue a permit or provide notice to the
applicant of deficiencies in the application within ten (10) business days of
receipt of a completed permit application.
   (c)   The fee for any permit required under this section is seventy-five
($75.00) unless the permit holder has also obtained a permit under Section
387.06 of this chapter, in which case only one (1) seventy-five dollar ($75.00)
fee is required.
   (d)   The City Fire Chief may waive the requirement for a permit under this
section when the receiver or shipper of explosives obtains a permit under
Section
387.06.
(Ord. No. 1253-07. Passed 11-19-07, eff. 11-21-07)
§ 387.11 Magazines for Explosives
   (a)   All magazine construction, location, and other applicable guidelines
must conform to the accepted standards and laws incorporated into this chapter,
and to the permitting requirements of this chapter.
   (b)   All indoor magazines must be on wheels and stored on the first floor,
within ten (10) feet of an exit equipped with a ramped exit discharge, unless
it is determined by the City Fire Chief that public safety can be maintained
without following this rule.
   (c)   Distance tables for explosives, ammonium nitrate and blasting agents
must be as indicated in the accepted standards, regulations and laws as
referenced in Section
387.02.
(Ord. No. 1253-07. Passed 11-19-07, eff. 11-21-07)
§ 387.12 Storage Requirements for Small Arms Ammunition
   (a)   All storage requirements for small arms ammunition must comply with
the accepted standards and laws incorporated into this chapter, and to the
permitting requirements of this chapter.
   (b)   The provisions of this chapter do not apply to the storage of less
than one thousand (1,000) pounds shipping weight of small arms ammunition.
(Ord. No. 1253-07. Passed 11-19-07, eff. 11-21-07)
§ 387.13 Change of Distance Requirements
   (a)   The American Table of Distances for Storage of Explosives or Low
Explosives as contained in NFPA Standard 495 must be followed.
   (b)   Unbarricaded distances as referenced in division (c) of Section
387.11 must only be reduced to barricaded distances when the City Fire Chief so
approves. Where added safety precautions have been taken, or particularly
favorable conditions exist, the Fire Chief or an officer designated by the Fire
Chief may be permitted to decrease the required separation distances as
considered appropriate, on demonstration that the hazard has been reduced or
the risk has been properly protected. Where unusual or safety threatening
conditions exist, the Fire Chief or an officer designated by the Fire Chief may
be permitted to increase the required separation distances considered
appropriate.
   (c)   The separation distance of all fireworks and/or pyrotechnic displays
from the public may be reduced where added safety precautions have been taken,
or particularly favorable conditions exist indicating that the risk has been
properly minimized as determined by the Chief or the Fire Chief’s designee.
Where unusual or safety threatening conditions exist, distances can be
increased as determined to be necessary by the City Fire Chief or the Fire
Chief’s authorized representative.
(Ord. No. 1253-07. Passed 11-19-07, eff. 11-21-07)
§ 387.14 Containers Required; Articles Not to Remain Outside
   A person must not have or keep explosives unless the explosives are
completely enclosed or encased in tight metallic, wooden, or fiber containers,
and must be kept in approved magazines. That provision that the explosives must
be kept in approved magazines does not apply while they are being transported
or used in the custody of a transporter, awaiting shipment, or pending delivery
to a consignee during the time permitted by federal law. A person having
explosives in their possession or control must not under any circumstances
allow any grain or particles to be or remain on the outside or about the
containers in which the explosives are kept. The containers in which explosives
are kept shall be plainly marked in the manner required by 49 C.F.R. 173 and
178.
(Ord. No. 1253-07. Passed 11-19-07, eff. 11-21-07)
§ 387.15 Seizure and Confiscation of Explosives
   If the City Fire Chief or the Fire Chief’s authorized representative, has
probable cause to believe that explosives are being manufactured, sold,
possessed, or used in violation of this chapter, the Fire Chief or the Fire
Chief’s authorized representative may seize the explosives. Any seizure of
explosives must be made under statutory and constitutional provisions governing
searches and seizures. This section does not affect the authority of a peace
officer, as defined in RC 2935.01, to make arrests for violations of this
chapter or to seize explosives manufactured, sold, possessed, or used in
violation of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 1253-07. Passed 11-19-07, eff. 11-21-07)
§ 387.16 Insurance
   (a)   The applicant for a permit under the provisions of this chapter shall
take out and maintain during the life of the permit such public liability and
property damage insurance as will protect the public from damages for personal
injury, including accidental death, as well as from property damage, that may
occur by operations under the permit, whether the operations are by the permit
holder or by anyone directly or indirectly employed by the permit holder.
   (b)   Except as otherwise stated in this chapter, the policy of insurance
for all permits under this chapter shall be in an amount not less than one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for injuries and property damage, including
accidental death of any one (1) person, and a general aggregate limit in an
amount not less than five million dollars ($5,000,000.00). The insurance
required can be comprised of a combination of primary insurance and excess
insurance. However, insurance for the use, handling, storage, receipt and
shipment of explosives for permitted pyrotechnical displays and small arms
ammunition must be in an amount not less than one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) for injuries, including accidental death to any one (1) person,
and a general aggregate limit in an amount not less than three million dollars
($3,000,000.00) on account of three (3) accident, and property damage insurance
in an amount not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). Each policy of
insurance shall include the City of Cleveland as an additional insured, and the
Certificate of Insurance required in this section in division (c) must
designate that the City of Cleveland is an additional insured.
   (c)   Each permit applicant shall provide to the Fire Chief a certificate of
insurance, subject to review by the Director of Law, prior to the issuance of a
permit. A copy of the certificate of insurance may be forwarded and utilized
for the permit application review process, but an original must be forwarded to
the Division of Fire prior to the issuance of a permit.
(Ord. No. 599-11. Passed 6-6-11, eff. 6-13-11)
§ 387.17 Severability
   If any portion of this chapter, or any section or part of a section is
declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the declaration
must be limited solely to that portion, section, or part of a section that was
directly involved in the controversy before the court on which judgment was
rendered and may not affect or impair the validity of the remainder of the
chapter.
(Ord. No. 1253-07. Passed 11-19-07, eff. 11-21-07)
§ 387.18 Inspections and Investigations
   Every person who receives a permit under this chapter and every person who
receives or ships explosives including pyrotechnic materials that are located
within the City, must allow the City Fire Chief, or the Fire Chief’s duly
authorized representative, permission to enter, at any time, the place,
building, or vehicle described in the permit. In addition, they must allow the
Fire Chief or the Fire Chief’s duly authorized representative permission to
examine the facility that is permitted or that receives or ships the
explosives, including the building and the contents of the building, and must
maintain the space or building in a safe and proper manner as directed by the
Chief.
(Ord. No. 1253-07. Passed 11-19-07, eff. 11-21-07)
§ 387.99 Penalty and Enforcement
   (a)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter other than those
which are felonies under state law, is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree. Each violation must be treated separately. When a violation is a
continuing one, each day of the violation constitutes a separate offense.
   (b)   This chapter may be enforced by the City in a criminal proceeding
without issuing a prior notice of violation other than the notice required
under the Ohio Rules of Criminal Procedure. This chapter may also be enforced
through orders issued by the Fire Chief or his or her designee, and any such
order may provide a time period in which compliance is required and a date by
which compliance is required. Except in an emergency, any order issued may be
appealed to the Cleveland Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals
within thirty (30) days after issuance of the order. The filing of an appeal
shall not constitute an automatic stay of the order. The City may also bring a
civil collection and/or civil penalty and/or injunction action to enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 1253-07. Passed 11-19-07, eff. 11-21-07)
CHAPTER 389 – FIRE EXTINGUISHING EQUIPMENT
Standpipes
389.01   Where Required
389.02   Approval of Plans for Standpipe Systems
389.03   Definitions
389.04   Materials
389.05   Location and Protection
389.06   Number
389.07   Size
389.08   Installation and Controls
389.09   Required Communication System for High Buildings
389.10   First-Aid Hose
389.11   First-Aid Hose in Sprinklered Buildings
389.12   Siamese Connections
389.13   Encroaching Hose Connections
389.14   Outlets
389.15   Water Supply for Required Wet Standpipes
389.16   Tests
389.17   Maintenance
389.18   Buildings Under Construction
389.19   Elevator for Use by Division of Fire
Yard Hydrant Systems
389.20   Location and Use Regulations
Automatic Sprinklers; Other Extinguishing Equipment
389.21   Scope and Application of Provisions
389.22   Required Locations
389.23   Definitions
389.24   Drawings
389.25   Design Pressure; Tests and Inspection
389.26   Approved Devices for Sprinkler Systems
389.27   Approved Standards for Installation
389.28   Water Supply Connections to City Main
389.29   Fire Division Connections
389.30   Basement or Cellar Sprinklers
389.31   Kitchen Compartments
389.32   Connections to Domestic Water Supply
389.33   Combination Sprinkler and Standpipe Tanks
389.34   Maintenance and Inspection
Hand Fire Extinguishing Equipment
389.35   Classification; Number Required; Location
Cross-reference:
   Above-ground storage tank extinguishing equipment, CO
383.25
   Combustible fibers, CO
385.36 et seq.
   Fire Chief approval required, CO
3105.11
   Flammable finishes, CO
385.03,
385.04
   Pyroxylin plastics, CO
385.52 et seq.
   Tire retreading or rebuilding, CO
385.66 et seq.
STANDPIPES
§ 389.01 Where Required
   (a)   New Buildings.
      (1)   Buildings erected after June 27, 1949, shall be equipped with the
standpipes specified in the following table:
   Standpipes
               Where Required                                       Type of Installation
                                                             In
                                     In              In      bldgs.
                                     bldgs.  In      bldgs.  more
                                     where   bldgs.  more    than
               To       In bldgs     any     more    than 3  55 ft.
Occupancy      comply   more than 1  floor   than 2  stories and                  First
Classification with     story in     area    stories or 45   more   Dry    Wet    Aid Hose
               State    height       above   in      feet in than 1 System System Attached
               Building irrespective 1st     height  height  story
               Code     of area      story   above   above   in
                                     exceeds grade   grade   height
                                     15,000  level   level   above
                                     sq. ft.                 grade
                                                             level
                                       Where Required                                       Type of Installation
                                                                                     In
                                                             In              In      bldgs.
                                                             bldgs.  In      bldgs.  more
                                                             where   bldgs.  more    than
                                       To       In bldgs     any     more    than 3  55 ft.
                                       comply   more than 1  floor   than 2  stories and                  First
Occupancy Classification               with     story in     area    stories or 45   more   Dry    Wet    Aid Hose
                                       State    height       above   in      feet in than 1 System System Attached
                                       Building irrespective 1st     height  height  story
                                       Code     of area      story   above   above   in
                                                             exceeds grade   grade   height
                                                             15,000  level   level   above
                                                             sq. ft.                 grade
                                                                                     level
Residential – Class “A” Multiple                                               X      X
Dwelling
Residential – Class “B” Multiple                                       X                     X      X
Dwelling
Business                                                                             X             X      X
Mercantile                                                   X               X                     X      X
Institutional                                                        X                             X      X
Assembly*                              X                                             (also)        X      X
                                                                                     X
Educational                            X                                             (also)        X      X
                                                                                     X
Storage (Low or Moderate Hazard)                             X**             X**            X
Industrial N.C.                                                                      X      X
Industrial C.                                                X               X                     X      X
High Hazard                                     X***                                               X      X
Note: Standpipes required even though building is equipped with automatic fire extinguishing equipment.
*   For assembly occupancies group classified as indoor-exhibition assembly, standpipes required on all floors
exceeding 15,000 square feet in area within exterior walls or within exterior walls and a fire wall or fire walls.
**   For buildings approved for incombustible storage only, standpipes required only in buildings more than 55
feet and more than 1 story in height above grade level.
***   Standpipes not to be installed where moisture hazard material is present. No standpipes required where no
combustible, flammable or explosive products or materials are stored, used or processed.
 
      (2)   All new standpipe installations shall be made in conformity with
the provisions of Sections
389.01 to
389.19, except that standpipe installations in buildings exceeding three
hundred (300) feet in height shall also conform to the rules promulgated by the
Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals.
   (b)   Existing Buildings. Within one (1) year of June 27, 1949, buildings
erected prior to June 27, 1949, which exceed fifty-five (55) feet in height,
are more than one (1) story in height above grade level and are not equipped
with a standpipe or standpipes three (3) inches or more in diameter, shall be
equipped with standpipe installations conforming to the requirements of
Sections
389.01 to
389.19 for standpipe installations in buildings erected after June 27, 1949.
   (c)   Change of Occupancy. When there is a change in occupancy involving a
change in occupancy classification, standpipe installations shall be provided,
or existing installations shall be altered, to conform to the requirements of
Sections
389.01 to
389.19. In cases of undue hardship the Board of Building Standards and Building
Appeals may approve the continued use of an existing standpipe installation
when it is determined by the Board that such existing installation, without
change or with approved modifications, will be adequate for new occupancy.
   (d)   Inspection, Improvement and Approval of Existing Installations.
      (1)   Within one (1) year of June 27, 1949, every existing standpipe
installation within the City shall be inspected by the owner and by the
authorized representative of the Fire Chief and shall have been placed in
serviceable condition and in substantial conformity with the applicable
provisions of this Fire Prevention Code. All connections shall conform to Fire
Division standards and all defective hose shall be replaced with hose of an
approved type.
      (2)   Except as provided in subsection (c) hereof, the provisions of this
subsection (d) shall not be interpreted to require alterations to existing
systems installed in conformity with the regulations enforced prior to June 27,
1949, provided that such systems are in serviceable condition; nor shall the
provisions of this subsection (d) be interpreted to require the conversion of
existing systems from dry systems to wet systems. No first-aid hose or other
hose shall be provided or maintained on dry systems.
      (3)   All parts of existing systems shall be cleaned of rust or other
accumulations, and the interiors of all check valves, the clapper valves on
Siamese connections and all threads on hose connections and inlets shall be
inspected and tested and replacements or repairs made where found necessary to
place the systems in serviceable condition.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 389.02 Approval of Plans for Standpipe Systems
   All required standpipe installations shall be made in conformity with plans
therefor which have been approved by the Fire Chief. Plans submitted for
approval shall clearly indicate, in diagrammatic fashion, all component parts
of the proposed system or systems, and the proposed location of all component
parts.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 389.03 Definitions
   As used in this Fire Prevention Code:
   (a)   “Standpipe” means a pipe exclusively for firefighting purposes ending
vertically throughout all stories of a building, including basement and cellars
having one (1) or more inlets close to the grade level and on or adjacent to
those exterior walls of a building which face a street or alley, and having
outlets on every story, basement and cellar.
   (b)   “Dry standpipe” means a standpipe without fixed connection to a source
of water and maintained without water in the piping.
   (c)   “Wet standpipe” means a standpipe connected to an open or
automatically provided source of water with water available at all outlets at
all times.
   (d)   “First-aid hose” means hose permanently attached to a standpipe outlet
and provided primarily for use in firefighting by the occupants of the
building. First-aid hose shall not exceed one and one-half (1-1/2) inches in
diameter unless larger hose is specifically approved or directed by the
Division of Fire.
   (e)   “Siamese” means a device on the exterior wall of a building, or in
another approved location, equipped with inlets for attachment of Fire Division
hose.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 389.04 Materials
   (a)   Pipe for standpipe systems shall be wrought iron or steel, except that
underground pipe may be of cast iron and except that other materials may be
used when approved by the Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals. All
piping of standpipe systems which may be subjected to pressure supplied by the
Fire Division connections shall be designed for a working pressure of not less
than one hundred (100) psi in excess of the static head of water due to the
height of the standpipe.
   (b)   Every device, valve, fitting or hose used in connection with any
required standpipe system shall be of a type approved by the Board. Devices,
valves, fittings and hose of type tested and approved by the Underwriters’
Laboratories, Inc., or tested and approved by another recognized testing
laboratory which possesses adequate equipment, experience and competency in
this field, may be approved by the Board without additional tests.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 389.05 Location and Protection
   (a)   All standpipes shall be so located that they are protected against
corrosion and against physical and fire damage.
   (b)   All wet standpipes shall be so installed that they are protected
against damage due to frost action.
   (c)   Standpipe outlets for use of the Division of Fire shall be within
stairway enclosures. However, in buildings heretofore erected in which the
stairways are not enclosed, such standpipe outlets shall be located as near the
stairway as possible, or shall be outside or immediately inside the exterior
walls within one (1) foot of an exterior stairway or fire escape as directed or
approved by the Division.
   (d)   Standpipes and standpipe outlets in connection with assembly occupancy
shall be located as specified by the Ohio Building Code.
   (e)   In Class B multiple dwellings, and in buildings or parts of buildings
of mercantile occupancy, institutional occupancy or educational occupancy,
first- aid hose, and the outlets therefor, shall be located in a public
hallway, corridor or floor space, and hose shall be either within a cabinet, or
on open racks, in an approved location where egress will not be obstructed
thereby. First-aid hose in buildings of other occupancy classifications may be
directly connected to the standpipe within a stair enclosure, or may be within
an adjoining public hallway, corridor or floor space. Cabinet doors shall be
plainly marked “Fire Hose” in letters not less than four (4) inches high.
   (f)   The location of all standpipes and standpipe outlets shall be subject
to the approval of the Division.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 389.06 Number
   (a)   Standpipe locations in theaters and assembly halls regulated by the
Ohio Building Code shall be as specified in that Code.
   (b)   Other required standpipes shall be in such number and so located that
all parts of all floor areas are within thirty (30) feet of a nozzle attached
to one hundred (100) feet of Fire Division hose connected to a standpipe outlet
provided for use of the Division and can be reached by a stream from such
nozzle.
   (c)   Where first-aid hose is required by this Fire Prevention Code, it
shall be provided and so located that all parts of every floor area are within
twenty (20) feet of a nozzle attached to seventy-five (75) feet of hose
connected to the valve at a first-aid hose station and can be reached by a
stream from such nozzle.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 389.07 Size
   (a)   When standpipes are required by this Fire Prevention Code, buildings
seventy-five (75) feet or less in height above grade level shall have
standpipes not less than four (4) inches in diameter.
   (b)   Buildings exceeding seventy-five (75) feet in height above grade level
shall have standpipes not less than six (6) inches in diameter.
   (c)   Standpipes intended only for first-aid streams and provided in
addition to and supplementary to required four (4) inch or six (6) inch
standpipes shall be not less than the following:
      (1)   Two (2) inch for buildings up to and not exceeding four (4) stories
or fifty (50) feet in height;
      (2)   Two and one-half (2-1/2) inch for buildings in excess of four (4)
stories in height.
   (d)   Standpipes in theaters and assembly halls regulated by the Ohio
Building Code shall be not less than the size specified in that Code.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 389.08 Installation and Controls
   (a)   When more than one (1) standpipe is required in a building the
standpipes shall be connected at their bases by pipe of a size equal to or
greater than that of the larger standpipe to permit water from any source to
supply all standpipes. Where only one (1) standpipe is installed, the supply
connections thereto shall not be smaller than the standpipe. Where standpipes
are supplied by gravity or pressure tanks located above the standpipe system,
the supply pipe therefrom to the standpipe system shall not be smaller in size
than the larger standpipe.
   (b)   Where the water supply is furnished by a gravity tank or a pressure
tank located in the building at or above the topmost outlet, a check valve
shall be provided below the tank and a stop valve between the check valve and
the tank.
   (c)   Sufficient stop valves or check valves shall be provided to permit
cutting off any standpipe riser without interrupting the supply to other risers
from the same source of supply. Stop valves which are located above the ground
floor and which must be closed to permit continued use of one (1) standpipe in
case of failure of another, shall be arranged and equipped to permit operation
of such stop valves from the ground floor level, from the pump room or from
other accessible locations approved by the Division of Fire. Where necessary to
reach manually operated stop valves placed more than six (6) feet above a floor
level, fixed incombustible ladders shall be provided.
   (d)   Each water service connection which directly and independently
supplies a stand-pipe system or fire pipe shall be equipped outside of the
building in an approved location with a control valve in a flush sidewalk or
lawn valve box of an approved type, or with a post indicator valve, clearly
marked “Standpipe Supply Control.” Each such water service connection shall be
installed in conformity with ordinances governing water service connections and
the rules and regulations of the Division of Water and Heat.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 389.09 Required Communication System for High Buildings
   Whenever the height of a building exceeds one hundred fifty (150) feet above
grade level a special telephone system for use of the Division of Fire in
connection with the operation of the standpipe system shall be provided and
shall be installed in accordance with the rules and regulations established by
the Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 389.10 First-Aid Hose
   (a)   First-aid hose shall not exceed seventy-five (75) feet in length, and
all hose fifty (50) feet or less in length shall be in one (1) piece without
intermediate couplings.
   (b)   Hose shall be within easy reach of a person standing on the floor and
in no case shall be more than six (6) feet from the floor.
   (c)   Hose shall be unlined linen hose or rubber lined cotton hose of types
approved by the Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals. Unlined linen
hose shall be installed on approved racks of the semi-automatic type, and
rubber lined cotton hose shall be installed on approved reels, attached to the
hose valve, and ready for use. Racks and reels shall be of a type operable by
one (1) man which, when the control valve has been opened, will release the
flow of water when the last few feet of hose are pulled from the rack or reel.
   (d)   Each line of first-aid hose shall be provided with washers at both
ends, and shall be equipped with a twelve (12) inch play pipe or nozzle with a
one-half (1/2) inch discharge outlet conforming to Fire Division standard.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 389.11 First-Aid Hose in Sprinklered Buildings
   In sprinklered buildings first-aid hose may be connected to a sprinkler
supply supplied direct by a City water main, in which case dry standpipes may
be substituted for wet standpipes required by this Fire Prevention Code.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 389.12 Siamese Connections
   (a)   Standpipe systems shall be equipped with approved outside Siamese
connections having check valve clappers in each inlet. The pipe from the
standpipe system to any Siamese connection shall not be less than four (4)
inches in diameter.
   (b)   Not less than one (1) Siamese connection with two (2) two and one-half
(2-1/2) inch inlets and one (1) four (4) inch outlet shall be provided for each
six (6) inch standpipe riser and not less than one (1) such connection for each
two (2) four (4) inch risers or fraction thereof. However, not more than four
(4) Siamese connections shall be required for any building. Not less than one
(1) Siamese connection shall be provided on each street frontage of a building
when there are more than two (2) standpipe risers within the building. When a
building fronts on only one (1) street and the standpipe system is required to
have more than two (2) Siamese connections, such connections shall be
distributed along the accessible exterior walls of the premises at such
locations as the Fire Chief may direct.
   (c)   Siamese connections shall be placed not less than eighteen (18) inches
nor more than thirty-six (36) inches above the adjoining grade level.
   (d)   Siamese connections shall not project beyond the street or alley line
except when installed on existing buildings under the provisions of Section
389.13(b).
   (e)   Inlets on Siamese connections shall have female threads conforming to
Fire Division standard. Substantial caps to protect the threads shall be
provided on each inlet.
   (f)   Just inside the building from each Siamese, in a horizontal section of
the standpipe connection, an approved straightaway check valve shall be placed
with an automatic drip valve between the check valve and Siamese to drain the
connection to the Siamese and prevent damage due to freezing.
   (g)   Each Siamese connection shall be suitably marked with an approved
durable sign indicating use, i.e., “TO WET STANDPIPE” or “TO DRY STANDPIPE.”
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 389.13 Encroaching Hose Connections
   (a)   On new buildings and on new construction no Fire Division hose
connection or Siamese connection shall be constructed so as to project beyond
the street or alley line.
   (b)   When the provisions of this Fire Prevention Code require the
installation of standpipes or sprinklers in existing buildings or in connection
with existing uses and occupancies, or when because of change of occupancy
standpipes or sprinklers are to be installed in existing buildings, and when
the installation of recessed hose connections or Siamese connections would
result in undue hardship, the Commissioner of Building may approve Fire
Division hose or Siamese connections installed so as to project not more than
ten (10) inches beyond the street or alley line.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 389.14 Outlets
   (a)   Each required four (4) inch or six (6) inch standpipe riser shall be
equipped at each story level with a two and one-half (2-1/2) inch valved outlet
with male threads conforming to Fire Division standard and suitable for the
hose connection of the Division and located not more than five (5) feet above
the floor level. Where first-aid hose is direct-coupled to such standpipes an
approved reducing coupling may be installed with not more than seventy-five
(75) feet of one and one-half (1-1/2) inch hose connected thereto. The two and
one-half (2-1/2) inch valve provided for Division use shall control the water
supplied to the first-aid hose.
   (b)   In addition to the two and one-half (2-1/2) inch valved outlet, where
this Fire Prevention Code requires first-aid hose stations to be located in
public hallways, corridors or spaces separate from the standpipe locations, a
one and one-half (1-1/2) inch branch shall be extended from the standpipe riser
to the hose station and equipped with an approved shut-off valve sealed open by
an easily broken seal at the point of connection with the standpipe riser. A
sign indicating the purpose of the branch and of the shut-off valve shall be
permanently secured at or to the shut-off valve. Hose stations of such branches
shall have one and one-half (1-1/2) inch hose valves and connections, with not
more than seventy-five (75) feet of first-aid hose attached thereto. Threads on
hose connections shall be male threads and shall conform to Division standard
for one and one-half (1-1/2) inch hose.
   (c)   Where separate branch lines to first-aid hose stations are provided,
and on dry standpipes, the two and one-half (2-1/2) inch valved Division
connection shall have a suitable cap to protect the thread.
   (d)   Where deemed necessary by the Division because of the hazardous nature
of penthouse occupancy or above roof uses, two and one-half (2-1/2) inch
standpipe outlets shall be provided at the roof level.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 389.15 Water Supply for Required Wet Standpipes
   (a)   Every wet standpipe required by this Fire Prevention Code shall be
permanently connected to an approved primary source of water supply which will
furnish water at each hose connection when the valve on the supply is open or
automatically opened or, in special cases, when the valve on the supply is
opened by the operation of suitably located thermostats. Such primary source
shall provide a sufficient flow of water at the highest outlet and at any other
outlet and shall be one (1) of the following:
      (1)   A direct connection to a City water main; provided that the
Division of Water and Heat certifies that such main is capable, between 5:00
a.m. and 8:00 pm. on a normal working day, of maintaining a flowing pressure of
at least fifteen (15) psi at the highest hose outlet when a street level
hydrant supplied by the main, and located within two hundred fifty (250) feet
of the connection, is discharging through two and one-half (2-1/2) inch open
hydrant butt at the rate of five hundred (500) gallons per minute;
      (2)   A gravity tank of not less than five thousand (5,000) gallons
capacity with bottom not less than twenty-five (25) feet above the standpipe
outlet in the top story of the building. When the tank which supplies the
standpipe system is also used for domestic water supply, the outlet to the
domestic supply shall be placed sufficiently above the bottom of the tank to
maintain a reserve of not less than five thousand (5,000) gallons for standpipe
use. When a tank which supplies a standpipe system also supplies an automatic
sprinkler system, the tank shall have a capacity of five thousand (5,000)
gallons in excess of that required for sprinkler use. In the latter case, the
connection of standpipe use shall be made to the upper part of the tank so that
the tank will retain the required reserve for sprinkler use;
      (3)   A pressure tank of not less than four thousand five hundred (4,500)
gallons capacity (three thousand three hundred (3,300) gallons of water)
located in the top story or at a higher level of the building;
      (4)   Automatic pumps having a combined capacity of not less than two
hundred fifty (250) gallons per minute.
   (b)   Wet standpipe installations with first-aid hose shall be designed on
the basis of seventy (70) gallons per minute flowing simultaneously at any two
(2) first- aid hose stations at a pressure not less than fifteen (15) psi.
   (c)   When the pressure at an outlet exceeds fifty (50) psi, an approved
reducing disc, adjustable reducer or regulator, set to maintain a pressure of
fifty (50) psi on the discharge side with a flow of two hundred (200) gallons
per minute through two and one-half (2-1/2) inch hose and nozzle, shall be
provided.
   (d)   Automatic pumps shall have an adequate source of power and shall be
supplied from street mains or from well systems, or from other storage systems
furnishing not less than one (1) hour’s supply at the rated capacity of the
pumps.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 389.16 Tests
   (a)   Upon the completion of a standpipe installation, and at least once
every two (2) years thereafter, every standpipe installation shall be tested in
the presence of a representative of the Division of Fire assigned to witness
such test.
   (b)   At the time of installation, standpipe systems shall be tested and
proved tight at a hydrostatic pressure at least twenty-five percent (25%) in
excess of the highest normal working pressure to which they will be subjected.
   (c)   Periodic tests thereafter on wet standpipes shall be made with hose
provided by the Division and shall be flow tests made from the topmost outlet
in the building.
   (d)   No periodic tests shall be required of dry standpipes, but these shall
be regularly inspected to verify their availability for immediate use.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 389.17 Maintenance
   (a)   Required tanks shall be kept properly filled at all times and, where
pressure tanks are employed, a pressure of at least seventy-five (75) psi shall
be maintained at all times. Where necessary, tank heaters shall be provided and
utilized to prevent freezing.
   (b)   All standpipe systems, pumps, tanks and other equipment shall be
maintained in readiness for use at all times.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 389.18 Buildings Under Construction
   (a)   Where standpipe systems are required, in buildings more than four (4)
stories in height, the standpipe installations shall be made as the building is
erected and shall be available for the use of the Division of Fire beginning at
the time when the floor construction at the fourth floor level is in place.
From that time on, the standpipe installation shall never be more than one (1)
story behind the construction of floors at levels above the fourth floor level.
The standpipe equipment so provided may be either the permanent equipment or a
temporary installation, and may be used for water supply for construction
operations.
   (b)   The systems erected for use during construction shall include at least
one (1) Siamese connection installed in an accessible location facing a street
and connected to the standpipe riser or to the cross-connection serving
standpipe risers, and two and one-half (2-1/2) inch valved outlets at each
story level. Only dry standpipes for Division use shall be required. First-aid
hose and branch connections to first-aid hose shall not be required for use
during construction. Caps shall be provided and maintained at all open ends of
the systems, except only while extensions or connections are being attached,
and systems shall be ready for use at all times.
   (c)   Stairs shall be erected at or adjacent to standpipe riser locations,
or other approved means for access of firemen to standpipe outlets shall be
provided.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 389.19 Elevator for Use by Division of Fire
   (a)   Whenever the height of a building exceeds six (6) stories or seventy-
five (75) feet above grade level, an elevator manned by a competent person, or
an automatic elevator, shall be available at all times to assist the Division
of Fire in reaching any floor of the building.
   (b)   Whenever the construction of a building has progressed to a height of
more than one hundred fifty (150) feet above grade level, at least one (1)
elevator used for carrying passengers or workmen shall be kept in readiness at
all times for use by the Division, and a competent person to operate the
elevator shall be available at all times unless the elevator is equipped with
such devices that it can be safely operated by the Division.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
YARD HYDRANT SYSTEMS
§ 389.20 Location and Use Regulations
   (a)   When Required. Whenever the ground area of the premises of an
industrial plant, tank farm, lumber yard, storage area for combustible
material, amusement park, exhibition park or other occupancy involving the use
of large ground area exceeds fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet, and
whenever the area of a lumber shed on any premises exceeds five thousand
(5,000) square feet aggregate area, and such premises are so located or
arranged that efficient firefighting cannot be carried on from existing public
hydrants, the Fire Chief may require the installation of yard hydrants by the
owner of the premises in conformity with the provisions of this section.
   (b)   Number Required.
      (1)   One (1) yard hydrant shall be provided for each twenty thousand
(20,000) square feet of ground area and such hydrants shall be spaced not more
than two hundred fifty (250) feet apart.
      (2)   Yard hydrants in lumber yards shall be spaced not more than two
hundred fifty (250) feet apart and shall be in such number and so located that
streams therefrom, when used in first-aid or Fire Division firefighting, shall
reach all areas on the premises, including those within lumber sheds.
   Every required yard hydrant within a lumber yard shall be equipped with
attached hose kept within a hose house.
   (c)   Hose Houses.
      (1)   When deemed necessary by the Chief or required by this Fire
Prevention Code, hose houses or cabinets containing an adequate supply of
rubber-lined cotton hose, two and one-half (2-1/2) inch in size and not less
than one hundred (100) feet long, shall be maintained attached to the yard
hydrant or hydrants and arranged or laid within a hose house ready for use at
any time.
      (2)   Hydrants, hose, hose connections and nozzles shall conform to Fire
Division standard.
      (3)   Hose houses shall be painted red with the words “Fire Hose” six (6)
inches high in white letters on the door.
   (d)   Water Supply.
      (1)   Where adequate pressure and capacity exist, yard hydrants may be
connected to the public water supply. Where the public water supply is deemed
inadequate by the Chief, such yard hydrants shall be supplied either from a
gravity tank of not less than fifty thousand (50,000) gallons capacity elevated
so that the bottom of the tank is at least seventy-five (75) feet above the
highest grade level within the area protected or at least twenty-five (25) feet
above the highest structure in the area; or from a fire pump with a capacity of
not less than one thousand (1,000) gallons a minute drawing from a suction tank
of not less than sixty thousand (60,000) gallons capacity; or from another
approved source which will provide an adequate supply of water for firefighting
purposes.
      (2)   When water supply is taken from a well, stream, lake or other
source approved by the Division, the installation and arrangement shall also be
approved by the Commissioner of Water and Heat. No connection shall be made
which may result in a cross- connection between the public mains and the water
drawn from other sources.
      (3)   Yard hydrant systems connected to City water mains shall be
provided with post indicator valves located in accessible positions. Post
indicator valves shall be sealed or locked in the open position, be painted red
and their purpose shall be plainly marked upon them.
   (e)   Monitor Nozzle and First-Aid Hose. Whenever the occupancy is of
unusual hazard the Chief may require the installation of a monitor nozzle with
remote control, connected to such yard hydrant system. Where unusual hazards
exist and where first-aid firefighting equipment is deemed necessary by him or
her, he or she may also require the installation of one and one-half inch (1-1/
2) first-aid hose mounted on approved racks and connected to piping not less
than two (2) inches in size.
   (f)   Special Fire Extinguishing Equipment. Storage areas for storing
flammable liquids in above- ground tanks, refineries and high hazard
occupancies shall also be equipped with other fire extinguishing equipment
required by this Code.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
AUTOMATIC SPRINKLERS; OTHER EXTINGUISHING EQUIPMENT
§ 389.21 Scope and Application of Provisions
   (a)   The provisions of Sections
389.21 to
389.34 shall govern the installation of required automatic fire extinguishing
equipment in buildings and other structures.
   (b)   Such automatic fire extinguishing equipment shall be approved
automatic sprinklers, except that in locations where automatic sprinklers would
be hazardous or inadvisable because of the nature of the occupancy or contents,
automatic fire extinguishing equipment comprising one (1) or more of the
following types of systems may be approved in lieu thereof by the Fire Chief.
      (1)   Carbon Dioxide Fire Extinguishing Systems. When installed in
conformity with the recommendation contained in NFPA Standard No. 12 entitled
“Carbon Dioxide Extinguishing Systems.”
      (2)   Foam Extinguishing Systems. When installed in conformity with the
recommendations contained in NFPA Standard No. 11 entitled “Foam Extinguishing
Systems.”
      (3)   Water Spray Extinguishing Systems. When installed in conformity
with recommendations contained in NFPA Standard No. 15 entitled “Water Spray
Fixed Systems.”
      (4)   Steam Extinguishing Systems. When installed in conformity with the
recommendations contained in NFPA Standard No. 86A entitled “Class A Ovens and
Furnaces.”
      (5)   Other Approved Automatic Systems. When approved and authorized for
use by the Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals and when installed
in conformity with the conditions of approval.
   (c)   No automatic sprinkler system shall be installed where water
discharged therefrom will come in contact with high voltage electrical
equipment or moisture-hazardous substances. For the purposes of this
subsection, high voltage shall be deemed to be two thousand two hundred (2,200)
volts and over.
   (d)   As used in this Fire Prevention Code, “automatic sprinklers or other
approved automatic fire extinguishing equipment” means approved automatic
sprinklers except in instances where substitution of
other automatic fire extinguishing equipment is approved by the Fire Chief.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 389.22 Required Locations
   Automatic sprinklers or other automatic fire extinguishing equipment shall
be installed in buildings or other structures where specified in the following
table and where specified for special uses or occupancies in Chapter
3125.
   Automatic Sprinklers or Other Approved Automatic Fire Extinguishing
Equipment
   Requirements for buildings erected or occupied after June 27, 1949, and for
existing buildings when specified (See Note (e)).
               Where Required
                         Bldgs. more
                         than 2                                                                                             Lobbies,
                         stories in                                                                                         hallways
                         height and                                                                                         and
               All       exceeding                                                                                          contiguous
               bldgs.    10,000 sq.                                                                                         areas with
               exceeding ft. in                                                                                   In        combustible Paint     Kitchen
Occupancy      either    area; and                                                                                connectio interior    shops and compartments:
Classification 1,000 sq. occupancies Basements and cellars: as specified under “Req. Based On Occupancy” when n with    finish and  similar   where
               ft. in    above 2nd   area exceeds 5,000 sq. ft.                                                   stage and serving as  hazardous required by
               area or 1 story                                                                                    appurtena a required  spaces    Section
               story     occupying                                                                                nt rooms  means                 3125.06(a)(3)
               height    more than                                                                                          ofegress;
                         10,000 sq.                                                                                         as required
                         ft. (Also                                                                                          by Sections
                         consult                                                                                            3135.19 and
                         sections                                                                                           3151.07(f)
                         listed)
                         Where Required
                                   Bldgs. more
                                   than 2                                                                                             Lobbies,
                                   stories in                                                                                         hallways
                                   height and                                                                                         and
                         All       exceeding                                                                                          contiguous
                         bldgs.    10,000 sq.                                                                                         areas with
                         exceeding ft. in                                                                                   In        combustible Paint     Kitchen
                         either    area; and                                                                                connectio interior    shops and compartments:
Occupancy Classification 1,000 sq. occupancies Basements and cellars: as specified under “Req. Based On Occupancy” when n with    finish and  similar   where
                         ft. in    above 2nd   area exceeds 5,000 sq. ft.                                                   stage and serving as  hazardous required by
                         area or 1 story                                                                                    appurtena a required  spaces    Section
                         story     occupying                                                                                nt rooms  means                 3125.06(a)(3)
                         height    more than                                                                                          ofegress;
                                   10,000 sq.                                                                                         as required
                                   ft. (Also                                                                                          by Sections
                                   consult                                                                                            3135.19 and
                                   sections                                                                                           3151.07(f)
                                   listed)
Residential – Multiple                                                                                                              X (b)       X (b)(e)  X (a)
Dwelling
Business                                                                                                                              X (b)       X (b)
Mercantile                         X (3127.25  X                                                                                                  X (b)
                                   (a)(2))
Institutional                                                                                                                                     X (b)(e)
Assembly                                                                                                                    X                     X (b)
Educational                                                                                                                                       X (b)(e)
Storage (Low or Moderate           X (3129.13  X (c)                                                                                              X (b)(f)
Hazard)                            (a)(1)B.)
Industrial N.C.                                                                                                                                   X (b)
Industrial C.                      X (3129.31  X                                                                                                  X (b)
                                   (a)(2))
High Hazard              X (d)                                                                                                                    X (b)(f)
(a)   On domestic water supply; no alarm valve or exterior Fire Division connection required.
(b)   When only these areas in a building are sprinklered, connection to domestic water supply permissible and no alarm valve or exterior Division connection required.
(c)   May be omitted when storage is restricted to incombustible material.
(d)   When used for purposes, processes or storage involving combustible, flammable or explosive products or materials. Also consult Section 3129.49(a).
(e)   Applies also in existing buildings; consult Sections 3125.46(f), 3127.46, and 3127.82.
(f)   Note requirements for special uses and occupancies in Sections
381.05,
385.35,
385.76,
391.29,
3129.01 to 3129.18 and 3129.34 to 3129.50.
 
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 389.23 Definitions
   As used in this Fire Prevention Code:
   (a)   “Sprinkler system” means a system of piping connecting to one (1) or
more approved sources of water supply and provided with distributing devices so
located and arranged as to discharge or diffuse an effective stream or spray of
water over the interior of a building or part of a building, or on the exterior
of a building.
   (b)   “Automatic sprinkler head” means a device which will open
automatically within a predetermined temperature range because of fusing of a
fusible element, or will operate automatically when controls are subjected to a
predetermined accelerated rise in temperature.
   (c)   “Automatic sprinkler system” means operate automatically to discharge
or diffuse a stream or spray of water through automatic sprinkler heads or
through open sprinkler heads.
   (d)   “Wet-pipe sprinkler system” means a sprinkler system in which all
piping is maintained filled with water and connected to an approved source of
water supply.
   (e)   “Dry-pipe sprinkler system” means a sprinkler system to which water is
supplied upon operation of an automatic dry-pipe valve actuated and operated
automatically by release or application of air pressure, or actuated and
operated electrically by remote thermostatic control.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 389.24 Drawings
   All required automatic sprinkler installations shall be made in conformity
with drawings which have been submitted to and approved by the Fire Chief. When
the building or other structure is to be equipped with a required standpipe
system, the drawing shall bear a notation to that effect, or may show the
layout of the standpipe system.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 389.25 Design Pressure; Tests and Inspection
   (a)   Sprinkler system shall be designed and tested to withstand, when ready
for use, a water pressure of two hundred (200) psi for two (2) hours without
leakage at the joints, valves, fittings or any other part of the piping.
   (b)   When ready for use, the entire system shall be inspected and tested in
the presence of the authorized representative of the Fire Chief and shall be
subject to his or her approval. All defects revealed by inspection or test
shall be corrected before final approval.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 389.26 Approved Devices for Sprinkler Systems
   All Siamese and other connections, fire pumps and their control devices,
check, control and other valves, pipeline fittings, and other units of
equipment and accessories of sprinkler systems shall be of a type approved by
the Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals and classified by it for
the water pressures or other operating and service conditions to which they
will be subjected. Devices tested, classified or approved by the Underwriters’
Laboratories, Inc., or by other recognized testing laboratory with adequate
equipment, experience and competency in this field, may be approved by the
Board without additional tests.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 389.27 Approved Standards for Installation
   (a)   All sprinkler installations shall be installed in conformity with the
provisions of this Fire Prevention Code and accepted safe practice.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this Code, statutes, rules or
regulations promulgated by authority of statute or other ordinances, conformity
with the recommendations and requirements of NFPA Standard No. 13 entitled
“Installation of Sprinkler Systems” shall be accepted as conformity with
accepted safe practice. However, only a single automatic water supply
conforming to the requirements contained in NFPA Standard No. 13 for primary
supply shall be required; provided further that the Board of Building Standards
and Building Appeals may change, modify or supplement any of the requirements
of NFPA Standard No. 13 when deemed necessary in the interest of public safety
or to further define accepted safe practice.
   (c)   When deemed necessary for safety to life or property, the Commissioner
of Building may require compliance with any recommendation or requirement of
NFPA Standard No. 13 as modified in subsection (b) hereof.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 389.28 Water Supply Connections to City Main
   (a)   When a connection to a City water main constitutes the primary source
of water supply and a Fire Division connection is required by this Fire
Prevention Code, such connection to the City water main shall be not less than
three (3) inches in diameter.
   (b)   Every sprinkler system shall be provided with an approved outside
screw and yoke valve, or indicator gate valve, located to be readily
accessible, to control all sources of water supply except that from the
Division connection.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 389.29 Fire Division Connections
   (a)   Except as provided in the table included in Section
389.22, every required sprinkler system shall be equipped with one (1) or more
approved connections for use of the Division of Fire. The pipes from the
sprinkle system to such connection shall be not less than four (4) inches in
size except that a three (3) inch pipe may be used to connect a single inlet
hose connection to a three (3) inch or smaller riser.
   (b)   When Fire Division hose connections are required, they shall be
provided on each street and alley frontage or, when the building sets back of
the street lines, on each accessible exterior wall facing street or alley.
However, when a frontage or exterior wall is less than fifty (50) feet in
length no connection shall be required on that frontage when approved
connections are provided on other frontages.
   (c)   The threads of inlets on hose connections shall have female threads
and shall conform to Division standard. Substantial caps shall be provided on
each connection.
   (d)   Each such connection shall be suitably marked with raised letters
reading “Fire Department Connection – Automatic Sprinklers” or when only
stories below grade are equipped, “Fire Department Connection – Basement
Sprinklers” or “Cellar Sprinklers.”
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 389.30 Basement or Cellar Sprinklers
   Where the only required sprinklers in a building are those installed in a
basement or cellar, a flow valve which operates on audible alarm or transmits
an alarm, as directed by the Fire Chief, shall be mandatory only when the total
area so sprinklered exceeds seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 389.31 Kitchen Compartments
   Sprinkler installations in kitchen compartments shall conform to the
provisions of Sections
389.21 to
389.34 and
3125.06(a)(3), governing installations connected to the domestic water supply.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 389.32 Connections to Domestic Water Supply
   When sprinklers are permitted by this Fire Prevention Code to be supplied
from the domestic water supply the following conditions shall be met:
   (a)   Sprinkler systems shall be the automatic wet type;
   (b)   There shall be sufficient water available to provide not less than
twenty (20) gallons of water per minute for thirty (30) minutes, flowing at a
pressure of not less than fifteen (15) psi at each head, within the largest
floor area or room in the building equipped with sprinklers so connected;
   (c)   The arrangement, location and spacing of sprinkler heads and the
piping, materials, test connections and controls therefor shall conform to the
standards established by Sections
389.26 and
389.27;
   (d)   An adequate supply of spare sprinkler heads shall be on hand at all
times;
   (e)   No supply shall be taken from a standpipe system;
   (f)   Domestic water supply connections shall be made so that stagnant water
from the sprinkler system is not likely to flow to drinking fountains or other
locations where water is used for human consumption.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 389.33 Combination Sprinkler and Standpipe Tanks
   A tank used to provide the required water supply to a standpipe system may
also be used to supply an automatic sprinkler system in the same building or
other structure when the tank capacity and connection conform to the
requirements included in Section
389.15(a)(2).
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 389.34 Maintenance and Inspection
   (a)   Each sprinkler system shall be maintained in good condition and in
such manner that it will function effectively in the event of fire.
   (b)   Sprinkler systems shall be inspected at least once in every six (6)
months by the owner or an authorized representative of the owner to ascertain
that all parts are in good working order. When such inspections are to be made,
the Division of Fire shall be notified and, when so requested by the Division,
the inspection shall be made under the direction of the Division.
   (c)   Fire pumps shall be tested by being operated at least once every
thirty (30) days, and when the sprinkler system is inspected.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
HAND FIRE EXTINGUISHING EQUIPMENT
§ 389.35 Classification; Number Required; Location
   (a)   Definition. As used in this Fire Prevention Code: “hand fire
extinguishing equipment” means portable equipment intended for the control of
small or incipient fires and designed for manual operation.
   (b)   Classification and Rating.
      (1)   For the purposes of this Code, units of hand fire extinguishing
equipment shall be classified in accordance with the types of fires with which
they are fitted to cope. Fires are classified as:
         A.   Class A fires: fires in ordinary combustible materials where the
quenching and cooling effects of quantities of water, or of solutions
containing large percentages of water, are of first importance.
         B.   Class B fires: fires in flammable liquids, greases, etc., where a
blanketing effect is essential.
         C.   Class C fires: fires in electrical equipment where the use of a
nonconducting extinguishing agent is of first importance.
      (2)   Hand fire extinguishing equipment shall be classified as to
suitability in combatting Class A, Class B and Class C fires, and rated in
terms of units of efficacy. For the purposes of this Code, the extinguishing
value of two and one-half (2-1/2) gallons of water applied as a forced stream
from a pressure cartridge or from a soda-acid extinguisher on a Class A fire
constitutes one (1) unit of efficacy.
      (3)   Hand fire extinguishing equipment shall be classified and rated in
accordance with the following table and the classifications and ratings
established by the Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals:
   Classification and Rating of Hand Fire Extinguishing Equipment
Type Size Classifica- Units of Classifica- Units of Classifica- tion Units of
          tion        Efficacy tion        Efficacy                  Efficacy
Type           Size       Classifica- Units of Classifica- Units of Classifica- Units of
                          tion        Efficacy tion        Efficacy tion        Efficacy
Chemical       2-1/       A           1
Solution (soda 2 gallon
acid)          1-1/       A           1/2
               2 gallon
               2-1/
               2 gallon
               (stored    A           1
               pressure
               cartridge)
               5 gallon   A           1
               (pump)
               50 gallon
               cask with  A           1
Water          3 pails
               25, 35 and
               40 gallon
               bucket     A           1
               tanks
               (6 pails)
               2 1/
               2 gallon   A           1
               (pump)
               12 quart   A           1/5
               pail
               2-1/
               2 gallon
               (stored
               pressure
               cartridge  A           1
               and
               internally
               generated
               pressure)
               5 gallon   A           1
               (pump)
Anti-Freeze    50 gallon
Solution       cask with  A           1
               3 pails
               25, 35 and
               40 gallon
               bucket     A           1
               tanks
               (6 pails)
               2-1/
               2 gallon   A           1
               (pump)
               12 quart   A           1/5
               pail
               2-1/2 and  A           1        B           1
Foam           5 gallon
               1-1/4 - 1- A           1/2      B           1/2
               1/2 gallon
               1 3/4 and
Loaded Stream  2 1/       A           1        B           1/2
               2 gallons
               1 gallon   A           1/2      B           1/4
               1, 2 and 3                      B           1/2      C           1
Vaporizing     gallon
Liquid (carbon 1, 1-1/4,
tetrachloride) 1-1/2 and                       B           1/2      C           1/2
               2 quart
               15 and 20
               lbs. of                         B           1        C           1
               carbon
               dioxide
               7 1/
               2 lbs.* &
               10 lbs.*                        B           1/2      C           1
Carbon Dioxide of carbon
               dioxide
               4 lbs. of
               carbon                          B           1/2      C           1/2
               dioxide
               2 lbs. of
               carbon                          B           1/4
               dioxide
               15 and 25
Dry Compound   lbs. of                         B           1        C           1
               dry
               chemical
*   With 24 inch core
 
   (c)   Number of Units.
      (1)   Hand fire extinguishing equipment shall be installed in each
building not equipped with wet standpipes, with first-aid hose attached, of the
following occupancy classifications, so as to provide the following numbers of
units of efficacy for each five thousand (5,000) square feet of floor area.
Equipment installed shall be suitable to the class of fire which might be
experienced in each location and as directed by the Fire Chief.
   Required Hand Fire Extinguishing Equipment in Buildings Not Equipped with
Wet Standpipes with Attached First-aid Hose
 
                                                                                No. of
                                                                                units of   Maximum
                                                                                efficacy   to
Occupancy Classification                                                        for each   Nearest
                                                                                5,000 sq.  Unit
                                                                                ft. of     (in
                                                                                gross      ft.)
                                                                                floor area
Residential – Class B Multiple Dwelling, Business, Institutional, *Industrial 1          100
N.C., occupancies
Mercantile – *Storage, Industrial C., Occupancies                             2          50
                                                                                2 (plus
                                                                                additional
                                                                                units as
High Hazard Occupancy                                                           directed   50
                                                                                by the
                                                                                Division
                                                                                of Fire)
*   None required where building and contents are incombustible.
 
      (2)   For assembly occupancy, hand fire extinguishers shall be provided
as required by Section 3125.67(c), and as specified in this Code for places of
outdoor assembly.
      (3)   For educational occupancy, hand fire extinguishing equipment shall
be provided as required by the Ohio Building Code.
      (4)   Irrespective of the occupancy classification of the building, hand
fire extinguishing equipment shall also be provided at locations of unusual
fire hazard where deemed necessary by the Fire Chief and as directed or
approved by the Chief.
   (d)   Locations and Installation.
      (1)   The proposed locations of all hand fire extinguishing equipment
shall be subject to the approval of the Division of Fire. Where first-aid
standpipe hose is installed, required hand fire extinguishers shall be located
adjacent to the same and may be within the cabinet containing such hose.
      (2)   All hand fire extinguishing equipment shall be properly supported,
held in place and maintained ready for use at all times.
   (e)   Prohibited Installation of Hazardous Equipment. Hand fire
extinguishing equipment of a type which might prove hazardous in use shall not
be installed.
      (1)   Extinguishers liberating carbon tetrachloride or carbon dioxide
shall not be installed where they would normally be used in confined occupied
areas.
      (2)   Extinguishers which rely upon water as the major extinguishing
medium shall not be installed where their normal use would be as a stream to
extinguish burning flammable liquids. However, water spray and water fog may be
used for that purpose.
      (3)   Only extinguishers liberating carbon dioxide or carbon
tetrachloride shall be installed where their normal use would be in
extinguishing fires in electric apparatus or equipment. However, carbon
tetrachloride extinguishers shall not be installed where their use would
liberate quantities of toxic gas.
      (4)   Only sand or inert powder extinguishers shall be installed where
their normal use would be in extinguishing fires in moisture hazard substances
such as calcium carbide or sodium peroxide.
   (f)   Recharging and Maintenance.
      (1)   All hand fire extinguishing equipment which requires periodic
recharging shall be recharged at intervals not exceeding those determined by
the Division. Each such piece of equipment shall have an attached label on
which the date of recharging shall be marked with the signature of the person
responsible for recharging.
      (2)   All hand fire extinguishing equipment shall be maintained in a
usable and serviceable condition ready for instant use at all times.
   (g)   Protection Against Freezing. Hand fire extinguishing equipment
installed in locations subject to temperatures below freezing shall be anti-
freeze extinguishers or of a type not affected by low temperatures. Where water
is the extinguishing medium, calcium chloride with other components may be
added to prevent freezing, provided such mixture will not have a detrimental
effect upon extinguishing action or upon the equipment or parts thereof.
   (h)   Approval. Hand fire extinguishing equipment shall be equipment
approved by the Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals. Equipment
tested, classified and approved by a Nationally recognized testing laboratory
which possesses adequate equipment for testing and is competent to classify and
approve fire extinguishing equipment may be approved by the Board without
additional tests.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
CHAPTER 391 – FIRE ALARM AND DETECTION SYSTEMS; FIRE DRILLS
Interior Fire Alarm Systems
391.01   Scope
391.02   Conditions Requiring Interior Fire Alarms
391.03   Types of Systems Required
391.04   Definitions
391.05   Materials and Devices
391.06   Approval of System Plans
391.07   Alarm Sending Stations
391.08   Sounding Devices
391.09   Annunciators
391.10   Sources of Electrical Energy
391.11   Supervising Current
391.12   Station Testing Devices
391.13   Subdivided Buildings
391.14   Installation of Electrical Work
391.15   Acceptance Tests
391.16   Monthly Tests
391.17   Maintenance
391.18   Supplemental Regulations for Installation of Interior Systems
391.19   Existing Installations
Fire Detection Systems
391.20   Conditions Requiring Automatic Equipment
391.21   Definitions
391.22   Approved Equipment
391.23   Installation, Tests and Maintenance
391.231   Smoke Detectors – Repealed
Fire Drills
391.24   Multiple Dwellings
391.25   Mercantile Occupancy
391.26   Institutional Occupancy
391.27   Assembly Occupancy
391.28   Educational Occupancy
391.29   Industrial Occupancy
391.30   High Hazard Occupancy
Cross-reference:
   Alarm system from hospitals and nursing homes, CO
135.35
   Fire Chief approval required, CO
3105.11
   Obstructing fire alarms and detection systems, CO
381.11
Statutory reference:
   School fire drills, RC 3737.73
INTERIOR FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS
§ 391.01 Scope
   The provisions of this chapter shall govern the installation of required
interior fire alarm systems, except that the provisions of this chapter shall
not apply to mechanically operated alarms actuated by automatic sprinkler
systems.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 391.02 Conditions Requiring Interior Fire Alarms
   Fire protective signaling systems shall be of an approved type and shall be
installed in accordance with the Ohio Basic Building Code and as specified in
the following table:
 
Use Group Classification as defined in Where Required
the Ohio Basic Building Code
                                       All buildings containing more than 1
Assembly, A-1, A-2, A-3                room or space of A-1, A-2 or A-
                                       3 assembly occupancy.
Factory & Industrial F-1               All buildings more than 2 stories in
                                       height.
High Hazard, H-1, H-2,H-3, H-4         All buildings or parts of buildings more
                                       than 1 story in height.
                                       Buildings with sales rooms above 2nd
Mercantile                             floor level; and those with an
                                       unenclosed moving stairway or open
                                       stairway.
 
   (a)   Presignal type to be installed only in buildings with approved trained
fire brigade.
   (b)   Noncoded type permitted only in buildings housing adults where there
are no bedridden or incapacitated patients.
   (c)   Any fire alarm condition initiated by a manual pull station or
detection appliance or any observance of fire or smoke by an individual in any
hospital or nursing home shall be immediately reported to the Division of Fire
by any of the following:
      (1)   Transmission of the alarm by a third party central station system
approved by the Fire Chief;
      (2)   Notification to the Division of Fire by dialing 911.
(Ord. No. 2013-94. Passed 6-19-95, eff. 6-28-95)
§ 391.03 Types of Systems Required
   All interior fire alarm systems shall be supervised closed circuit
electrically operated systems except that in specific instances, where deemed
adequate for the purpose by the Division of Fire, manually operated trip fire
gongs not less than eight (8) inches in diameter may be installed in buildings
not more than two (2) stories in height, and except that open circuit systems
may be installed in specific instances where deemed adequate for the purpose by
the Division in buildings where noncoded systems are permitted by this Fire
Prevention Code and where not more than two (2) alarm sending stations are
required.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 391.04 Definitions
   As used in this Fire Prevention Code:
   (a)   “Interior fire alarm system” means an alarm system installed within a
building and provided and intended to warn the occupants of the building in the
event of fire by means of an audible signal transmitted from manual trip
stations, signal stations or boxes, or automatic fire detecting devices.
   (b)   “Closed circuit system” means one in which all circuits between alarm
sending stations, sounding devices and annunciators are maintained as normally
closed electrical circuits.
   (c)   “Open circuit system” means one in which all circuits are maintained
as electric circuits normally open at the alarm sending stations and which is
operated by closing the circuit at any alarm sending station.
   (d)   “Coded closed circuit interior fire alarm, signal system” means
interior fire alarm signal consisting of sending stations and signaling devices
operated on supervised closed electrical circuits where rounds of automatically
sounded coded signals are transmitted to indicate the floor or portion of the
same from which the alarm was sent.
   (e)   “Noncoded closed circuit interior fire alarm signal system” means an
interior fire alarm signal system consisting of sending stations and signaling
devices operated on supervised closed electrical circuits so arranged that
operation of any station will automatically sound the sounding devices
throughout all portions of the building.
   (f)   “Presignal system” means a coded closed circuit interior fire alarm
signal system so arranged that the operation of any station will cause the
sounding of the sounding devices located at a main telephone switchboard,
office, custodian’s room, chief engineer’s office or other place within a
building, to notify a responsible person that an alarm box has been operated,
and the location of such alarm box. Alarm stations of a presignal system shall
be so equipped that operation of any alarm sending station by an authorized
person in a special manner or by use of a special key shall cause the sounding
of all sounding devices throughout the building.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 391.05 Materials and Devices
   All required electrically operated interior fire alarm systems and all
devices and equipment in connection with such fire alarm systems installed
after June 27, 1949, shall be systems, devices and equipment of a type which
has been approved for the purpose by the Board of Building Standards and
Building Appeals. Systems, devices and equipment which have been tested and
approved by the Underwriters’ Laboratories, Inc., or tested and approved by
other recognized testing laboratory with adequate equipment, experience and
competency, may be approved by the Board without additional tests.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 391.06 Approval of System Plans
   All required interior fire alarm systems shall be installed in conformity
with plans therefor which have been submitted to and approved by the Fire
Chief. Plans submitted for approval shall clearly describe all component parts
of the proposed system and indicate, in diagrammatic fashion, the proposed
location of all alarm sending stations, sounding devices and annunciators.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 391.07 Alarm Sending Stations
   (a)   In all buildings provided with an electrically operated interior fire
alarm system, at least one (1) fire alarm sending station shall be provided at
each floor level located in a natural path of escape from fire at a readily
accessible location designated or approved by the Fire Chief. Additional
sending stations shall be provided so that no point on any floor area not
divided into rooms, or from any door to an apartment, dwelling unit or room,
shall be more than one hundred (100) feet distant from the nearest sending
station upon such floor. At floor levels where more than one (1) sending
station are required, the sending stations shall be located at the customary
means of egress from the floor level unless otherwise directed by the Chief.
   (b)   All sending stations shall be located five (5) feet three (3) inches
from handle to floor.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 391.08 Sounding Devices
   (a)   Sounding devices shall be sufficient in number to be clearly audible
to all the occupants of the building.
   (b)   All sounding devices in the same building shall be of the same type
and shall emit a distinctive signal used only for fire alarm purposes.
   (c)   Where coded systems are used, audible sounding devices shall sound the
code signal at least three (3) times whenever such code signal is transmitted.
However, in buildings of residential occupancy classification the code signal
shall sound continuously until manually silenced at the station from which the
signal was transmitted.
   (d)   Where ceiling heights permit, gongs or other sounding device shall be
located approximately eight (8) feet above the floor level. Where ceiling
heights do not permit installation at that level, gongs or other sounding
devices shall be located close to the ceiling level.
   (e)   The provisions of this section shall not, however, be interpreted to
preclude or prevent the installation of special sounding devices which have
been approved by the Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals and which
are installed in conformity with the conditions of such approval.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 391.09 Annunciators
   (a)   Annunciators used in connection with presignal type interior fire
alarm systems shall be of an approved closed circuit type.
   (b)   Annunciators shall have relays of approved type and shall be equipped
with suitable target, shutter or other indicating device, each marked with a
suitable description of the purpose it serves and requiring manual reset after
operation.
   (c)   Annunciators shall be so designed that they will indicate trouble on
any circuit, control board or at any other point on an interior fire alarm
system, by visible and audible signals. The indicating devices on trouble
annunciators shall reset automatically when the cause of trouble has been
removed.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 391.10 Sources of Electrical Energy
   (a)   The following sources of energy for electrically operated interior
fire alarm systems shall be approved:
      (1)   Central station electric power;
      (2)   Two (2) or more electric power generating units;
      (3)   Two (2) or more sets of storage battery units;
      (4)   One (1) electric generator supplemented by storage battery
equipment or other approved auxiliary equipment;
      (5)   Storage battery equipment under continuous charge from an approved
trickle type charger.
   (b)   One (1) approved source of energy shall be connected to an
electrically operated interior fire alarm system at all times. When an
auxiliary source of energy is required, it shall be so arranged and controlled
by an automatic switch that, when the primary source of energy fails, the
secondary source will be automatically connected to the fire alarm signal
system. No intermediate devices shall be connected between the fire alarm
control board and the source of current supply unless specifically approved by
the Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals.
   (c)   Except as provided in subsection (e) hereof, when the energy for a
fire alarm signal system is supplied by a central station electric power
system, it shall be accepted as the sole source of supply. Connections to the
service shall be made as close to the service entrance as practicable, but in
any case on the street side of any main overcurrent protection device or
service switch.
   (d)   Fire alarm cut-outs installed at power sources shall be enclosed in
locked or sealed metal cabinets painted bright red and stenciled “INTERIOR FIRE
ALARM.” Fuses shall be of the enclosed cartridge type, three (3) pole with
neutral fuse replaced by a solid copper wire or other approved fuses. Screw
plug fuses shall not be used.
   (e)   In buildings or parts of buildings of Institutional H Occupancy or
Assembly Occupancy classification required under Chapter
3135 to have an auxiliary power source for emergency lighting or exitways, such
source shall be utilized as an auxiliary source of energy for the interior fire
alarm systems.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 391.11 Supervising Current
   (a)   Provisions shall be made so that a small current flow to constantly
supervise each circuit shall be maintained on every closed circuit electrically
operated interior fire alarm system. A milliammeter or other approved current
indicator shall be provided and so connected as to indicate the supervising
current.
   (b)   The supervising circuit shall be provided with a trouble bell
operating on open circuit arranged to ring continuously in case of failure of
the system. The trouble bell shall be so located that will be within audible
range of some responsible person in the building and shall be connected to the
electric light or power service in the building.
   (c)   Trouble bells shall not be fitted with silencing switches except in
such a manner that the act of silencing the bell by the operation of a switch
automatically and positively transfers the trouble signal to a red lamp, fed by
some auxiliary source of current supply, on the control board. This auxiliary
source of current supply may be a house lighting circuit or any other approved
source.
   (d)   Trouble bells shall be an approved vibrating type and shall give a
distinctive signal.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 391.12 Station Testing Devices
   Interior fire alarm systems shall be provided with an auxiliary device to
test the signaling devices, and provision shall be made for silent testing of
coded alarm box mechanisms without operating the signaling devices. All
provisions for station testing shall be of an approved type.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 391.13 Subdivided Buildings
   Where a building is subdivided into sections by fire walls, each section
shall be deemed a separate building when designing or installing required
interior fire alarm signal systems. One (1) control board may be used if so
arranged as to operate the signaling devices in each section of the building
separately.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 391.14 Installation of Electrical Work
   All electrical work in connection with interior fire alarm systems shall
conform to the provisions of Chapter 3161.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 391.15 Acceptance Tests
   (a)   Upon completion of an interior fire alarm system and as a condition of
approval, a test of the entire installation shall be made under the direction
of the Fire Chief and with the cooperation of the Commissioner of Building.
   (b)   Electrical equipment and installations shall be subject to inspection
and approval under Chapter 3161. All electrically operated closed circuit
systems shall show an insulation resistance of not less than ten (10) megohms
with signaling apparatus disconnected.
   (c)   The owner or installer of such interior fire alarm system shall
furnish all the necessary tools, instructions and labor to conduct the test.
   (d)   Every installer shall notify the Division of Fire and the Commissioner
in writing at the start and upon the completion of the installation of each
interior fire alarm system.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 391.16 Monthly Tests
   Interior fire alarm systems shall be tested each month, and at such times as
may be directed by the Division of Fire, after warning the occupants of the
building.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 391.17 Maintenance
   (a)   Interior fire alarm systems shall be maintained in operating condition
at all times except when a building is vacated for a period of more than one
(1) week. If, for any reason, a system becomes inoperative, cards shall be
placed at the sending stations indicating that the system is out of order and
immediate steps shall be taken to have the system restored to working order.
   (b)   In systems using break-glass type stations at least one (1) extra
glass for each station in the system shall be kept on the premises.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 391.18 Supplemental Regulations for Installation of Interior Systems
   When deemed necessary, the Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals
may promulgate supplementary rules and regulations for the installation of
interior fire alarm systems. In the absence of such rules and regulations all
installations shall conform to the provisions of this Fire Prevention Code and
to accepted good practice. Conformity with the requirements and recommendations
of the NFPA Standard No. 72A “Local Protective Signaling Systems”; No. 72B
“Auxiliary Protective Signaling Systems”; No. 72C “Remote Station Protective
Signaling Systems”; No. 72E “Automatic Fire Detectors” and NFPA Standard No.
73, shall be deemed evidence of conformity with accepted good practice.
(Ord. No. 1017-76. Passed 7-19-76, eff. 7-21-76)
§ 391.19 Existing Installations
   (a)   Interior fire alarm systems installed prior to June 27, 1949, which
provide an adequate means of warning the occupants in case of fire may be
approved by the Fire Chief as long as they are maintained in proper working
order.
   (b)   Existing systems which are not in substantial conformity with the
provisions of Sections
391.01 to
391.19 and which are deemed inadequate by the Chief shall be altered or
replaced as necessary to provide an adequate means for warning the occupants of
the building in case of fire.
   (c)   Hospitals, and nursing homes shall provide, within one (1) year after
the passage of this section, an approved radio signal system or a direct
connection, or a connection by means of an approved signal supervisory service
to the Division of Fire for immediate notification of the Division should fire
occur.
(Ord. No. 1017-76. Passed 7-19-76, eff. 7-21-76)
FIRE DETECTION SYSTEMS
§ 391.20 Conditions Requiring Automatic Equipment
   (a)   Approved automatic fire detecting systems may be provided in lieu of
required fire patrols in Class B multiple dwellings and in buildings of
Institutional Occupancy Classification as specified in Sections
391.26 and 3125.46.
   (b)   In buildings of any occupancy classification, where deemed adequate
and satisfactory protection for the rooms or premises so equipped when approved
by the Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals, approved automatic
fire detecting equipment may be provided in lieu of required automatic
sprinkler installations in locations where the fire load from combustible
contents within the rooms or premises, does not exceed twelve (12) pounds per
square foot of floor area and where such combustible contents are not of an
explosive or hazardous nature, or where the installation of an automatic
sprinkler system is deemed inadvisable by the Board because of the nature of
the contents or occupancy.
   (c)   No automatic fire detecting system shall be approved for the purposes
specified in this section unless there is provided from such automatic fire
detecting system either a direct connection, or a connection by means of an
approved signal supervisory service, to the Division of Fire for immediate
notification of the Division should fire occur, or in buildings where some
responsible person in authority is on duty at all hours of the day and night, a
connection to sound an alarm and indicate the locality from which such alarm
was sounded. In the latter cases, alarm gongs and indicators or annunciators
shall be provided in such number and in such locations as are directed or
approved by the Division.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 391.21 Definitions
   As used in this Fire Prevention Code:
   (a)   “Automatic fire detecting system” means a system which utilizes
thermostatic or other approved detecting elements for the detection of fire and
the automatic transmission of an alarm.
   (b)   “Supervisory service” means an agreed-upon service rendered upon
receipt of a signal or nonreceipt of a scheduled signal from devices or
equipment being supervised, at a central station remote from the building,
devices or equipment being supervised.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 391.22 Approved Equipment
   (a)   Required systems of automatic fire detection and their component parts
and devices shall be of a type approved by the Board of Building Standards and
Building Appeals. Fire detecting systems and devices tested and approved by the
Underwriters’ Laboratories, Inc., or tested and approved by other recognized
testing laboratory with adequate equipment, experience and competency, may be
approved by the Board without additional tests.
   (b)   Automatic fire detecting devices shall be placed throughout the rooms
or premises protected and shall be placed and distributed in conformity with
the conditions of approval of the system.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 391.23 Installation, Tests and Maintenance
   (a)   All installations shall be made in conformity with the conditions of
approval of the system.
   (b)   All electrical work shall conform to the provisions of Chapter 3161.
   (c)   Upon completion of an automatic fire detecting system and as a
condition of approval, a test of the entire installation shall be made under
the direction of the Fire Chief and with the co-operation of the Commissioner
of Building.
   (d)   Automatic fire detecting systems shall be tested each month and at
such times as may be directed by the Division of Fire.
   (e)   Automatic fire detecting systems shall be maintained in operating
condition at all times.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 391.231 Smoke Detectors – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1594-89. Passed 10-16-89, eff. 11-25-89)
FIRE DRILLS
§ 391.24 Multiple Dwellings
   (a)   The provisions of this section shall apply to Class B multiple
dwellings with twenty (20) or more sleeping rooms or used or occupied at any
time by forty (40) or more persons for sleeping purposes, and to Class A
multiple dwellings, used in whole or in part for single room occupancy as
defined in Section 3125.25(f).
   (b)   Each such building shall have provisions for fire detection consisting
of either:
      (1)   A fire patrol, which shall consist of the necessary number of
persons to inspect all parts of the building at least once every hour, in
approved tours, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 am. Approved time
recording apparatus shall be installed and maintained in such buildings and
shall be used to record the time of the inspection trips of the fire patrol.
Such records shall be dated and filed in order and shall be available for
inspection by the Division of Fire at any time within one (1) year after the
date of such record;
      (2)   An approved automatic fire detection system conforming to the
provisions of Sections
391.20 to
391.23.
   (c)   The fire patrol shall inspect all stairways, exit passageways, public
hallways, exit lighting, fire extinguishing equipment and fire protection
equipment on each tour of duty and correct every hazardous condition and every
condition which might be hazardous in the event of fire or that is in violation
of this Fire Prevention Code. The Fire Patrol shall also transmit, or cause to
be transmitted, an alarm of fire to the Division in case, of fire or suspicion
of fire.
   (d)   The personnel employed in such buildings shall be organized for, and
shall have, regular monthly fire drills conducted in accordance with the rules
and regulations therefor issued by the Division and held under the direction of
the owner or an employee duly qualified therefor and holding a certificate of
qualification issued by the Division.
   (e)   In each sleeping room of such buildings there shall be posted a floor
plan of the floor upon which such sleeping room is located, clearly showing the
arrangement and the location of exits and the direction of travel required to
reach them. There shall be appended to each such floor plan the fire safety
rules for the building promulgated by the Division. Such floor plan shall be
posted or attached to the wall surface in a prominent position immediately
adjacent to the entrance door to such sleeping room.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 391.25 Mercantile Occupancy
   The personnel employed in mercantile occupancy buildings equipped with
required fire alarm systems shall be organized for, and shall have, regular
monthly fire drills held under the direction of the owner or an employee duly
qualified therefor and holding a certificate of qualification issued by the
Division of Fire and conducted in accordance with the rules and regulations
therefor issued by the Division.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 391.26 Institutional Occupancy
   (a)   Every building of institutional occupancy classification shall have
provisions for fire detection consisting of either:
      (1)   A fire patrol, which shall consist of the necessary number of
persons to inspect all parts of the building at least once every hour, in
approved tours, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Approved time
recording apparatus shall be installed and maintained in such buildings and
shall be used to record the time of the inspection trips of the fire patrol.
Such records shall be dated and filed in order and shall be available for
inspection by the Division of Fire at any time within one (1) year after the
date of such record;
      (2)   An approved automatic fire detection system conforming to the
provisions of Sections
391.20 to
391.23.
   (b)   The fire patrol shall inspect all stairways, exit passageways, public
hallways, exit lighting, fire extinguishing equipment and fire protection
equipment on each tour of duty and correct every hazardous condition and every
condition which might be hazardous in the event of fire or that is in violation
of this Fire Prevention Code. The fire patrol shall also transmit, or cause to
be transmitted, an alarm of fire to the Division in case of fire or suspicion
of fire.
   (c)   The personnel employed in buildings of institutional occupancy
classification shall be organized for, and shall have, regular monthly fire
drills conducted in accordance with the rules and regulations therefor issued
by the Division and held under the direction of the owner or an employee duly
qualified therefor and holding a certificate of qualification issued by the
Division.
   (d)   Within sixty (60) days of June 27, 1949, every building of
institutional occupancy classification shall have provisions for fire detection
and fire drills in conformity with the provisions of subsections (a), (b) and
(c) hereof.
   (e)   The provisions of this section relating to fire detection shall not
apply to nurseries used only as day nurseries.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 391.27 Assembly Occupancy
   The employees or attendants at places of assembly occupancy shall be
organized for and shall be trained in the duties they are to perform in case of
fire, panic or other emergency. Each such employee or attendant shall have
regularly assigned duties to perform in such cases of emergency.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 391.28 Educational Occupancy
   (a)   The personnel, instructors and other responsible persons employed or
in charge of buildings and parts of buildings of educational occupancy
classification shall be organized for, and shall have, regular monthly fire
drills conducted in accordance with the rules and regulations therefor issued
by the Division of Fire and held under the direction of the person appointed
therefor and holding a certificate of qualification issued by the Division.
   (b)   When the average age of the students within a building or part of a
building of educational occupancy classification is eighteen (18) or less, the
monthly fire drills shall be held while the building is occupied and in use,
and shall include orderly evacuation of the building.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 391.29 Industrial Occupancy
   (a)   The personnel employed in institutional occupancy buildings equipped
with required fire alarm systems shall be organized for, and shall have,
regular monthly fire drills held under the direction of the owner, or an
employee duly qualified therefor, holding a certificate of qualification issued
by the Division of Fire, and conducted in accordance with the rules and
regulations therefor issued by the Division.
   (b)   Fire drills shall also be held when and as required by the Ohio
Revised Code.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
§ 391.30 High Hazard Occupancy
   Regular monthly fire drills shall be held in every building of high hazard
occupancy equipped with a required interior fire alarm system and used or
occupied as a factory or for other similar industrial purpose. Such fire drills
shall be conducted in accordance with the rules and regulations therefor issued
by the Division of Fire and shall be held under the direction of the owner, or
an employee duly qualified therefor, holding a certificate of qualification
issued by the Division.
(Ord. No. 991-49. Passed 6-27-49, eff. 6-27-49)
CHAPTER 392 – SMOKE DETECTORS, SMOKE ALARMS, AND CARBON MONOXIDE ALARMS
392.01   Definitions
392.02   Smoke Detection and Alarm Systems – Installation Required
392.021   Carbon Monoxide Alarms; Installation Required in Rental Dwelling
Units
392.03   Testing, Inspection, and Notification
392.04   Maintenance
392.05   Tampering
392.06   Enforcement
392.07   Smoke Alarm, Smoke Detector, and Carbon Monoxide Alarm and Battery
Program
392.08   Acceptance of Gifts and Grants of Smoke Alarms, Smoke Detectors,
Carbon Monoxide Detectors, Batteries and Monies for Those Devices; Authority to
Purchase Smoke Alarms, Smoke Detectors, Carbon Monoxide Detectors and Batteries
for Those Devices
392.99   Penalty
§ 392.01 Definitions
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   "Carbon monoxide alarm" means an approved device which detects the
invisible gas known as carbon monoxide and which emits an audible signal
indicating the presence of unhealthy or lethal levels of carbon monoxide, or
both an audible and a visual signal indicating the presence of unhealthy or
lethal levels of carbon monoxide.
   (b)   "Hearing impaired" means a hearing problem impairing the ability to be
awakened by a standard smoke detector or carbon monoxide alarm whether or not
wearing a hearing aid.
   (c)   "Multiple-station smoke alarm" means two (2) or more single-station
alarm devices that are capable of interconnection such that actuation of one
(1) causes the appropriate alarm signal to operate in all interconnected
alarms.
   (d)   "Occupant" means a person over one (1) year of age, living, sleeping,
cooking or eating in, or having actual possession of a dwelling unit or room
used for room occupancy.
   (e)   "Owner" means the owner or owners of the premises, a vendee in
possession, a mortgagee or receiver in possession, a lessee or joint lessees of
the whole thereof, or an agent as any other person, firm or corporation
directly in control of the premises or having a legal or equitable interest in
the property.
   (f)   "Single-station smoke alarm" means an assembly incorporating the
detector, the control equipment and the alarm-sounding device in one (1) unit,
operated from a power supply either in the unit or obtained at the point of
installation.
   (g)   "Sleeping area" means an area of a dwelling containing bedrooms which
are separated from each other by no use area other than a bathroom.
   (i)   "Smoke alarm" means a single- or multiple-station alarm responsive to
smoke.
   (j)   "Smoke detector" means a listed device that senses visible or
invisible particles of combustion.
(Ord. No. 1528-15. Passed 5-9-16, eff. 5-10-16)
§ 392.02 Smoke Detection and Alarm Systems – Installation Required
   (a)   The Ohio Fire Code at OAC 1301:7-7-09 "Fire Protection Systems"
effective, November 10, 2011, and as amended, is adopted and incorporated by
the City of Cleveland as if fully set out in this section. Owners of each new
and existing building or structure shall install smoke alarms and smoke
detectors as required by OAC 1301:7-7-09.
   (b)   Any battery-operated smoke detector or smoke alarm that is replaced
with a battery-operated smoke detector or smoke alarm shall be replaced with a
smoke-detector or smoke alarm that is equipped with a sealed, tamper-proof
battery with a service life of not less than ten (10) years.
   (c)   Existing battery operated smoke detectors or smoke alarms shall be
removed from service and replaced when they have been in service for a period
of ten (10) years.
(Ord. No. 1528-15. Passed 5-9-16, eff. 5-10-16)
§ 392.021 Carbon Monoxide Alarms; Installation Required in Rental Dwelling
Units
   (a)   It shall be the responsibility of the owner of each new and existing
dwelling unit intended for rental purposes, within which fuel-fired appliances
exist, to install a carbon monoxide alarm in each residential dwelling unit.
   (b)   The carbon monoxide alarm shall be installed outside of each separate
sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of the bedrooms in each residential
dwelling unit. When sleeping areas are not fully enclosed or separated from
other living areas within a dwelling unit, the carbon monoxide alarm shall be
installed nearest the area designated for sleeping, as per the manufacturer's
specifications. Alarms shall be clearly audible in all bedrooms within the
sleeping area or dwelling unit when all intervening doors are closed.
   (c)   Every carbon monoxide alarm shall comply with all applicable federal
and state regulations and with Underwriters Laboratories standard 2034, and
shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installation
instructions.
   (d)   Where a dwelling is occupied by a person who is deaf or hearing
impaired and a written request for the installation of a carbon monoxide alarm
is received by the owner from an occupant in the dwelling, a carbon monoxide
alarm shall be installed by the owner which provides a visual or vibratile
signal sufficient to warn the deaf or hearing impaired individual when
activated.
   (e)   Carbon monoxide alarms in new construction shall be installed as
required by the Building Code.
(Ord. No. 1528-15. Passed 5-9-16, eff. 5-10-16)
§ 392.03 Testing, Inspection, and Notification
   (a)   Testing and inspection of smoke alarms, smoke detectors, and carbon
monoxide alarms in each dwelling unit shall be performed by the occupant not
less than once a week. The owner shall provide the occupant with printed
information as to proper testing of smoke alarms, smoke detectors, and carbon
monoxide alarms within the dwelling unit. If testing or inspection by an
occupant reveals that a smoke alarm, smoke detector, or carbon monoxide alarm
is not in proper working condition, the occupant shall notify the owner in
writing that it is in need of maintenance by the owner to restore it to proper
working condition or replacement as required under this chapter.
   (b)   At every change of occupancy of each dwelling unit occasioned by or
incidental to a sale, lease or sublease of the dwelling, it shall also be the
duty of the owner to inspect the smoke alarms, smoke detectors, and carbon
monoxide alarms to ensure they are in proper working condition as required by
this chapter. This section shall not be construed to vitiate or render void any
contract, lease or sublease. In addition to other requirements of this chapter
regarding testing and inspection of smoke alarms, smoke detectors, and carbon
monoxide alarms, each owner of a dwelling unit shall inspect and test each
smoke alarm, smoke detector, and carbon monoxide alarm in the dwelling unit at
least annually to ensure they are in proper working condition as required by
this chapter.
   (c)   Nothing in this section regarding testing, inspection and notification
shall be construed to relieve the owner of a dwelling unit of the requirements
under Section
392.02 or
392.021 of this chapter regarding the proper installation and maintenance of
smoke alarms, smoke detectors, and carbon monoxide alarms.
(Ord. No. 1528-15. Passed 5-9-16, eff. 5-10-16)
§ 392.04 Maintenance
   (a)   The owner shall repair or replace the smoke alarm, smoke detector, or
carbon monoxide alarm as required under this chapter within seventy-two (72)
hours of receipt of the occupant's written notice or other evidence that it is
not in proper working condition.
   (b)   In addition to the other requirements of this chapter, the owner of
each dwelling unit shall, at a minimum, provide new batteries for battery-
operated smoke alarms, smoke detectors, and carbon monoxide alarms at least
annually and at the beginning of any new lease. It shall be the responsibility
of the occupant to ensure that the batteries installed are not removed.
(Ord. No. 1528-15. Passed 5-9-16, eff. 5-10-16)
§ 392.05 Tampering
   Anyone tampering or interfering with the effectiveness of a smoke alarm,
smoke detector, or carbon monoxide detector shall be in violation of this
chapter and subject to the penalties set forth in Section
392.99.
(Ord. No. 1528-15. Passed 5-9-16, eff. 5-10-16)
§ 392.06 Enforcement
   (a)   The City of Cleveland's Chief of Fire and the Director of Building and
Housing or their designees shall have concurrent jurisdiction to conduct
inspections to determine compliance with this chapter and to enforce its
provisions.
   (b)   Any notice of violation issued to enforce the requirements of this
chapter shall, at a minimum, require compliance with its provisions within
seventy-two (72) hours of the issuance of the notice. If a notice of violation
is issued for a violation discovered subsequent to a fire or carbon monoxide
gas leak and the dwelling unit was rendered uninhabitable by the fire or carbon
monoxide gas leak, then the violation notice shall require compliance with the
provisions of this chapter prior to the re-occupancy of the dwelling unit.
   (c)   No owner or occupant shall refuse to allow inspection at reasonable
times of any dwelling unit by a duly authorized City inspector.
   (d)   The means of enforcement authorized by this section shall be in
addition to and not in lieu of any other means of enforcement that may be
authorized by these Codified Ordinances or by statute.
(Ord. No. 1528-15. Passed 5-9-16, eff. 5-10-16)
§ 392.07 Smoke Alarm, Smoke Detector, and Carbon Monoxide Alarm and Battery
Program
   (a)   This Council determines that a program to provide smoke alarms, smoke
detectors, and carbon monoxide alarms, and batteries for those devices free of
charge to residents of the City who report that they cannot afford them, and to
install or arrange for the installation of smoke alarms, smoke detectors, and/
or carbon monoxide alarms free of charge to those residents, constitutes a
public purpose. The Fire Chief may conduct such a program.
   (b)   The Fire Chief may require any person who participates in the program
authorized by this section to sign an agreement that may include the following
provisions, and such other provisions as the Fire Chief deems necessary:
      (1)   That each smoke alarm, smoke detector, and carbon monoxide alarm
provided will be installed in the person's residence within a reasonable period
of time, to be specified by the Fire Chief; and
      (2)   That the person receiving one (1) or more smoke alarms, smoke
detectors, and carbon monoxide alarms will permit a representative of the
Division of Fire to inspect the installation of the unit or units to confirm
that installation has occurred and was done properly; and
      (3)   That the resident participating in the program will indemnify and
hold harmless the City, its officers, employees, agents and assigns relative to
providing one or more smoke alarms, smoke detectors, and carbon monoxide alarms
and/or batteries, and relative to providing assistance in the installation of
the smoke alarms, smoke detectors, and carbon monoxide alarms, if applicable.
   (c)   For residents requiring assistance in installing smoke alarms, smoke
detectors, and carbon monoxide alarms the Fire Chief may arrange for the
installation by personnel of the Division of Fire, other City personnel, or
such other persons who are willing to provide this service at no cost to the
City.
   (d)   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to waive or otherwise negate
any statutory or common law immunity provided to the City, its officials or
employees for activities under this chapter.
(Ord. No. 1528-15. Passed 5-9-16, eff. 5-10-16)
§ 392.08 Acceptance of Gifts and Grants of Smoke Alarms, Smoke Detectors,
Carbon Monoxide Detectors, Batteries and Monies for Those Devices; Authority to
Purchase Smoke Alarms, Smoke Detectors, Carbon Monoxide Detectors and Batteries
for Those Devices
   The Fire Chief may accept gifts and grants of smoke alarms, smoke detectors,
and carbon monoxide alarms, and batteries for those devices, and monies to
conduct a program to provide smoke alarms, smoke detectors, and carbon monoxide
alarms and batteries for those devices free of charge to residents of the City
that report that they cannot afford them, and to install or arrange for the
installation of smoke alarms, smoke detectors, and carbon monoxide alarms free
of charge to residents that require such assistance or to abate a nuisance
under this chapter. The Director of Public Safety is authorized to enter into
standard purchase or requirement contracts under these Codified Ordinances to
purchase smoke alarms, smoke detectors, and carbon monoxide alarms, and
batteries for those devices to conduct the program. The funding source for such
contracts shall include any monies annually appropriated for this purpose, any
monies accepted pursuant to this chapter, which are appropriated for this
purpose, and block grant and other grant monies as available.
(Ord. No. 1528-15. Passed 5-9-16, eff. 5-10-16)
§ 392.99 Penalty
   (a)   Anyone who violates any of the provisions of Sections
392.02,
392.021,
392.03,
392.04, or
392.05 shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor on the first offense. In addition
to any other method of enforcement provided for in these Codified Ordinances,
the above listed minor misdemeanors may be enforced by the issuance of a
citation in compliance with Rule 4.1 of the Ohio Rules of Criminal Procedure.
For a second offense such person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. On a third or subsequent offense, such person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day of a continuing violation shall be
deemed a separate offense.
   (b)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter pertaining to
penalties, if a fire or carbon monoxide gas leak occurs at a dwelling unit
where a violation of Section
392.02,
392.021,
392.03,
392.04, or
392.05 has occurred, then the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree if the fire or carbon monoxide gas leak results in bodily injury or
death of any person; or if the fire or carbon monoxide gas leak does not result
in bodily injury or death of any person, then the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the second degree if the offense is the first offense by that
person of any of the provisions of this chapter, or the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree if the offense is the second or subsequent
offense by that person of any of the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 1528-15. Passed 5-9-16, eff. 5-10-16)
CHAPTER 393 – HAZARDOUS CHEMICALS: RIGHT-TO-KNOW CODE
393.01   Application
393.02   Scope of Coverage
393.03   Definitions
393.04   Master List of Toxic and Hazardous Substances
393.05   Hazard Determination and Communication Program
393.06   Labels and Placards
393.07   Employer Filing Requirements
393.08   Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS)
393.09   Employee Training Program
393.10   Duties of the Fire Division
393.11   Registration and Fees
393.12   Variances
393.13   Remedies Available to Law Director
393.14   Conflict and Invalidity
393.15   Separability
393.16   Hazardous Chemicals Committee
393.17   Trade Secrets
393.18   Employee Rights
393.19   Sunset Division
393.20   Effective Dates
393.21   Confidentiality Agreement
393.99   Penalties
Cross-reference:
   Fire Division, CO
135.21 et seq.
Statutory reference:
   Labeling of Hazardous Materials, RC Ch. 3716
§ 393.01 Application
   (a)   This chapter in appropriate sections, requires employers to provide
information to their employees and to designated representatives of these
employees about hazardous chemicals to which these employees may be exposed by
means of a hazard communication program, labels, placards, work area hazardous
chemical lists, material safety data sheets, and information training.
   (b)   This chapter, in appropriate sections, requires employers to provide
information to the City of Cleveland’s Fire Division about the hazardous
chemicals manufactured, used or stored inside the workplace by means of a
hazardous chemical list, hazardous chemical discharge permits, and reports and
material safety data sheets, if requested.
(Ord. No. 2704-B-83. Passed 3-4-85, eff. 4-13-85)
§ 393.02 Scope of Coverage
   (a)   This chapter shall apply: to Standard Industrial Codes (SIC) 7, 13
through 17, 20 through 39, 41, 42, 44, 45, 48 through 50, 516, 517, 5198, 53
through 55 (except 554), 70, 72, 733, 734, 7349, 7395, 75, 7692, 80 (except
807), 82, 84, 863 and nonclassifiable establishments unless expressly exempted
by the Fire Chief; to all governmental bodies except the federal government, or
any department, agency, board or commission thereof; and to any industry which
the Fire Chief determines is cleaning hazardous and/or toxic chemicals from
bulk containers.
   (b)   If no highly hazardous chemicals are present in a particular workplace
and if that workplace either has twelve (12) or fewer employees or less than an
aggregate of fifty (50) gallons or five hundred (500) pounds of hazardous
chemicals present, then only Section
393.05(c),
393.06(a)(1),
393.07(a),
393.10 and
393.11(b)(5) of this chapter shall apply. If such workplace contains any highly
hazardous chemicals, then the entire chapter shall apply.
   (c)   This chapter shall not apply to toxic or hazardous substances in
containers having a volume of one (1) gallon or less of liquid, or a weight of
ten (10) pounds or less, except that such substances must be identified for the
employees, and must be identified on an area list.
   (d)   This chapter shall not apply to any laboratory operated by an
otherwise covered employer, including educational laboratories, research
laboratories, analytical laboratories, or medical laboratories, so long as the
chemical names in such laboratories are available to the employees or the
employees’ representative.
   (e)   This chapter shall not apply to hazardous chemicals or to workers
involved with those chemicals in the process of being transported into, or
through the City of Cleveland.
   (f)   This chapter shall not apply to substances which are consumer
products, food stuffs or tobacco products intended for use by the public
without further alterations by a manufacturer or employer.
   (g)   This chapter does not apply to chemicals which are foods, drugs,
cosmetics or tobacco products intended for personal consumption by employees
while in the workplace.
   (h)   This chapter shall not apply to any article manufactured or formed
which, in its intermediate or end use function(s) does not release, or
otherwise result in exposure to a hazardous chemical under normal conditions of
use.
   (i)   This chapter shall not apply to hazardous chemicals during the first
five (5) business days after they first enter the workplace, if, despite
reasonable efforts of the employer to comply with this chapter, such substances
arrive without conforming labels or material safety data sheets.
   (j)   This chapter shall not apply to gasoline or kerosene if it is present
in a workplace in quantities of less than fifty-five (55) gallons or five
hundred fifty (550) pounds, or to propane if it is used as a fuel.
   (k)   If, after November 25, 1985, regulation has commenced under the
federal Hazard Communication Standard contained in 29 C.F.R. 1910.1200, then
the Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals shall, in accordance with
its procedures contained in Section
393.12, grant a categorical exemption in SIC Codes, 20-39, provided that
affected employers continue to satisfy the requirements set forth in
Subsections 393.06(d) and
393.07(a), (b) and (c).
(Ord. No. 2704-B-83. Passed 3-4-85, eff. 4-13-85)
§ 393.03 Definitions
   (a)   “Chemical name” is the scientific designation in accordance with the
nomenclature system developed by the International Union of Pure and Applied
Chemistry (IUPAC) or the Chemical Abstract Service (CAS) rules of nomenclature
for those substances referred to in Section
393.04.
   (b)   “Common name” means a code name, code number, trade name, brand name,
generic name or any other means used to identify a chemical order than by its
chemical name.
   (c)   “Container” means any bag, barrel, bottle, box, can, cylinder, drum,
storage tank, reaction vessel, or the like that contains a hazardous chemical.
For purposes of this section, pipes, piping systems or transfer containers used
in production are not considered to be containers.
   (d)   “Designated representative” means any individual or organization to
whom an employee gives written authorization to exercise such employee’s rights
under this chapter. A recognized or certified collective bargaining agent shall
be treated automatically as a designated representative without regard to
written employee authorization.
   (e)   “Discharge” means the emission of a hazardous chemical into the air or
water, or onto the land, whether accidental or intentionally.
   (f)   “Employee” includes any worker who may be exposed, on or after the
effective date of this chapter, under normal conditions of use or foreseeable
emergencies to hazardous chemicals including, but not limited to, production
workers, line supervisors, and repair or maintenance personnel. Office workers,
grounds maintenance personnel, security personnel and non-resident management
are excluded unless their jobs involve exposure to hazardous chemicals. In the
case of a deceased or legally incapacitated employee, the employee’s legal
representative may directly exercise all the employee’s rights under this
chapter.
   (g)   “Employer” means any person, firm, corporation, association or other
entity in the City of Cleveland if any portion of its activities falls within
the coverage under Section
393.02. In determining whether it is covered by this chapter, each employer
shall be guided by the standards contained in the most recent Standard
Industrial Classification Manual, published by the Office of Management and
Budget. In the case of ambiguity, the Fire Chief shall make an assignment in
conformance with those standards.
   (h)   “Exposure” or “exposed” means that any employee is subjected to a
hazardous chemical in the course of employment through any route of entry
(inhalation, ingestion, or skin contact) and includes potential exposure,
without regard to the use of personal protective equipment, but does not
include situations where the employer can demonstrate to the Fire Division
inspection personnel that the hazardous chemical is not used, handled, stored,
generated, or present in the workplace in any manner different from typical,
non-occupational situations.
   (i)   “Hazardous and/or toxic chemical” means any substance set forth on the
list promulgated pursuant to Section
393.04. Any mixture which is comprised of at least one percent (1%) (by weight
or volume) of any chemical set forth on the list promulgated pursuant to
Section
393.04 or one-tenth of one percent (0.1%) of a chemical which is identified on
said list as a carcinogen, reproductive toxin, mutagen or sensitizer (“Highly
hazardous chemical”) shall also be considered hazardous for purposes of this
chapter, unless the mixture has been evaluated as a whole by the Fire Chief in
consultation with the Hazardous Chemical Committee, and the data indicates it
is not hazardous.
   (j)   “Highly hazardous chemical” means any substance identified as a
carcinogen, reproductive toxin, mutagen, or sensitizer on the list promulgated
pursuant to Section
393.04.
   (k)   “Physical hazard” means a chemical identified by OSHA as a combustible
liquid, a compressed gas, explosive, flammable, an organic peroxide, an
oxidizer, pyrophoric, unstable (reactive) or water-reactive.
   (l)   “Use” means handle, react, process, package, or repackage.
   (m)   “Waste” includes all hazardous material required to be reported under
Section
393.07(b).
   (n)   “Work area” means a room or defined space in an establishment where
hazardous chemicals are produced, used, or stored.
   (o)   “Workplace” means all buildings, structures and storage at one (1)
geographical location which contains one (1) or more work areas.
(Ord. No. 2704-B-83. Passed 3-4-85, eff. 4-13-85)
§ 393.04 Master List of Toxic and Hazardous Substances
   (a)   No later than one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of enactment
of this chapter, the Fire Chief of the City of Cleveland, in consultation with
the Hazardous Chemicals Committee created under Section
393.16 of this chapter, shall compile a Master List of Toxic and/or Hazardous
Chemicals, using as reference the sources in Subsections 393.04(a)(1)-(8). The
Fire Chief may indicate a threshold quantity and/or concentration hazard level,
using appropriate references, including the Cleveland Fire Prevention Code and
the Ohio Fire Code. Substances whose aggregate presence in the workplace falls
below the stated threshold levels shall be excluded from regulation under this
chapter. The Master List shall indicate which chemicals were listed as
carcinogens, sensitizers, reproductive toxins or mutagens on the source list.
      (1)   The occupational Safety and Health Administrator’s list of Toxic
and Hazardous Substances, 29 C.F.R. 1910, Subpart Z.
      (2)   The U.S. Department of Transportation’s Hazardous Materials Table,
49 C.F.R. 172.101.
      (3)   The American Conference of Governmental and Industrial Hygienist’s
list entitled “Threshold Limit Value for Chemical Substances and Physical
Agents in the Workplace.”
      (4)   The International Agency for Research on Cancer’s sublist entitled
“Substances found to have at least sufficient evidence of carcinogenity in
animals.”
      (5)   The National Toxicology Program’s list of chemicals published in
the annual report on carcinogens.
      (6)   The “Chemical Hazards to Human Reproduction” list, by Ian Nisbet
and Nathan J. Karch; Clement Associates, Inc. Arlington, Virginia; 1983.
      (7)   The sensitizer list in “Index of signs and symptoms of Industrial
Diseases”, the Johns Hopkins University, School of Hygiene and Public Health;
1980 or such other list of sensitizers which the Fire Chief determines is
appropriate.
      (8)   Such other substances as the Fire Chief deems hazardous.
   (b)   In consultation with the Hazardous Chemicals Committee created under
Section
393.16 of this chapter, the Fire Chief shall review such lists at least
annually. He or she shall make revisions of the Master List as often as is
necessary, arrange for publishing them in the City Record, and place them on
file in the Public Administration Library and in every City fire station.
   (c)   The Fire Chief shall append to the Master List and annually revise a
description of all mixtures determined not to be hazardous and/or toxic
chemicals under Section
393.03(i).
(Ord. No. 2704-B-83. Passed 3-4-85, eff. 4-13-85)
§ 393.05 Hazard Determination and Communication Program
   (a)   Every employer manufacturing, using, or storing hazardous chemicals in
the workplace shall post a sign in the form as follows this subsection at the
location or locations where notices to employees are normally posted to inform
employees that they or their designated representatives have a right to
information from the employer regarding the toxic or hazardous effects of the
chemicals and the circumstances under which these effects may be produced. Such
sign shall emphasize that any reports to the Fire Division of apparent
violations shall remain confidential:
 
NOTICE TO EMPLOYEES
YOU HAVE A RIGHT TO KNOW
Your employer must inform you of the chemical name and health hazards of the
hazardous chemicals in your workplace.

Learn all you can about hazardous chemicals on your job. For information,
contact:


_______________________________________________________________________________
(name of company representative)


________________________________________________________________________________
(location and phone number)

If your employer fails to train or inform you about hazardous chemicals in your
workplace, please notify:

   Cleveland Fire Department, Fire Prevention Bureau; 216-664-6664.

All reports will remain confidential.
 
   (b)   Each employer shall develop and implement a hazard communication
program for its workplace which meets criteria specified in Sections
393.06 through
393.09 for labels and placards, material safety data sheets, employees
information and training, and hazardous chemical lists. The employer may rely
on an existing hazard communication program to comply with this section
provided it meets the criteria specified in Sections
393.06 through
393.09.
   (c)   Each employer shall develop and post in each work area a list of all
hazardous or toxic chemicals in that work area, identified by chemical name,
unless otherwise provided under the trade secret provisions of Section
393.17.
(Ord. No. 483-2020. Passed 6-17-20, eff. 6-23-20)
§ 393.06 Labels and Placards
   (a)   The employer shall ensure that each container of hazardous or toxic
substances in the workplace is labeled, tagged or marked:
      (1)   With the chemical name where said name is not a trade secret under
Section
393.17. Employers may use the common name in addition to the chemical name to
identify the chemical;
      (2)   With Department of Transportation (DOT) required labels for all
substances regulated by DOT;
      (3)   With a cancer warning for all materials identified as carcinogens
on the list required by Subsection 393.04(a). The cancer warning shall say,
“Warning: Chemicals in this container can cause cancer.” The label shall be
large enough to be clearly legible.
   (b)   When stationary containers in a work area have similar contents and
hazards, the employer may post signs or placards to convey the required
information rather than affixing labels to each container.
   (c)   Where containers or process equipment contain hazardous chemicals and
the contents change frequently, or where labels would be obscured or destroyed
by heat, spillage or other factors, the employer may post signs or placards to
convey the required information.
   (d)   Each work area shall have hazard warnings, including the category and
degree of hazard conveyed through the color and number coding system adopted by
the National Fire Protection Association, Inc., as published in the 1980
edition of NFPA 704, entitled “Standard System for the Identification of the
Fire Hazards of Materials”. A copy of the NFPA 704 shall be on file for public
inspection in the Clerk of Council’s office and the Cleveland Law Library.
   In some situations, a wide variety of materials may be stored in a
particular work area having varying degrees of hazards. In such cases, the
identifying NFPA symbol shall indicate the most severe degree of hazard present
except when a high hazard rating would be misleading because of the presence of
an insignificant quantity of the material requiring the rating.
   (e)   This chapter does not require labeling for materials required to be
labeled under the following Acts or Regulations issued under them: Federal
Insecticide, Fungicide and Rodenticide Act (7 U.S.C. 136 et seq.), Food, Drug
and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 301 et seq.), Federal Alcohol Administration Act
(27 U.S.C. 201 et seq.), Consumer Product Safety Act (15 U.S.C. 2051), Federal
Hazardous Substance Act (15 U.S.C. 1261), and the Atomic Energy Act (42 U.S.C.
2011 et seq.).
(Ord. No. 2704-B-83. Passed 3-4-85, eff. 4-13-85)
§ 393.07 Employer Filing Requirements
   (a)   Each employer shall compile and update at least annually a list of all
hazardous or toxic chemicals manufactured, used or stored in the workplace. The
list shall conform to the requirements of Section
393.05(c) of this chapter or to the requirements of any separately required
program which applies in lieu of this chapter. The list shall be filed annually
with the Fire Division and made available, at cost, to employees, employee
representatives or community representatives.
   (b)   Each employer shall also forward to the Fire Division, upon request,
its written hazard communication program, and any MSDS obtained by it.
   (c)   Each employer shall immediately report to the Fire Division any
information concerning any spill, leak, discharge or emission of any hazardous
and/or toxic substance in the workplace of reportable quantities as defined
under the U.S. Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability
Act (CERCLA or “Superfund”) or any other toxic or hazardous chemical included
on the list under Subsection 393.07(a) if the spill or discharge exceeds one
(1) gallon.
   (d)   The provisions of Subsections (a), (b) and (c) shall not apply to
employers engaged in the business of construction provided such employers are
in compliance with the provisions of Section
393.08 of this chapter and the quantity of any industrial toxic or hazardous
substance manufactured, used or stored is less than fifty-five (55) gallons of
liquid or the equivalent thereof in its solid or gaseous state.
(Ord. No. 2704-B-83. Passed 3-4-85, eff. 4-13-85)
§ 393.08 Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS)
   (a)   Each employer shall obtain a material safety data sheet for each
hazardous chemical or toxic substance which it manufactures, uses, or stores.
Each material safety data sheet shall be entitled as such and contain the
following information:
      (1)   The identity used on the label, and, except as provided in Section
393.17 governing trade secrets:
         A.   If the hazardous chemical is a single substance, or a mixture
which has been tested as a whole to determine its hazards, its chemical and
common names;
         B.   If the hazardous chemical is a mixture which has not been tested
as a whole, the chemical and common names of all ingredients set forth on the
list promulgated pursuant to Section
393.04 and which comprise greater than one percent (1%) of the composition, or
one tenth of one percent (0.1%) of the composition for chemicals on said list
determined to be carcinogens; and
         C.   The chemical and common names of all ingredients set forth on the
list pursuant to Section
393.04 which have been determined to be physical hazards.
      (2)   The physical and chemical characteristics of the hazardous
chemicals including flash point, vapor pressure, vapor density, solubility,
specific gravity;
      (3)   The fire and explosion data of the hazardous chemical, including
flammability limits, autoignition temperature, extinguishing media, special
fire fighting procedures, and unusual fire and explosion hazards;
      (4)   The reactivity characteristics including stability, hazardous
decomposition products, incompatibility with other materials, and whether the
hazardous chemical will polymerize or not;
      (5)   The known acute and chronic health effects of exposure to the
hazardous chemical, including signs and symptoms of exposure, and any medical
conditions which are generally recognized as being aggravated by exposure to
the chemical;
      (6)   The primary route(s) of entry into the body and OSHA permissible
exposure limit, ACGIH Threshold Limit Value and any other exposure limit used
or recommended by the chemical manufacturer, importer, or employer preparing
the material safety data sheet, where available;
      (7)   Whether the hazardous chemical is listed in the National Toxicology
Program (NTP) Annual Report on Carcinogens (latest edition) or has been found
to be a potential carcinogen in the International Agency for Research on Cancer
(IARC) Monographs (latest edition), or by OSHA. (Such list shall be on file in
the Fire Division);
      (8)   Any generally applicable precautions for safe handling and use
which are known to the employer or preparer, including appropriate hygienic
practices, protective measures during repair and maintenance of contaminated
equipment, and procedures for clean-up of spills and leaks;
      (9)   Any generally applicable control measures which are known to the
chemical manufacturer, importer or employer preparing the material safety data
sheet, such as appropriate engineering controls, work practices, or personal
protective equipment;
      (10)   Emergency first aid procedures;
      (11)   The date of preparation of the material safety data sheet or the
last change to it;
      (12)   The name, address and telephone number of the chemical
manufacturer, importer, employer or other responsible party preparing or
distributing the material safety data sheet, who can provide additional
information and appropriate emergency procedures, if necessary;
      (13)   If no relevant information is found for any given category on the
material safety data sheet, the chemical manufacturer, importer or employer
shall mark it to indicate that no applicable information was found;
      (14)   Where complex mixtures have similar hazards and contents (i.e.,
the chemical ingredients are essentially the same, but the specific composition
varies from mixture to mixture), the chemical manufacturer, importer or
employer may prepare one (1) material safety data sheet to apply to all these
similar mixtures;
      (15)   The employer shall update the material safety data sheet within
ninety (90) days of the time the employer is notified by the preparer of the
MSDS or within ninety (90) days of the time the employer becomes aware of any
new and significant information regarding the health hazard of a chemical.
   (b)   The employer shall maintain copies of the most recent required
material safety data sheet in each workplace and shall ensure that they are
readily accessible to employees during each work shift.
   (c)   The employer shall provide one (1) copy of a material safety data
sheet to any employee, designated representative, or the Fire Division by the
close of business on the next workday following a written request made to the
appropriate company representative.
   (d)   The provisions of Subsection (c) hereof shall not apply to employers
engaged in the business of construction provided such employers ensure that
copies of the material safety data sheets for each toxic or hazardous substance
are available during all hours of operations.
   (e)   If an MSDS is not available from a supplier, seller or manufacturer of
a toxic or hazardous substance or mixture, then upon an employee’s or an
employee representative’s request to inspect the MSDS, an employer who is only
a processor, user, or storer of the toxic or hazardous substance or mixture
shall be deemed to satisfy his or her obligations under this section if:
      (1)   Within ten (10) working days of the employee’s request the employer
makes a written inquiry to the supplier, seller or manufacturer requesting an
MSDS or equivalent information. If the employer has made such an inquiry in the
preceding six (6) months, then an additional inquiry need not be made;
      (2)   The employer notifies the employee, in writing, of the date that
the inquiry was made, to whom it was made, and the response, if any, received;
and
      (3)   The employer notifies the employee of the availability of MSDS
within ten (10) working days of receipt of the MSDS from the supplier, seller
or manufacturer, or provides a copy of the MSDS to the employee within ten (10)
working days of the receipt of the MSDS.
(Ord. No. 2704-B-83. Passed 3-4-85, eff. 4-13-85)
§ 393.09 Employee Training Program
   (a)   Employers shall provide employees with information and training on
hazardous chemicals and toxic substances as listed on the Master List pursuant
to Section
393.04 in their work areas at the time of their initial assignment, and
whenever a new hazardous chemical or toxic substance listed on said Master List
is introduced into their work area. Employees shall be informed of:
      (1)   The requirements of this chapter;
      (2)   Any operations in their work area where hazardous chemicals are
present; and
      (3)   The location and availability of the written hazard communication
program, including the required list(s) of hazardous chemicals, and material
safety data sheets required by this chapter.
   (b)   Employee training shall include at least:
      (1)   Methods and observations that may be used to detect the presence or
release of a hazardous chemical in the work area (such as monitoring conducts
by the employer, continuous monitoring devices, visual appearance or odor of
hazardous chemicals when being released, etc.);
      (2)   The physical and health hazards of the chemicals in the work area;
      (3)   The measures employees can take to protect themselves from these
hazards, including specific procedures the employer has implemented to protect
employees from exposure to hazardous chemicals, such as appropriate work
practices, emergency procedures, and personal protective equipment to be used;
      (4)   The details of the hazard communication program developed by the
employer, including an explanation of the labeling system, the material safety
data sheet, and how employees can obtain and use the appropriate hazard
information; and
      (5)   A copy of Section
393.18 dealing with Employee Rights. This shall be posted in each work area or
included in the employee training information.
   (c)   The employer shall keep a written record of the employee training
program. Information on this record shall include a list of employees trained,
when the training took place, the name and qualifications of the trainer, and
the subjects covered.
(Ord. No. 2704-B-83. Passed 3-4-85, eff. 4-13-85)
§ 393.10 Duties of the Fire Division
   (a)   The Fire Division’s responsibilities include inspection of workplaces
where hazardous chemicals are used, manufactured or stored, based either on a
complaint or a rotating inspection schedule. The Fire Chief or his or her
authorized representative upon presentation of proper credentials, may enter
any building or premises at all reasonable hours to inspect for compliance with
this chapter. No person shall prevent, obstruct or delay any inspection or the
performance of any lawful duty of such inspector acting within his or her
official capacity. The inspector shall determine whether hazardous chemicals
are properly labeled consistent with Section
393.06; shall check a random sample of MSDSs for compliance with Section
393.08; and shall inspect the employee training record required by division (c)
of Section
393.09. Inspections should occur regularly, but not necessarily annually.
   (b)   The Fire Division shall investigate, within five (5) working days of
receipt, any complaint in which it is alleged that employees have been ordered
to work with substances for which material safety data sheets or proper labels
required by this chapter are not provided. Each such complaint shall be in
writing, dated, and signed by the complainant.
   (c)   If, upon inspection, the Fire Division finds violations, it shall give
a written violation notice to the employer, stating specific violations, allow
an appropriate period of time for corrections, and then return and reinspect.
At that time, if all violations have not been corrected, the Fire Division
shall have authority to issue a written violation letter and order requiring
correction of specifically described deficiencies. Such order may be appealed
to the Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals by filing a written
notice of appeal and filing fee as provided in Sections
3103.18 and
3103.19 of these Codified Ordinances.
   (d)   The Fire Division shall maintain a copy of the most recent work area
hazardous chemical list required by division (a) of Section
393.07.
   (e)   The Fire Division shall maintain for public inspection the full list
of hazardous and toxic substances promulgated pursuant to Section
393.04 and their health effects.
   (f)   The Fire Division shall maintain a copy of the work area list for
thirty (30) years.
   (g)   Upon written request, the Fire Division shall provide copies of any
work area list or MSDS to members of the public at cost.
   (h)   The Fire Division shall provide consulting assistance, as feasible, to
employers in connection with employee training programs.
   (i)   Each employer is obligated to comply with this chapter, with or
without an inspection by the Fire Division.
(Ord. No. 1233-15. Passed 11-9-15, eff. 11-11-15)
§ 393.11 Registration and Fees
   (a)   No employer shall store or use hazardous or toxic chemicals unless it
has submitted an annual registration form and fee to the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses. The registration form shall contain a sworn statement
that the employer has received and read the Right-to-Know Code and that it has,
to the best of its knowledge and ability, complied with all of its provisions.
   (b)   To cover the monitoring costs under this chapter, the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses of the City of Cleveland shall collect an annual
registration fee based on the following classifications:
      (1)   For employers with a workplace square footage of zero (0) to one
hundred thousand (100,000), the fee shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00);
      (2)   For employers with a workplace square footage of one hundred
thousand one (100,001) to four hundred thousand (400,000), the fee shall be
three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00);
      (3)   For employers with workplace square footage of over four hundred
thousand one (400,001) the fee shall be five hundred fifty dollars ($550.00);
      (4)   For employers with a workplace square footage of zero (0) to one
hundred thousand (100,000) and ten (10) or fewer employees, the fee shall be
sixty- five dollars ($65.00);
      (5)   For employers with aggregate toxic or hazardous chemicals of less
than twenty-five (25) gallons or two hundred fifty (250) pounds, and no highly
hazardous chemicals, the fee shall be sixty-five dollars ($65.00);
      (6)   Where a workplace contains only one (1) work area, the fee
structure shall be based on the square footage of that work area only.
   The revenue raised by this fee schedule shall be used to defray the
inspection and enforcement costs associated with the implementation of this
chapter.
   (c)   If, after the Fire Division issues an order requiring corrections
under division (c) of Section
393.10, another reinspection is required, then the employer shall pay a one
hundred dollar ($100.00) reinspection fee, collectible by the City of
Cleveland.
(Ord. No. 2393-02. Passed 2-3-03, eff. 2-3-03)
§ 393.12 Variances
   (a)   The Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals shall have the
power, upon written application by an employer and a hearing as provided by
law, to authorize variances from this chapter which will not be contradictory
to the public interest or the intent of this chapter, but only where, owing to
special conditions pertaining to a specific employer, workplace or work area,
the literal enforcement of this chapter would cause undue or unnecessary
hardship, or owing to a separately required program of an employer designed to
inform or protect workers, an employer is in substantial compliance with this
chapter. The Board shall act in accordance with Section
3103.18 of these Codified Ordinances, and may also adopt and promulgate such
rules and regulations as are necessary to carry out its duties under this
chapter.
      (1)   A variance for undue or unnecessary hardship shall be preceded by a
finding by the Fire Division that the following facts and conditions exist:
         A.   Exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions apply to
the subject employer, workplace or work area. In making a finding on this
point, the Fire Division shall consider factors, including but not limited to,
extreme temperature, difficulty of access, or lack of a permanent work area or
workplace; and
         B.   The employer has established acceptable alternate methods of
providing information about the toxic or hazardous substances involved, such as
placards, posting signs in common areas or entry areas, and oral and written
communication, which shall be substituted for those requirements that are
waived and which will result in substantial compliance with the intent of this
chapter.
      (2)   In considering a variance for a separately required program, the
Fire Division shall determine if the following facts and conditions exist:
         A.   The separately required program will substantially achieve the
purposes of this chapter;
         B.   The labeling used in the program conveys information in a manner
substantially equivalent to or better than the labeling requirements of this
chapter; and
         C.   Material Safety Data Sheets which contain substantially the same
data as required by this chapter are readily accessible to workers.
      (3)   In recommending a variance from the literal interpretation and
strict application of this chapter, the Fire Division shall impose such
requirements and conditions as it may deem essential in order to carry out the
intent and purpose of this chapter, and to otherwise safeguard the public
health, safety and general welfare.
   (b)   Variances for undue or unnecessary hardship shall be granted for up to
two (2) years from the date of issuance, and may be renewed. Variances granted
pursuant to this section for separately required programs shall be reexamined
every five (5) years.
   (c)   When an employer files an application for a variance the employer
shall notify its employees and their designated representative(s) of such
application by immediately posting a notice of such application. Such posting
shall occur in the same manner as provided for in Section
393.05.
   (d)   If a variance is denied, the employer shall have sixty (60) days to
come into compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 2704-B-83. Passed 3-4-85, eff. 4-13-85)
§ 393.13 Remedies Available to Law Director
   The Law Director, or his or her designee, may institute appropriate legal
action as authorized herein, or as may be otherwise available and appropriate
either at law or in equity, which may in the judgment of the Law Director be
necessary for the enforcement of any order or orders issued pursuant to this
chapter, or the abatement of any nuisance or hazard against which such order
was directed. Any such suits or proceedings shall be brought in the name of the
City of Cleveland and shall neither exclude criminal or penal remedies
otherwise authorized by law or exempt any violators of this or any other laws
from any penalty or penalties as may be prescribed. This section shall not be
construed to eliminate, abridge or detract from any remedies either at law or
in equity which any employee or other individual may have arising out of any
breach of violations of the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 2704-B-83. Passed 3-4-85, eff. 4-13-85)
§ 393.14 Conflict and Invalidity
   In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict
with a provision of any other chapter of the Codified Ordinances existing on
the effective date of this chapter, the provision which establishes the higher
standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the
people shall prevail. In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to
be in conflict with a provision of any other chapter or code of the City
existing on the effective date of this chapter, which latter provision
establishes a lower standard for the promotion and protection of the health and
safety of the people, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail to the
extent of the conflict.
(Ord. No. 2704-B-83. Passed 3-4-85, eff. 4-13-85)
§ 393.15 Separability
   Each provision of this chapter shall be deemed independent of all other
provisions herein, and should any provision of this chapter be declared
invalid, all other provisions hereof shall remain valid and enforceable.
(Ord. No. 2704-B-83. Passed 3-4-85, eff. 4-13-85)
§ 393.16 Hazardous Chemicals Committee
   (a)   The Director of Public Health and Welfare or his or her designee shall
serve as chair of a Hazardous Chemicals Committee, consisting of seven (7)
members, five (5) of whom shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to
confirmation by Council. One (1) member shall be the Fire Chief or his or her
designee and one (1) shall be a lawyer specializing in patent and trade secret
matters. The remaining four (4) members shall be chosen on the basis of their
technical experience and expertise, so as to represent the viewpoints of
private employers, employees, the community and the health profession. The Law
Department shall act as legal advisor to the Committee. Of the five (5) members
first appointed, two (2) shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years, two
(2) for a term of two (2) years, one (1) for a term of one (1) year; thereafter
all appointees shall be for a term of three (3) years. The Committee shall be
appointed and in place within one (1) year of passage of this chapter.
   (b)   Members of the Hazardous Chemicals Committee shall serve without
compensation but shall be reimbursed for expenses incurred in the performance
of their duties. The Committee shall rule on all appeals made pursuant to
Section
393.17 of this chapter, and shall advise the Fire Chief about the composition
of the Master List under Section
393.04.
(Ord. No. 2704-B-83. Passed 3-4-85, eff. 4-13-85)
§ 393.17 Trade Secrets
   (a)   Any employer may withhold the specific chemical name or other specific
chemical identification of a hazardous chemical, if:
      (1)   The claim that the information withheld is a trade secret can be
supported in writing;
      (2)   Information contained in the material safety data sheet concerning
the properties and effects of the hazardous chemical is disclosed;
      (3)   The label and material safety data sheet indicates that the
specific chemical identity is being withheld as a trade secret; and
      (4)   The specific identity is made available to the Fire Chief and
health professionals, in accordance with the applicable provisions of
paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section.
   (b)   The employer shall immediately disclose to the Fire Chief or a
treating physician/nurse, upon request, the specific chemical identity of the
requested trade secret, without regard to trade secrecy claims and regardless
of the existence of a written statement of need or a confidentiality agreement,
if:
      (1)   The Fire Chief determines that an accident has occurred which
requires knowledge of specific chemical identities; or
      (2)   A treating physician or nurse determines that medical emergency
exists and the specific chemical identity of a hazardous chemical is necessary
for emergency or first aid treatment; or
   The employer may require a written request and confidentiality agreement in
the form of the standard Confidentiality Agreement contained in Section
393.21 or in accordance with the provisions of division (d) of this section as
soon as circumstances permit.
   (c)   In situations where the employer has made a trade secret claim, the
employer shall, upon written request from the Fire Chief or a health
professional (i.e., physician, nurse, industrial hygienist, toxicologist, or
epidemiologist) providing medical or other occupational health services to
exposed employee(s), disclose the specific chemical name of any chemical
substance if:
      (1)   The request is in writing;
      (2)   The request describes with reasonable detail one (1) or more of the
following occupational health needs for the information:
         A.   To assess or study the hazards or effects of the chemicals to
which employees will or have been exposed;
         B.   To conduct or assess sampling of the workplace atmosphere to
determine employee exposure levels;
         C.   To medically pre-screen employees or provide medical treatment to
exposed employees;
         D.   To assess appropriate personal protective equipment, engineering
controls or other protective measures for exposed employees.
      (3)   The request includes a description of the procedures to be used to
maintain the confidentiality of the disclosed information; and
      (4)   The requesting party and the employer agree in a written
confidentiality agreement that the requesting party will not use the trade
secret information for any purpose other than the health need(s) asserted and
agree not to release the information under any circumstances.
   (d)   The confidentiality agreement provided by divisions (b) and (c) of
this section:
      (1)   May restrict use of information to health and treatment purposes
consistent with the preservation of the trade secret information;
      (2)   May provide appropriate legal remedies in the event of a breach of
the agreement, but not stipulation of a reasonable pre-estimate of likely
damages; and
      (3)   May not include requirements for the posting of a penalty bond.
   (e)   Nothing in this section is meant to preclude the parties from pursuing
noncontractual remedies to the extent permitted by law.
   (f)   If the employer denies a written request for disclosure of a specific
chemical identity in non- emergency or non-accident situations, the denial
must:
      (1)   Be provided to the requesting party and the Fire Chief within ten
(10) working days of the request;
      (2)   Be in writing;
      (3)   Include evidence to support the claim that the specific chemical
identity is a trade secret;
      (4)   State the specific reason why the request is being denied; and
      (5)   Explain in detail how alternative information may satisfy the
specific medical need without revealing the specific chemical identity.
   (g)   The requesting party whose request for information is denied under
division (f) of this section, may refer the written request and denial to the
Hazardous Chemicals Committee for consideration. Both the requesting party and
the employer shall be permitted an opportunity to submit evidence supporting
their respective positions to the Hazardous Chemicals Committee.
   (h)   The Hazardous Chemicals Committee shall consider the evidence to
determine if:
      (1)   The employer has supported the claim that the specific chemical
identity is a trade secret;
      (2)   The requesting party has supported the claim that there is medical
or occupational health need for the information; and
      (3)   The requesting party has demonstrated adequate means to protect its
confidentiality.
   (i)   If the Hazardous Chemicals Committee determines that the specific
chemical identity requested under division (c) of this section is not a bona
fide trade secret, or that the specific chemical identity requested under
division (c) of this section is a trade secret but the requesting party has a
legitimate need for the information, has executed a written confidentiality
agreement, and has shown adequate means to protect the confidentiality of the
information, the employer shall provide said chemical identity to the
requestingparty within thirty (30) days of the Committee's decision. If the
employer appeals the Committee's determination pursuant to subsection (j) of
this section, it shall have a right to a stay, as provided in division (e)(3)
of Section
3103.20 of these Codified Ordinances.
   However, if the Hazardous Chemicals Committee determines that there is no
medical or occupational health need for the information or that the execution
of a confidentiality agreement would not provide a sufficient protection
against the potential harm from the unauthorized disclosure of a trade secret
specific chemical identity, the Hazardous Chemicals Committee may deny the
request or may delay its final decision until appropriate modifications of the
confidentiality agreement are made.
   (j)   The Hazardous Chemicals Committees' decision under division (i) may be
appealed within thirty (30) days by either party to the Board of Building
Standards and Building Appeals established pursuant to Charter Section
76-6. The Board’s decision is a final order from which either party may appeal
under RC Chapter 2506.
   (k)   No officer, employee, agent or contractor of any City department,
board or commission shall knowingly and intentionally disclose to anyone in any
manner, any trade secret information, except as is required to administer or
enforce the provisions of this chapter and perform official duties or unless
authorized by the employer claiming that the data is trade secret information
or a court of law. Any person who knowingly violates this provision shall be
subject to discipline for malfeasance in office under the City’s Civil Service
rules, and shall be subject to other applicable provisions and penalties under
existing law for violations of trade secret protections. This section shall not
be construed to eliminate, abridge or detract from any remedies, either at law
or in equity, which an employer or other individual may have arising out of any
breach of a confidentiality agreement or other legal protection of trade
secrets.
(Ord. No. 1233-15. Passed 11-9-15, eff. 11-11-15)
§ 393.18 Employee Rights
   (a)   If the Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals determines
that the work area hazardous chemical list is not provided as required by
Section
393.07(a), or the material safety data sheet is not provided as required by
Section
393.08, the employee may, after thirty (30) days notice to the employer, refuse
to work with hazardous chemicals until the information is made available.
   (b)   No employer shall directly or indirectly discharge, discipline, or in
any manner discriminate against any employee for the reason or reasons that
such person has exercised any right, made any claim or filed any suit pursuant
to this chapter or has instituted, or caused to be instituted, any proceedings
under this chapter, or has testified, or is about to testify in any proceedings
in his or her own behalf or on the behalf of others; nor shall any
remuneration, position, seniority or other benefits be lost or denied to any
such employee who has exercised any right provided by this chapter.
   (c)   If any employee or designated representative believes that a violation
of this chapter exists or that the employee’s protections, as set forth in
Sections
393.07,
393.08, and
393.09, have not been provided, then the employee or designated representative
may request an inspection by giving written notice to the Fire Division of such
violation. Upon the request of the person giving such notice, his or her
identity or that of employees referred to in the notice shall be confidential
information and shall not be unnecessarily revealed or published by the Fire
Division. No employer shall be charged an additional inspection fee for
inspections requested under this section.
(Ord. No. 2704-B-83. Passed 3-4-85, eff. 4-13-85)
§ 393.19 Sunset Division
   If a statute of the State of Ohio is enacted which provides employees and
the public the right to know the names of hazardous chemicals, and which states
that the state intends to preempt local Right-to-Know Laws to the extent
permitted, then this chapter shall automatically be repealed unless the Council
of the City of Cleveland expressly determines that all or a portion of this
chapter continues to be essential to the health and welfare of its citizens and
therefore reenacts all or a portion of the chapter.
(Ord. No. 2704-B-83. Passed 3-4-85, eff. 4-13-85)
§ 393.20 Effective Dates
   Employers employing fifty-one (51) or more employees shall be in compliance
within one (1) year of passage of this chapter; employers with fifty (50) or
fewer employees shall be in compliance within twenty- four (24) months of
passage of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 2704-B-83. Passed 3-4-85, eff. 4-13-85)
§ 393.21 Confidentiality Agreement
   The employer and Fire chief, treating physician/nurse or other health
professional may use the following standard Confidentiality Agreement to
protect trade secrets.
 
   CONFIDENTIALITY AGREEMENT
 
      THIS AGREEMENT, entered into this __________ day of __________ between
_______________ (hereinafter called “Employer”) and _______________ (Fire Chief of
the City of Cleveland or _______________ (a physician/nurse) (hereinafter called
“Trade Secret Recipient”).
 
   WITNESSETH:
 
   Whereas, in its business, Employer has developed and uses commercially valuable
chemical information and formulae, which information Employer desires to hold as
secret and confidential; and
 
   Whereas, Trade Secret Recipient has a right to receive the chemical
identification of specific chemical components used by Employer, pursuant to Section
393.17 of the Codified Ordinances of Cleveland, Ohio, 1976;
 
   Now, therefore, in consideration of the mutual promises made herein, the parties
agree as follows:
 
   1.   All disclosures to Trade Secret Recipient of the chemical identification of
specific chemical components used by Employer shall be denoted as confidential
information by Employer and treated as such by Trade Secret Recipient.
 
   2.   Trade Secret Recipient shall keep such confidential information in separate,
personal files to which only Trade Secret Recipient has access; shall not make
copies of the documents provided; shall take reasonable steps to protect the
confidentiality of the specific chemical identity of the trade secret; and shall not
disclose the chemical identity of the requested trade secret to any person who has
not signed a confidentiality agreement with Employer, provided that if there is a
need to consult about appropriate treatment, Trade Secret Recipient may disclose the
chemical identity to a nonsignatory so long as neither the employer nor employee’s
name is disclosed to the same consultant.
 
   3.   The trade secret information shall be used only in connection with the
incident which gave rise to disclosure of the information, or with the treatment of
the person(s) exposed to the chemical.
 
   4.   Trade Secret Recipient may share with nonsignatories advice as to the
appropriate medical treatment of exposed employees or advice as to proper fire
prevention techniques to be used, provided that the specific chemical identity is
not disclosed. Such advice shall not be deemed disclosure of the trade secret
information.
 
   5.   This Agreement shall remain in effect unless Trade Secret Recipient obtains
Employer’s written consent to release the denoted confidential information or
Employer’s written release from this Agreement.
 
   IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties have signed this Agreement in duplicate as of the
date first written above.
 
   EMPLOYER
_______________________________________________________________________________
   Printed Name
 
By: ________________________________________________________________________________
   TRADE SECRET RECIPIENT
___________________________________________________________________________________
   Printed Name
By: ________________________________________________________________________________
 
(Ord. No. 2704-B-83. Passed 3-4-85, eff. 4-13-85)
§ 393.99 Penalties
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) per
day. For a second separate violation such person is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree and shall be fined not more than two hundred and fifty
dollars ($250.00) per day or imprisoned not more than thirty (30) days or both.
On a third separate violation such person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree and shall be fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
per day or imprisoned not more than six (6) months or both. In any event, the
maximum fine shall be ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). Any fines collected
from violators of this chapter shall be used only to defray costs for
inspection and enforcement associated with the implementation of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 2704-B-83. Passed 3-4-85, eff. 4-13-85)
CHAPTER 394 – HAZARDOUS MATERIAL TRANSPORTATION
394.01   Purpose
394.02   Scope
394.03   Definitions
394.04   Adoption and Incorporation of Federal Regulations
394.05   Hazardous Material Subject to Regulation
394.06   Restrictions on the Use of City Streets for the Transportation of
Hazardous Materials
394.07   Regulations Concerning the Operation of Motor Vehicles Carrying
Hazardous Material(s); Parking Prohibited
394.08   Inspections and Investigations
394.09   Reporting Requirements
394.10   Suspension of Operations
394.11   Suspension of Regulations
394.12   Liability/Response Costs
394.13   Nuisance Abatement
394.14   Abandoned Vehicles; Nuisance
394.15   Severability
394.99   Penalty and Enforcement
   Note: Former Chapter 394 was repealed by Ord. No. 1253-07, passed 11-19-07,
eff. 11-21-07.
§ 394.01 Purpose
   The purpose and intent of this chapter is to protect the public health,
safety, and welfare from the potential hazards of fire, explosion, and exposure
to toxic substances that accompany a hazardous materials incident by regulating
the transportation of hazardous substances or material in and through the City
of Cleveland, and the development and maintenance of the capability for
emergency response.
(Ord. No. 1253-07. Passed 11-19-07, eff. 11-21-07)
§ 394.02 Scope
   This chapter applies to all substances or materials defined as hazardous
materials in this chapter that are transported in and through the City of
Cleveland. This chapter applies, in addition to all other sections of this Fire
Prevention Code, all other ordinances of the City regarding hazardous
substances or materials, and any rules or regulations of other City
departments, boards, or commissions that apply.
(Ord. No. 1253-07. Passed 11-19-07, eff. 11-21-07)
§ 394.03 Definitions
   (a)   “City” means City of Cleveland unless specifically defined otherwise.
   (b)   “Fixed Facility” means any building or property where materials or
articles are received, shipped, stored, transferred, picked up or delivered,
and includes without limitation, a terminal, storage facility, explosives
interchange lot, explosives motor vehicle terminal, and intermodal facility.
   (c)   “Hazardous material” means a substance or material defined as
hazardous under Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations (C.F.R.) and
includes explosives regulated under Chapter
387 of these Codified Ordinances.
   (d)   “Highway” means any interstate, public street, public alley, public
road or other public thoroughfare.
   (e)   “Intermodal facilities” means any designated area where truck
trailers, storage containers, and other vehicles used in the transportation of
hazardous materials are received, shipped, loaded onto, unloaded from, or
stored in connection with two (2) or more modes of transportation.
   (f)   “Interstate highways” means those highways in the City of Cleveland
designated as Interstates 71, 77, 90, 176, 480, and 490.
   (g)   “Person” means an individual, trustee, receiver, association,
corporation, business, partnership, or other legal entity or group of
individuals.
   (h)   “Terminal” means a fixed facility used by carriers or transporters for
the receipt, shipment, transfer, storage, pick-up or delivery of, articles or
materials.
   (i)   “Transporter” means a person engaged in the transport, movement, or
carrying of hazardous material on highways.
   (j)   “Vehicles” means any conveyance that is, or was, at one time operated
by mechanical power on a highway and includes any trailer or storage container
incidental to such a vehicle whether attached or not to a vehicle.
(Ord. No. 1253-07. Passed 11-19-07, eff. 11-21-07)
§ 394.04 Adoption and Incorporation of Federal Regulations
   (a)   To ensure the application of their requirements to vehicles within the
City limits, the following laws and regulations and their successor regulations
are adopted and incorporated into this code as such laws and regulations exist
at the time of passage of this chapter or as they may be amended: 49 C.F.R.
Subchapter C – Hazardous Materials Regulations; Part 171 – General Information,
regulations, and definitions; Part 172 – Hazardous materials table, special
provisions, hazardous materials communications, emergency response information,
and training requirements; Part 173 – Shippers-general requirements for
shipments and packagings; Part 174 – Carriage by rail; Part 175 – Carriage by
aircraft; Part 176 – Carriage by vessel; Part 177 – Carriage by public highway;
Part 178 – Specifications for packagings; Part 179 – Specifications for tank
cars; Part 180 – Continuing qualification and maintenance of packagings; and
Part 397 – Transportation of Hazardous Materials, Driving, and Parking Rules.
Any violation of these federal rules and regulations within the City limits is
a violation of this chapter.
   (b)   The requirements of the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations 49
C.F.R. Parts 390 - 399 are adopted and incorporated. Any violation of those
federal rules and regulations within the City limits is a violation of this
chapter.
   (c)   When any provision of this chapter conflicts with the regulations
adopted in divisions (a) or (b) above, or any other provision of these Codified
Ordinances, the provision which establishes the stricter standard for the
promotion and protection of the safety and welfare of the public must prevail.
This division does not apply if the local regulation contains the stricter
standard and compliance with both the local regulation and a federal regulation
adopted in division (a) or (b) above is not possible and the local regulation
is preempted by federal law. This division also does not apply if the local
regulation as applied or enforced is an obstacle to accomplishing and carrying
out the federal rules and regulations adopted in division (a) or (b) above and
is preempted by federal law. Nothing in this provision may compromise the
City’s right to apply for and receive a waiver of preemption under 49 C.F.R.
107.215.
(Ord. No. 1253-07. Passed 11-19-07, eff. 11-21-07)
§ 394.05 Hazardous Material Subject to Regulation
   (a)   Transportation in commerce within the City of Cleveland of hazardous
materials that is required to be placarded by 49 C.F.R. Part 172, Subpart F –
Placarding, or any successor regulation, must be subject to the requirements of
this chapter. If the hazardous materials are required to be placarded by 49
C.F.R. Part 172, Subpart F – Placarding, but are not, the transportation in
commerce within the City of Cleveland of the hazardous materials is still
subject to regulation under this chapter.
   (b)   Transportation in commerce within the City of Cleveland of hazardous
materials that are exempt, under RC 4921.02(A)(2) from the requirements of RC
Chapter 4921, are subject to the requirements of Section
387.10 of these Codified Ordinances, and to the requirements of this chapter to
the extent that labeling is required by 49 C.F.R. Part 172, Subpart E, and
shipping papers are required by 49 C.F.R. Part 172, Subpart C, for the
transportation of hazardous materials.
(Ord. No. 1253-07. Passed 11-19-07, eff. 11-21-07)
§ 394.06 Restrictions on the Use of City Streets for the Transportation of
Hazardous Materials
   The following provisions must be complied with for the purpose of applying
49 C.F.R. 397.3 adopted in Section
394.04 of this chapter:
   (a)   The use of City streets (other than interstate highways) for the
transportation of materials specified in Section
394.05 of this chapter is prohibited where there is neither a point of origin
nor destination (delivery point) within the City. This division does not apply
where the point of origin or destination (delivery point) is within one (1)
mile of the City limits or where the use of City streets provides the safest
and most direct route and the shortest distance of travel from an interstate
highway to the point of origin or destination, as determined by the City Fire
Chief or his or her designee.
   (b)   The transportation of materials specified in Section
394.05 of this chapter is prohibited on City streets in the Downtown Area, as
defined in division (c) of this section, between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. daily,
except Saturdays and Sundays.
   (c)   The Downtown Area is defined as the area, not including the interstate
highways, bounded by Lake Erie on the north, the Cuyahoga River on the west,
Interstate 71 and the Inner Belt on the south and east, and Interstate 90/Route
2 on the northeast to and including the eastern boundary of Burke Lakefront
Airport.
   (d)   Transporters of hazardous materials specified in Section
394.05 of this chapter, where there is a point of origin or destination
(delivery point) in the City or within one (1) mile of the City limits, or
where the use of City streets provides the safest and most direct route and the
shortest distance of travel from an interstate highway to the point of origin
or destination must use interstate highways and designated truck routes to a
point as close as possible to the destination to reach their point of pickup or
delivery, unless otherwise approved by the City Fire Chief. Only the Fire Chief
or the Fire Chief’s designee may determine that the use of City streets
provides the safest and most direct route and the shortest distance of travel
from an interstate highway to the point of origin or destination.
   (e)   The Fire Chief may grant permission in writing to operate in exception
to division (b) of Section
394.06 of this chapter only where the Fire Chief has determined that the
following criteria are met:
      (1)   Need is shown, that is, the applicant must show that delivery or
pick-up of the hazardous material identified in Section
394.05 of this chapter can be practicably made only during the time period
identified in division (b) of Section
394.06 of this chapter; and
      (2)   Transportation of the hazardous material is in the public interest.
   (f)   Waivers granted under division (e) of this section are per calendar
year. A person may obtain a waiver beyond the period of one (1) year only by
reapplying for, and meeting the criteria described in divisions (e)(1) and (e)
(2) of this section, each calendar year that a waiver is applied for.
(Ord. No. 1253-07. Passed 11-19-07, eff. 11-21-07)
§ 394.07 Regulations Concerning the Operation of Motor Vehicles Carrying
Hazardous Material(s); Parking Prohibited
   (a)   Vehicles transporting hazardous materials, as specified in Section
394.05 of this chapter, must comply with 49 C.F.R. 397.3 while operating within
the City. If a vehicle transporting hazardous materials commits a moving
traffic violation, it is also a violation of this chapter, subject to the
penalty established in Section
394.99 of this chapter, in addition to any other penalty imposed for the
violation.
   (b)   No vehicle containing hazardous materials as specified in Section
394.05 of this chapter may be parked on any City street at any time, unless it
is necessary for a pick-up or delivery and is otherwise permitted by law.
(Ord. No. 1253-07. Passed 11-19-07, eff. 11-21-07)
§ 394.08 Inspections and Investigations
   (a)   The City Fire Chief or the Fire Chief’s authorized representative may
inspect vehicles used in the transportation of hazardous materials at random.
The vehicles must comply with all applicable laws and regulations in this
chapter.
   (b)   The City, through its inspectors or other authorized employees, may
enter and inspect premises at reasonable times where hazardous material or
materials are stored, transferred, loaded, packaged, shipped or received. This
authorization includes, without limitation, inspection of intermodal facilities
and terminals as defined in Sections
387.01 and
394.03 of these Codified Ordinances. It also includes inspection at any time of
the vehicle of any person who transports or offers for transportation hazardous
materials subject to this chapter. Inspection, under this section, may include
examination of any records or documents that relate to the transportation and
the offering for transportation of hazardous materials subject to this chapter.
(Ord. No. 1253-07. Passed 11-19-07, eff. 11-21-07)
§ 394.09 Reporting Requirements
   Any incident or incidents involving hazardous materials occurring within the
City and required to be reported by 49 C.F.R. 171.15 must be reported
immediately upon discovery by the operator of the vehicle. In the event any
incident or incidents involving a release or spillage of hazardous materials
poses or may pose a threat of danger to health, safety or the environment, the
incident must be reported immediately on discovery by a representative of a
fixed facility as the term is defined in Sections
387.01 and
394.03 of these Codified Ordinances. The reporting must be made to the City of
Cleveland’s emergency operator by telephone. The City Fire Chief must file a
standing request with the Research and Special Programs Administration of the
Department of Transportation, or its successor agency, for routine mailing to
the Division of Fire of a copy of the written report required by 49 C.F.R.
171.16.
(Ord. No. 1253-07. Passed 11-19-07, eff. 11-21-07)
§ 394.10 Suspension of Operations
   The City Fire Chief or Police Chief may temporarily reroute or suspend the
operation of some or all vehicles carrying hazardous materials within the City,
without notice, whenever road, weather, traffic, emergency, or other
circumstances warrant that action. All vehicles carrying hazardous materials
must comply with any rerouting, suspension of operation, or other order issued
under this section.
(Ord. No. 1253-07. Passed 11-19-07, eff. 11-21-07)
§ 394.11 Suspension of Regulations
   The City Fire Chief or Police Chief may suspend these regulations in whole
or in part, when circumstances require the suspension to maintain the public
safety.
(Ord. No. 1253-07. Passed 11-19-07, eff. 11-21-07)
§ 394.12 Liability/Response Costs
   (a)   In addition to the criminal penalty provided in Section
394.99 of this chapter, in the event of a hazardous materials incident, as
described in 49 C.F.R. 171.15, or 49 C.F.R. 171.16, or in the event of the
declaration of a nuisance under this chapter, requiring the response of the
Division of Fire or the Division of Police, or the Division of Emergency
Medical Service, or other City employees or agents to control that incident,
the transporter, the owner and/or lessee of the vehicle, the owner and/or
source of the hazardous materials, and the operator of the vehicle must be
jointly and severally liable to the City for the payment of all actual costs
and expenses incurred in, and related to the incident. These costs and expenses
must include the following: employee recall and overtime wages; equipment;
supplies; uniforms; and materials and expenses necessary for the control and
clean-up activities required through final regulatory closure of the incident.
The amount of the costs and expenses must be determined by the City and must be
billed to those liable, as described in this section. This responsibility is
not conditioned on evidence of purpose, knowledge, recklessness, or negligence
on the part of the transporter, or other party liable under this section.
   (b)   All billing for reimbursement of City costs described in division (a)
of this section may be appealed to the Board of Zoning Appeals within thirty
(30) days after receipt of the billing. The Board has jurisdiction to either
affirm, reverse, or modify the billing. If the City does not receive
reimbursement within fifteen (15) days after a decision of affirmation or
modification by the Board, the City may institute a court action to collect or
recover the costs.
(Ord. No. 1253-07. Passed 11-19-07, eff. 11-21-07)
§ 394.13 Nuisance Abatement
   The Fire Chief may consider any quantity of hazardous material or materials
that has been discharged during transportation to be a nuisance, if it may
affect or endanger the life, health, or senses of the inhabitants of the City.
The Fire Chief is authorized to, and may order, the owner, operator, source, or
party in control of any vehicle or hazardous material to abate any nuisance in
the manner required in Chapter
203 “Nuisance Abatement” (Health Code) or Chapter
381 “Enforcement and General Provisions” (Fire Prevention Code) of these
Codified Ordinances.” An owner, operator, source, or party in control must
comply with the order immediately, or within the time required in the order if
a specific compliance date is provided. The City may take action to abate the
nuisance and charge the owner, lessee, operator, or person most recently in
control of the vehicle and/or the hazardous material or hazardous materials for
the City’s cost of abatement.
(Ord. No. 1253-07. Passed 11-19-07, eff. 11-21-07)
§ 394.14 Abandoned Vehicles; Nuisance
   Any vehicle containing hazardous material, as specified in Section
394.05 of this chapter, which is abandoned, as defined in Section
451.25 of these Codified Ordinances, or subject to being impounded as provided
in Chapter
405 of these Codified Ordinances, is declared a nuisance. The Fire Chief may
order the abatement of the nuisance as described in Section
394.13 of this chapter, and the failure to comply with the order is a violation
of this chapter. The City may take action to abate the nuisance and charge the
owner, lessee, operator, or person most recently in control of the vehicle for
the City’s costs of abatement.
(Ord. No. 1253-07. Passed 11-19-07, eff. 11-21-07)
§ 394.15 Severability
   If any portion of this chapter, or any section or part of a section is
declared by a court or a governmental agency of competent jurisdiction to be
invalid or preempted, such declaration must be limited solely to that portion,
section, or part of a section that was directly involved in the controversy
before the court or agency on which judgment was rendered. That declaration may
not affect or impair the validity of the remainder of the section or chapter.
(Ord. No. 1253-07. Passed 11-19-07, eff. 11-21-07)
§ 394.99 Penalty and Enforcement
   (a)   Any person who violates Sections
394.07,
394.10, or
394.13 of this chapter, is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. The City may issue a
citation under Rule 4.1 of the Ohio Rules of Criminal Procedure to enforce
these ordinances.
   (b)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter other than those
listed in division (a) above or those which are felonies under state law is
considered guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (c)   Each violation must be treated separately. When a violation is a
continuing one, each day of the violation constitutes a separate offense.
   (d)   This chapter may be enforced by the City in a criminal proceeding,
without providing a prior notice of violation other than the notice required
under the Ohio Rules of Criminal Procedure. This chapter may also be enforced
through orders issued by the City Fire Chief or his or her designee, and any
order may provide a time in which compliance is required. Any order issued may
be appealed to the City Board of Zoning Appeals no later than thirty (30) days
after the date the order was issued. The filing of an appeal shall not
constitute an automatic stay of the order. Nothing in the section limits the
City’s ability to bring a civil action for injunctive relief and apply for an
adequate legal or equitable remedy. The City may also bring a civil injunction
or collection action to enforce any provision of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 1253-07. Passed 11-19-07, eff. 11-21-07)
CHAPTER 395 – UNNECESSARY FIRE ALARMS
395.01   Definitions
395.02   Unnecessary Alarms; Charges
395.03   Hearings
395.04   Appeals
395.05   Annual Report
395.06   Registration of Alarm System Users; Fee
   Note: Pursuant to Section 2 of Ord. No. 1583-90, Chapter
395 shall take effect 9-1-91.
§ 395.01 Definitions
   As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
following meanings:
   (a)   “Auxiliary protective signaling system” means a connection to the
municipal fire alarm system to transmit an alarm of fire to the Division of
Fire, which can be either a radio box or a master box.
   (b)   “Central station operating company” means a company equipped to
receive a fire alarm signal from each of its customers and which then transmits
to the Division of Fire the location of any such alarm the central station
operating company receives.
   (c)   “Division of Fire” means the Division of Fire in the Department of
Public Safety of the City of Cleveland.
   (d)   “Fire alarm system” or “alarm system” means any heat-activated, smoke-
activated, flame energy- activated or other such automatic device or devices
capable of transmitting a fire alarm signal to a central supervising station of
a proprietary protective signaling system, a central station operating company,
or directly to the Division of Fire by means of a master box or radio box.
   (e)   “Fire Chief” means the Chief of the Division of Fire of the City of
Cleveland.
   (f)   “Master box” means a municipal fire alarm box which is activated
either by the internal building fire alarm system or manually. It sends an
alarm signal directly to the Division of Fire.
   (g)   “Person” means an individual, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or business of any kind.
   (h)   “Proprietary protective signaling system” means an installation of a
protective signaling system that serves a building or contiguous and/or
noncontiguous properties, whether or not under common ownership, from a central
supervising station serving the protected property or properties and having
personnel in attendance, or any other system that alerts personnel or
automatically transmits an alarm to the Division of Fire.
   (i)   “Protective signaling system” means electrically operated circuits,
instruments, and devices, together with the necessary electrical energy,
designed to transmit alarm, supervisory, and trouble signals necessary for the
protection of life and property.
   (j)   “Radio box” means a radio transmitter which is activated either by the
internal building fire alarm system or manually. It sends an alarm signal
directly to the Division of Fire.
   (k)   “Unnecessary alarm” means the activation of a fire alarm system which
results in the Division of Fire being summoned to the location served by the
alarm system when there is no fire or fire-related emergency occurring, nor is
there any indication, as determined by the Division of Fire, that a fire or
fire-related emergency has occurred, as reported by the alarm. The activation
of a fire alarm system shall be rebuttably presumed to be an “unnecessary
alarm” if, after investigation, the Division of Fire finds no indication that a
fire or fire-related emergency occurred. “Unnecessary alarm” shall not include
a scheduled or controlled test of the fire alarm system, provided that the
Division of Fire’s dispatch center has been notified immediately prior to each
test, nor shall “unnecessary alarm” include a deliberate false alarm as
proscribed by Section
605.07 of these Codified Ordinances, the burden of proof for these exceptions
being upon the person(s) responsible for the alarm system.
(Ord. No. 1426-92. Passed 7-22-92, eff. 7-31-92)
   Note: Pursuant to Section 2 of Ord. No. 1426-92, Section
395.01 shall take effect on August 1, 1992.
§ 395.02 Unnecessary Alarms; Charges
   (a)   Upon the occurrence of a second unnecessary alarm at a particular
location in a given calendar year, the Fire Chief shall cause a letter to be
sent via regular U.S. mail to the alarm system location stating that the person
(s) responsible for the alarm system as identified in division (c) may be
invoiced under the authority of this section for reimbursement of a portion of
the costs of responding to the third and any subsequent unnecessary alarm.
   (b)   If more than two (2) unnecessary alarms occur at a particular location
in a given calendar year, then the Fire Chief shall invoice the person(s)
responsible for the alarm system as identified in division (c) of this section
in the sum of one hundred thirty dollars ($130.00) for reimbursement of a
portion of the costs of responding to the third and any subsequent unnecessary
alarm.
   The charges shall be due and payable on receipt of an invoice, except that
the charges shall be suspended pending the outcome of any hearing conducted
under Section
395.03, or any appeal conducted under Section
395.04.
   (c)   As used in this section and division (k) of Section
395.01, the “person(s) responsible for the alarm system” means each owner and
leaseholder, if any, of the property or properties served by the alarm system,
and the person(s) shall be jointly and severally liable for the charges
assessed under this section.
   (d)   As used in this section, a “particular location” means a property or a
group of contiguous or noncontiguous properties, whether or not under common
ownership, which are under a common street address, both as to house or
building number and street name.
(Ord. No. 12-10. Passed 5-10-10, eff. 5-20-10)
§ 395.03 Hearings
   Any person who has been invoiced pursuant to Section
395.02 may request, in writing, within thirty (30) days of the date of invoice,
a hearing by the Fire Chief or his or her designee for the purpose of
presenting evidence that an unnecessary alarm did not occur, or that the person
invoiced is not an owner or leaseholder of the property or properties served by
the alarm system from which the unnecessary alarm originated. Upon the
establishment by the Division of Fire of a prima facie case that an unnecessary
alarm has occurred at a given street address, the burden of proof shall shift
to the person who requested the hearing. An incident report indicating that the
Division of Fire responded to the alarm and found no indication that a fire or
fire-related emergency occurred shall be sufficient to establish a prima facie
case that an unnecessary alarm has occurred at the street address identified in
the incident report. The rules of evidence applicable to courts of law shall
not be strictly applied.
   If the Fire Chief or his or her designee determines, by a preponderance of
the evidence, that an unnecessary alarm did not occur, or that the person
invoiced pursuant to Section
395.02 is not an owner or leaseholder of the property or properties served by
the alarm system, then the charges shall be voided, otherwise the charges shall
be due and payable.
(Ord. No. 1426-92. Passed 7-22-92, eff. 7-31-92)
§ 395.04 Appeals
   Any person subject to an adverse finding by the Fire Chief or his or her
designee pursuant to Section
395.03 may appeal the finding to the Board of Building Standards and Building
Appeals. The notice of appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the
Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals within ten (10) days of the
finding of the Fire Chief or his or her designee. The Board shall approve,
modify or annul the finding from which the appeal is taken.
(Ord. No. 1583-90. Passed 4-8-91, eff. 4-15-91)
§ 395.05 Annual Report
   The Director of Public Safety shall file a report with the Clerk of Council
by the 15th of February each year, containing the number of unnecessary fire
alarms that occurred and the amount of monies that were reimbursed to the City
pursuant to Section
395.02 in the previous calendar year.
(Ord. No. 905-18. Passed 8-15-18, eff. 8-17-18)
§ 395.06 Registration of Alarm System Users; Fee
   (a)   Each owner or leaseholder of a property or properties served by an
alarm system user shall register with the Commissioner of Assessments and
Licenses using forms designated by the Commissioner for this purpose, and shall
provide the name of the owner or leaseholder, the location of the premises on
which the alarm system is in operation, and other information as the
Commissioner shall require.
   (b)   Each owner or leaseholder of a property or properties served by an
alarm system on whose premises an alarm system is in operation on the effective
date of this section shall initially register within ninety (90) days of the
effective date of the section. Each owner or leaseholder on whose premises an
alarm system is placed in operation after the effective date of this section
shall initially register not later than the date on which the system is placed
in operation.
   (c)   After the initial registration required by division (b) of this
section, such registrations shall be issued as of January 1, and shall expire
on December 31, next succeeding. Each registered owner or leaseholder shall re-
register each year before January 1. The period from July 1, 2018 through
December 31, 2018 shall apply to the 2019 calendar year registration.
   (d)   Each owner or leaseholder shall pay a fee of twenty-five dollars
($25.00) for each registration or re-registration required by this section.
   (e)   No person shall fail to register or re-register as required by this
section.
   (f)    The registration or re-registration fee in division (d) above shall
be waived for any calendar year in which an owner or leaseholder has paid
either the fire alarm permit fee required by Section
381.05 or the police alarm registration or re-registration fee required by
Section
670A.03.
(Ord. No. 905-18. Passed 8-15-18, eff. 8-17-18)
CHAPTER 396 – NOTIFICATION, ENVIRONMENTAL ABATEMENT AND SECURING OF CLOSED OR
VACATED FACILITIES
396.01   Definitions
396.02   Legislative Findings and Declaration of Nuisance
396.03   Notification, Facility Closure Plan, Clean-up, and Fee Requirements
396.04   Duties of Owner, Operator, or Party in Control Prior to Closing or
Vacating a Facility
396.05   Building, Structure or Outdoor Location to be Secured Against
Unauthorized Entry; Warning Signs
396.06   Inspection of Facility; Investigations
396.07   Authority of City Where Responsible Party Fails to Act
396.08   Relationship to Other Laws
396.09   Contracts for the Sale or Lease of Real Property
396.99   Penalties
§ 396.01 Definitions
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   “Close” or “closing” means the permanent discontinuation, termination,
or cessation of regulated operations at a facility. For purposes of this
chapter, “permanent” means a period of time longer than ninety (90) days and
does not include transfer of the regulated operation to another entity which
will resume the operations within the ninety (90) day timeframe.
   (b)   “Establishment” means an economic unit generally at a single physical
location where business is conducted or where services or industrial operations
are performed.
   (c)   “Facility” means all buildings, equipment, structures, and other
stationary items that are located on a single site or on contiguous or adjacent
sites and that are owned or operated by the same person. However, in the case
of a site or contiguous or adjacent sites that are owned by the same person and
on which two (2) or more establishments are located, each portion of the site
or contiguous or adjacent sites and the buildings, equipment, structures, and
other stationary items located thereon that is occupied by an establishment
that is not owned or operated by the same parent corporation as, or does not
have common corporate or business interests in or with, another establishment
located thereon is a separate facility; and, in the case of a building or
structure that is so located and that is occupied by two (2) or more
establishments, each portion of the building or structure and the equipment and
other stationary items located therein that is occupied by an establishment
that is not owned or operated by the same parent corporation as, or does not
have common corporate or business interests in or with, another establishment
that is located therein is a separate facility.
   (d)   “Generator” means any person, by site, whose act or process produces
hazardous substances at a facility as defined in this chapter or whose act
first causes a hazardous substance to become subject to regulation under this
chapter.
   (e)   “Regulated operations” means the production, use, storage, or handling
of regulated substances.
   (f)   “Regulated substances” means all hazardous substances regulated by
this Title, as well as petroleum, tires, and any other hazardous element,
compound, mixture, solution, material, gas, or substance having characteristics
identified as hazardous including flammable, ignitable, corrosive, reactive and
toxic substances regulated pursuant to Federal, State, or local environmental
laws.
   (g)   “Vacate” or “vacant” means abandoning a facility where regulated
operations have been conducted, or a majority of the facility where regulated
operations have been conducted as measured in square footage, such that no
regular activities or regular occupancy by persons associated with the facility
is occurring. It does not include:
      (1)   Storage of materials regulated by and in compliance with the
remainder of this Title;
      (2)   Storage of materials being actively used in normal business
processes. The burden is on the owner, operator, or party in control to show
that the materials are in active use;
      (3)   Storage of materials that are not regulated substances and that are
stored by an entity that is in the commercial storage business as a part of
that business.
(Ord. No. 987-2024. Passed 10-7-24, eff. 10-10-24)
§ 396.02 Legislative Findings and Declaration of Nuisance
   (a)   Council of the City of Cleveland finds that:
      (1)   Non-residential sites which are closed for business but vacant and
open to entry by the general public attract children to enter who may encounter
health or environmental hazards, harbor vermin, serve as temporary abode for
vagrants and criminals, invite dumping and illegal storage of hazardous and
flammable substances, and are likely to be damaged by vandals or set ablaze by
arsonists.
      (2)   Unkempt and open grounds on such sites invite the dumping of
garbage, rubbish, hazardous and other regulated substances, and the
accumulation of combustible material.
      (3)   Thousands of structures in this City are made of wood-frame
construction which is more combustible than other building types.
      (4)   Thousands of structures in this City are situated on narrow lots
and in close proximity to one another, thereby increasing the risk of
conflagration and the spread of environmental contamination through the water
and the air.
   (b)   All facilities which are injurious to or a menace to the public
health, safety or welfare, or which constitute a fire hazard, or which are
vacant and open to public entry are declared to be a nuisance and are to be
abated in accordance with this chapter.
   (c)   The owner, operator, or party in control of any facility which is
closed or vacant as of the effective date of this chapter shall comply with the
requirements of this chapter by July 1, 1999.
(Ord. No. 2020-A-96. Passed 12-14-98, eff. 12-24-98 without the signature of
the mayor)
§ 396.03 Notification, Facility Closure Plan, Clean-up, and Fee Requirements
   (a)   No later than fifteen (15) days before closing or vacating a facility
the owner, operator, or party in control of the facility shall submit to the
Fire Chief a written notice that the facility will be closed or vacated,
accompanied by a check or money order payable to the “City of Cleveland” for
the sum of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). Copies of the notice shall also
be submitted to the Director of Development, the Commissioner of Environment,
and the Director of Building and Housing.
   (b)   The notice shall designate a contact person who works or resides in
Cuyahoga County and who shall be available both before and after closing or
vacating the facility, until the time that the property is transferred to
another owner, operator, or party in control. The contact person shall provide
access to the facility to City employees and agents to inspect the facility for
the purpose of ascertaining compliance with this chapter. The contact person
shall respond to requests for information regarding the facility exercising
reasonable diligence; however, the designation of a contact person does not
preclude a City employee or agent from requesting information from or making
notifications directly to the owner, operator, party in control, or generator.
   (c)   The notice shall include the address and telephone number of the
principal office or residence of the owner, as well as the operator or party in
control, and the address and telephone number of the contact person.
   (d)   The notice shall include the date on which the facility proposes to
close or be vacated and shall include any plans for transfer of the property to
another owner, operator, or party in control, if known.
   (e)   A person or entity acquiring title to or control over any facility
which is closed or vacant shall comply with the notice requirements of this
section within fifteen (15) days after acquiring title or control and the
facility closure plan requirements not later than thirty (30) days after
acquiring title or control.
   (f)   Facility Closure Plan. Not less than thirty (30) days prior to closing
or vacating a facility, the owner, operator, party in control, or generator
shall submit to the Fire Chief for review and approval, if appropriate, a
facility closure plan. The plan shall meet the following requirements:
      (1)   Demonstrates that the hazardous substances that are stored,
dispensed, handled or used in the facility will be removed, transported,
treated, or disposed of in a manner that complies with the provisions of Title
XI – Fire Prevention Code of the Codified Ordinances (“this Fire Code”),
including permit requirements for removal.
      (2)   Demonstrates that the methods for removal, transport, treatment and
disposal will meet Federal and State law requirements, and will eliminate the
need for further maintenance and any threat to public health or safety.
      (3)   Contains a description that sets forth the procedure for cleaning
equipment, removing contaminated soil, sampling and analysis methods for soils,
and criteria for determining the extent of decontamination required to meet the
requirements of Federal and State law and this Fire Code.
      (4)   Contains a compliance schedule and a timetable to achieve full
compliance with the provisions of this Fire Code.
   Whenever a change in an operation or design occurs that will affect the
closure or time frame for closure, then the owner, operator, person in control,
or generator must first submit a written request for a change in the plan that
must include a copy of an amended closure plan. The request for modification
and amended closure plan shall be submitted thirty (30) days prior to any date
in the original plan that will be affected by the modification. An amended plan
must be approved by the Fire Chief.
   (g)   Every owner, operator, or party in control of a closed or vacated
facility shall treat, remove, or dispose of all hazardous substances at the
regulated facility in accordance with Federal and State law and this Fire Code
within sixty (60) days of closing or vacating the facility unless another
timetable is provided in a facility closure plan approved by the Fire Chief.
   (h)   In addition to any other remedy under this chapter, the Fire Chief may
issue abatement orders to the owner, operator, person in charge, or generator
to remedy any hazardous or dangerous condition, or orders to conduct the
necessary tests to determine the sources of hazardous substances, within the
time limit stated in such order, when necessary to prevent any threat to the
public health or safety from the hazardous substances at the facility,
including for failure to submit a facility closure plan in accordance with
division (f) above.
(Ord. No. 987-2024. Passed 10-7-24, eff. 10-10-24)
   Note: Pursuant to Section 11 of Ord. No. 1226-2025, any references to the
Department of Economic Development (and, by extension, the Director of Economic
Development) shall be amended to read the Department of Development (and, by
extension, the Director of Development).
§ 396.04 Duties of Owner, Operator, or Party in Control Prior to Closing or
Vacating a Facility
   (a)   No later than thirty (30) days before closing or vacating a facility
the owner, operator, or party in control shall do all of the following:
      (1)   Submit to the Fire Chief a written statement indicating whether any
asbestos-containing materials are present at the facility, either in storage or
as part of the structure, if known;
      (2)   If applicable, submit to the Fire Chief a copy of the most recent
emergency and hazardous chemical inventory form for the facility under RC
Chapter 3750;
      (3)   If applicable, submit to the Fire Chief a copy of the current
hazardous chemical list, or of each of the material safety data sheets, that
the owner, operator, or party in control is required to have on file under RC
Chapter 3750 in connection with the facility;
      (4)   If applicable, submit to the Fire Chief a copy of the current list
of all hazardous and toxic chemicals manufactured, used or stored in the
workplace, as mandated by Section
393.07 of the Codified Ordinances;
      (5)   If applicable, submit to the Fire Chief a list of every stationary
tank, vat, drum, electrical transformer, and vessel of any type that is
contaminated with a regulated substance and that is to remain at the facility;
a precise description of the location of each; and an identification of the
regulated substances that contaminate each;
      (6)   Remove all regulated substances, including regulated substances
contained in a stationary vat, tank, drum, electrical transformer, vessel, or
piping that is to remain at the facility; and remove from the facility or
appropriately abate all debris, nonstationary equipment and furnishings,
nonstationary containers, and motor vehicles and rolling stock that contain or
are contaminated with a regulated substance. Submit to the Fire Chief the
methods that were used to comply with this Paragraph and the place of final
disposition of any regulated substances that were removed. This Paragraph does
not require the abatement of nonfriable asbestos that is an integral part of
the structure or its piping;
      (7)   Submit to the Fire Chief a description of any other equipment,
material, or procedures at the facility that may result in the release of a
regulated substance to the environment or that may pose a substantial risk of
fire.
   (b)   The owner, operator, or party in control shall submit a statement of
completion to the Fire Chief, affirming that the actions required by this
section have been completed or are not applicable to the facility, stating
specifically the reasons why.
   (c)   All information submitted pursuant to this section shall also be
copied to the Commissioner of Environment and the Commissioner of Building and
Housing.
   (d)   Upon the written request of the owner, operator, or party in control
of the facility, the Fire Chief may extend the length of time required for
compliance with this section.
   (e)   If the Fire Chief determines that the actions taken under this section
or under Section
396.05 are insufficient to achieve the goals of this chapter, the Fire Chief
may order the owner, operator, or party in control to submit an environmental
assessment prepared by a certified environmental consultant, describing the
condition of the facility, and may order the owner, operator, or party in
control to take appropriate actions to further protect public health, safety,
and the environment. Nothing in this section shall prevent the Fire Chief from
taking other appropriate action pursuant to this Title or pursuant to the Ohio
Fire Code.
   (f)   A person or entity acquiring title to or control over any facility
which is closed or vacant shall comply with the requirements of this section
within sixty (60) days after acquiring title or control, to the extent that the
requirements of this section were not met by the previous owner, operator, or
party in control.
(Ord. No. 2020-A-96. Passed 12-14-98, eff. 12-24-98 without the signature of
the mayor)
§ 396.05 Building, Structure or Outdoor Location to be Secured Against
Unauthorized Entry; Warning Signs
   (a)   Before closing or vacating a facility, the owner, operator, or party
in control of the facility shall secure against unauthorized entry each
building or structure at the facility and each outdoor location by one (1) or
more of the following methods:
      (1)   Boarding or locking windows, doors and other potential means of
entry;
      (2)   Providing security personnel to patrol the facility on a twenty-
four (24) hours-a-day, seven (7) days-a-week basis;
      (3)   Providing secure fencing;
      (4)   Providing lighting and a surveillance system;
      (5)   Using any other method or methods that are approved by the Fire
Chief or the Fire Chief’s designee.
   (b)   The owner, operator, or party in control shall post about each
building, structure, or outdoor location in publicly-visible locations warning
signs that prohibit trespassing and, if applicable, state that the facility may
contain regulated substances that may endanger public health or safety if
released into the environment or may constitute a fire hazard. The signs shall
be constructed to withstand weathering, be firmly affixed to secure against
removal in an approved manner, and consist of all of the following: 1. White
reflective background with red letters; 2. Durable material; 3. Numerals shall
be Roman or Latin numerals, as required, or alphabet letters; 4. The width and
height of the letter shall be 6 inches by 6 inches (152 mm by 152 mm); 5. The
height or width of each Maltese cross wing area shall be 1 1/8 inches (29 mm)
and have a stroke width of 1/2 inch (13 mm); 6. The center of the Maltese
cross, a circle or oval, shall be 3 inches (76 mm) in diameter and have a
stroke width of 1/2 inch (13 mm); and 7. All Roman numerals and alphabetic
designations, shall be 1 1/4 inches (32 mm) height and have a stroke width of
1/4 inch (6 mm).
   (c)   The owner, operator, or party in control shall continue to ensure that
the facility is secured against unauthorized entry by maintaining the security
measures and the warning signs until the facility is transferred to another
owner, operator, or party in control. All fire protection systems shall remain
in service and be maintained as required by the Ohio Fire Code.
   (d)   Promptly after discovering, or after receiving notice from the Fire
Division, whichever is earlier, that any of the entry barriers or warning signs
installed pursuant to this section have been damaged, lost, or removed, the
owner, operator, or party in control shall repair or replace them.
   (e)   A person or entity acquiring title to or control over a facility which
is closed or vacant shall comply with the requirements of this section
immediately upon acquiring title or control.
(Ord. No. 987-2024. Passed 10-7-24, eff. 10-10-24)
§ 396.06 Inspection of Facility; Investigations
   (a)   After receiving a statement of completion under Section
396.04, the Fire Chief or the Fire Chief’s designee may conduct an inspection
of the facility. Prior to conducting the inspection, reasonable efforts shall
be made to schedule a time to conduct the inspection with the contact person
designated under Section
396.03.
   (b)   The Fire Chief, the Commissioner of Environment or the Commissioner of
Building and Housing, upon request or upon their own initiative, may
investigate or make inquiries into any violations or alleged violations of this
chapter. Upon proper identification and upon stating the purpose and necessity
of an inspection, they or their designees, including representatives of other
federal, state and local agencies concerned with fire, safety or environmental
enforcement may enter at reasonable times upon any public or private property,
real or personal, to inspect or investigate, obtain samples, and examine and
copy records to determine compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. No. 2020-A-96. Passed 12-14-98, eff. 12-24-98 without the signature of
the mayor)
§ 396.07 Authority of City Where Responsible Party Fails to Act
   (a)   If the owner, operator or party in control fails to undertake the
security and posting measures required by this chapter, the City may undertake
those actions without further notice. Any costs incurred by the City in doing
so shall be recoverable as costs under Section
3103.09 of the Codified Ordinances.
   (b)   If the conditions at a facility, including a fire, spill, leak or
emission of a hazardous material at the facility, constitute an imminent and
substantial threat to public health or safety, or are causing or contributing
to, or are threatening to cause or contribute to, air or water pollution or
soil contamination, then the Fire Chief, the Commissioner of Environment, or
the Director of Building and Housing may take such remedial actions as are
necessary to protect the public health, safety, or the environment. These
actions include without limitation extinguishing fires, demolishing buildings
or structures, boarding or otherwise securing property, placarding the property
with warning signs, removing equipment, materials, or substances, and
contracting with environmental professionals to take remedial actions on behalf
of the City.
   (c)   Costs to Be Paid by Property Owner.
      (1)   Any and all expenses or costs, including, but not limited to,
attorneys’ fees, costs of inspection, administrative and support staff,
property maintenance costs, court costs, title search fees, process server
fees, skip tracing expenses, and costs of collection or prosecution, including
discovery and deposition expenses, incurred under this section relating to
remediation necessary to protect the public health, safety, or the environment
or the demolition, repair, alteration, securing or boarding of a building or
structure or for abating any other nuisance shall be paid by the owner of such
building or structure, except when such expenses or costs are incurred with
respect to a government or school building owned by a governmental entity or
political subdivision and is funded by federal money.
      (2)   Any and all owners of a building or structure who appear in the
chain of title from the time the facility becomes subject to regulation under
this Fire Code for the use, handling, storage, or removal of hazardous
substances to closure of the regulated facility shall be jointly and severally
responsible for all costs and expenses incurred relating to the demolition and
all costs and expenses of prosecution or collection related thereto.
      (3)   If within thirty (30) days from the date the Director of Public
Safety sends a statement of charges and costs incurred to the last known
address of the property owner or the tax mailing address listed at the Cuyahoga
County Recorder’s office and its successor in interest as the custodian of the
real property tax records for Cuyahoga County, the owner fails to pay for the
costs of remediation, removal, repair, alteration, securing or boarding or of
inspections of violations that have not been remedied, the Director may certify
the amount to the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses, including
collection agency fees. The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses may make
written return to the County Auditor of the action under this section with a
statement of the charges for services, the amount paid for the performing of
labor and a proper description of the premises. Certification to the County
Auditor is for the purpose of making expenses and costs a lien upon the lands,
to be collected as other taxes and returned to the City with the General Fund,
with special accounting under RC 715.261.
      (4)   Notwithstanding the method of collection set forth in this
division, the Director of Law, in the Director’s sole discretion, may take any
action necessary to collect the costs of remediation, demolition, boarding, or
other nuisance abatement from the owner or other responsible party, including
but not limited to filing of legal proceedings, referring the amount due to
outside counsel by the Law Director for collection action, including filing
civil complaints, and initiating post judgment execution actions.
   (d)   Civil Actions. Whenever the Fire Chief finds that any person has
violated or is violating any provision of this chapter, or has failed to remove
or abate any other condition that is a threat to public health or safety under
this chapter, the Fire Chief, in addition to any other remedies or penalties
available under this chapter, may order in writing that the violation cease
immediately, and such person violating or who has violated a provision of this
chapter shall pay a civil penalty of no more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) per day of violation.
(Ord. No. 987-2024. Passed 10-7-24, eff. 10-10-24)
§ 396.08 Relationship to Other Laws
   (a)   This Chapter does not abridge rights of action or remedies in equity,
under common law, or as provided by statute or other Chapters of the Codified
Ordinances, or limit the City in the exercise of other rights in equity, under
common law, or as provided by statute or the Codified Ordinances to suppress
nuisances or to abate or prevent pollution.
   (b)   Complying with this chapter is required in addition to any other
requirements contained in City, state, or federal law.
(Ord. No. 2020-A-96. Passed 12-14-98, eff. 12-24-98 without the signature of
the mayor)
§ 396.09 Contracts for the Sale or Lease of Real Property
   Any contract for the sale or lease of a facility or portion of a facility
that is closed or vacant or will become closed or vacant within sixty (60) days
following the sale or lease shall contain a statement certifying that the
requirements of this chapter have been met.
(Ord. No. 2020-A-96. Passed 12-14-98, eff. 12-24-98 without the signature of
the mayor)
§ 396.99 Penalties
   A person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree for each day of violation.
(Ord. No. 2020-A-96. Passed 12-14-98, eff. 12-24-98 without the signature of
the mayor)
   Note: Section 2 of Ordinance No. 2020-A-96 requires that all funds recovered
by the City pursuant to Section
396.07 shall be deposited in a fund and subfund designated by the Director of
Finance for the purpose of the rehabilitation and remediation of structural and
environmental defects and other nuisances found in properties throughout the
City, and the funds are hereby appropriated for that purpose.
CHAPTER 397 – EMERGENCY RAPID ENTRY SYSTEMS
397.01   Scope
397.02   Owners Encouraged to Install Emergency Rapid Entry Systems
397.03   Contents of Emergency Rapid Entry System
397.04   Permit Required
397.05   Permit Application
397.06   Fee
§ 397.01 Scope
   (a)   The provisions of this chapter shall govern the installation and
maintenance of emergency rapid entry systems for use by the Division of Fire.
   (b)   The emergency rapid entry system shall consist of an emergency rapid
entry key box, rapid access security padlock, and/or a key access switch or
another approved device from a manufacturer approved by the Fire Chief.
   (c)   All emergency rapid entry systems shall be UL listed and approved and
of a type that enables the Division of Fire to gain access to any rapid access
device with one (1) master key. All emergency rapid entry systems installed
within the City shall be approved by the Fire Chief.
   (d)   Installation of an emergency rapid entry system shall be on a
voluntary basis.
(Ord. No. 2107-02. Passed 6-2-03, eff. 6-4-03)
§ 397.02 Owners Encouraged to Install Emergency Rapid Entry Systems
   (a)   Owners of multi-unit or commercial properties are encouraged to
install an emergency rapid entry system. Any owner or operator who chooses to
place an emergency rapid entry system at a structure shall adhere to the
provisions of this chapter and the Ohio Fire Code.
   (b)   Any costs associated with the purchase, construction, placement,
maintenance or replacement of an emergency rapid entry key box shall be the
responsibility of the owner or operator of the structure in which the key box
is installed.
   (c)   Emergency rapid entry key boxes shall be located a minimum of six (6)
feet above final grade, on the exterior of the structure at or near a main
entrance to the property, or as designated by the Fire Chief.
   (d)   Facility gates that are designed to control vehicle ingress or egress
shall be maintained and equipped with a back-up means of opening should a power
failure occur.
   (e)   The owner or operator of the facility shall update all information and
contents contained within the emergency rapid entry system on an annual basis,
or more frequently as required by the Fire Chief.
(Ord. No. 2107-02. Passed 6-2-03, eff. 6-4-03)
§ 397.03 Contents of Emergency Rapid Entry System
   An emergency rapid entry system shall contain one (1) or more of the
following items, as designated by the Fire Chief. In the event that the number
of items makes storage in the emergency rapid entry system impracticable,
written instructions as to their location and how to readily access them shall
be contained within the emergency rapid entry system.
   (a)   Keys or access devices, clearly labeled as to their use;
   (b)   Keys to all parts of the facility and site, including but not limited
to: mechanical equipment rooms, electrical rooms, and elevator controls;
   (c)   A roster indicating the location of individuals with special needs in
the event of an emergency;
   (d)   A roster of facility personnel knowledgeable about safety procedures
for on-site materials, complete with telephone numbers for such personnel in
the event of an incident after normal hours of operation;
   (e)   A diagram of the complete water system, fire protection system, fire
hydrants and spill clean-up equipment relative to the facility; and
   (f)   Material Safety Data Sheets (“MSDS”) or emergency/hazardous chemical
inventory sheets if required to be kept under subtitle B, Section 311 and 312
of the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986 (SARA III).
(Ord. No. 2107-02. Passed 6-2-03, eff. 6-4-03)
§ 397.04 Permit Required
   No emergency rapid entry system shall be installed without a prior written
permit first issued by the Fire Chief.
(Ord. No. 2107-02. Passed 6-2-03, eff. 6-4-03)
§ 397.05 Permit Application
   Any owner or operator of a property shall make written application for a
permit to install an emergency rapid entry system to the Fire Chief on a form
provided by the Division of Fire.
(Ord. No. 2107-02. Passed 6-2-03, eff. 6-4-03)
§ 397.06 Fee
   A permit fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be paid to cover the cost of
plan reviews, site inspections and to oversee overall compliance with this
Code. All fees generated under this section shall be placed in a separate
account to be used for the implementation, training and ongoing maintenance and
development of the emergency rapid access systems for the protection of the
public.
(Ord. No. 2107-02. Passed 6-2-03, eff. 6-4-03)
PART IIIE: LAND USE CODE – BUILDING CODE
TITLE XIII: BUILDING CODE
   Chapter
3101   Scope, Definitions and Standards
   Chapter
3103   Enforcement and Penalty
   Chapter
3104   Civil Enforcement
   Chapter
3105   Permits and Occupancy Certificates
   Chapter
3106   Registration of Vacant Buildings and Certificates of Compliance for
Vacant Buildings
   Chapter
3107   Registration of Contractors
   Chapter
3109   Encroachments
   Chapter
3111   Ohio Building Code
   Chapter
3113   Outdoor Signs and Displays
   Chapter
3114   Fire Limits
   Chapter
3115   Demolition and Moving
   Chapter
3116   Construction and Post-Construction Site Storm Water Runoff Control
   Chapter
3117   Private Swimming Pools
   Chapter
3121   Residential Building Code of Ohio for One, Two, or Three-Family
Dwellings
   Chapter
3123   Miscellaneous Occupancy
   Chapter
3125   Excavations, Soils and Foundations
   Chapter
3126   Fills, Excavations, Soils, and Grading
   Chapter
3127   Wood Construction
   Chapter
3129   Loads
   Chapter
3131   Heating, Ventilating and Air Conditioning
   Chapter
3133   Plumbing
   Chapter
3135   Gas Piping and Appliances
   Chapter
3137   Electrical Wiring
   Chapter
3139   Refrigeration
   Chapter
3141   Elevators
   Chapter
3143   Exterior Walls and Appurtenances; Parking Garages
   Chapter
3167   Flood Plain Management
   Chapter
3169   Manufactured Homes
CHAPTER 3101 – SCOPE, DEFINITIONS AND STANDARDS
3101.01   Title and Purpose
3101.02   General Scope; Conflict
3101.03   Word Meanings Generally
3101.04   Abbreviations
3101.05   Definitions
3101.06   Technical Standards
3101.07   Technical Standards Supplemental to OBC – Repealed
3101.08   Compliance for New Buildings
3101.09   Responsibility of Owner
3101.10   Safety and Maintenance
3101.11   Removal of Graffiti
   Note: The legislative history of this chapter, except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 1116-A-85, passed
February 10, 1986.
   “OBC” means the Ohio Building Code, as contained in OAC Chapters 4101:1-1 to
4101:1-35. All references to “OBBC” in this Building Code shall hereafter mean
“OBC”.
Cross-reference:
   Alternate materials and construction, CO
3103.13,
3103.20
   Re-use of used materials, CO
3103.14
   Requirements not covered, CO
3103.12
   Test of materials or methods, CO
3103.15,
3103.20
Statutory reference:
   Test of materials or methods, OAC Ch. 4101:2-11
§ 3101.01 Title and Purpose
   (a)   This Title shall be known and may be cited as “The Building Code of
the City of Cleveland” and is referred to herein as “this Building Code”.
   (b)   Within the scope of this Building Code, the purpose is to provide
minimum standards to safeguard life or limb, health, property and public
welfare.
§ 3101.02 General Scope; Conflict
   (a)   The provisions of this Building Code shall apply to the location,
design, materials, construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and
occupancy, maintenance, removal and demolition of every building and other
structure, and to any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings and
other structures, except as such matters are otherwise specifically provided
for in the Charter or under other titles of the Codified Ordinances of the City
of Cleveland.
   (b)   The provisions of this Building Code shall supplement any and all laws
of the State of Ohio and any and all rules and regulations promulgated by
authority thereof, applicable to buildings and other structures in the City.
   (c)   If in any specific case there is an apparent difference in the
materials, methods of construction or other requirements specified in different
sections of this Building Code, or between the requirements of this Building
Code and any other applicable ordinance, or rule or regulation of any
administrative officer, board or commission of the City, the more restrictive
shall govern.
§ 3101.03 Word Meanings Generally
   (a)   For the purposes of this Building Code the abbreviations, terms,
phrases, words and their derivatives listed in this chapter shall have the
meaning given herein.
   (b)   Definitions pertinent to specific chapters of this Building Code are
included in such specific chapters. Unless specifically limited in scope, such
definitions shall have general application throughout this Building Code.
   (c)   Words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural includes
the singular. Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine gender.
   (d)   Words not defined in OBBC or this Building Code shall have the
meanings given in the current edition of Webster’s Unabridged Dictionary.
§ 3101.04 Abbreviations
   (a)   Abbreviations used in this Building Code substance or if preceding or
referring to standards and publications mean those contained in the Ohio
Administrative Code (OAC), those authoring or promulgating agencies indicated
in OAC Chapter 4101:2-46, and those as follows:
   “BOCA” means Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc.
   “CABO” means “CABO One and Two Family Dwelling Code” as promulgated by the
Council of American Building Officials.
   “ICC” means International Code Council.
   “NFiPA” means National Fire Protection Association.
   “OAC” means Ohio Administrative Code.
   “OBC” means the Ohio Building Code, as contained in OAC Chapters 4101:2-1 to
4101:2-69. All references to OBBC in this Building Code shall hereafter mean
OBC.
   “OCIEB” means Ohio Construction Industry Examining Board.
   “ORC 123” means Ohio Residential Code for One, Two and Three Family
Dwellings as promulgated by the Ohio Building Officials Association. Any
reference to CABO shall mean ORC 123.
(Ord. No. 2370-01. Passed 5-13-02, eff. 5-20-02)
   Note: The 2002 Ohio Building Code, effective January 1, 2002, as contained
in the Ohio Administrative Code, was renumbered as OAC Chapters 4101:1-1 to
4101:1-35.
§ 3101.05 Definitions
   The definitions contained in OBC, and ORC 123 shall be applicable to this
Building Code, except as supplemented or otherwise provided for as follows:
   (a)   “Approved” means approved by the Ohio Board of Building Standards or
the City Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals, or approved by the
Commissioner of Building and Housing under provisions of this Building Code, or
approval by other authority designed by OBC or this Building Code to give
approval in the matter in question.
   (b)   “Building Department” means the Division of Building and Housing.
   (c)   “Building Official” means the Commissioner of the Division of Building
and Housing of the City of Cleveland.
   (d)   “City” means the City of Cleveland.
   (e)   “Commissioner” means the Commissioner of Building and Housing of the
City of Cleveland.
   (f)   “Jurisdiction” means the “City.”
   (g)   “Natural grade” means the surface of the ground prior to excavation,
fill or grading. (For “grade level” see Section
325.32 of the Zoning Code.)
   (h)   “Occupancy change” means a change from one (1) occupancy
classification to another occupancy classification. (For use group
classifications, see OAC Chapter 4101:2-3.)
   (i)   “Occupancy separation” means fire separation in a building or other
structure between parts of different occupancy classifications.
   (j)   “Owner” means the owner or owners of the premises, a vendee in
possession, a mortgagee or receiver in possession, a lessee or joint lessees of
the whole thereof, or an agent or any other person, firm, or corporation
directly in control of the premises or having a legal or equitable interest in
the property.
   (k)   “Premises” means land, including buildings or structures thereon, or
any part thereof, except land occupied by streets, alleys or public
thoroughfares.
   (l)   “Repair” means the reconstruction, replacement or renewal of any part
of an existing building, structure or device with like material or parts, for
the purpose of maintenance of such building, structure or device.
   (m)   “Required” means required by OBC or this Building Code.
   (n)   “Shall” means mandatory.
   (o)   “Toilet room” means a room containing one (1) or more water closets,
and may also contain one (1) or more lavatories, urinals and other plumbing
fixtures.
(Ord. No. 2370-01. Passed 5-13-02, eff. 5-20-02)
§ 3101.06 Technical Standards
   (a)   The referenced standards in OBC shall be supplemented by the standards
listed in the Cleveland Fire Prevention Code which relate to building fire
prevention as fire prevention is defined in OAC 4101:2-2.
   (b)   Compliance with the referenced standards specified in subsection (a)
hereof constitutes prima facie compliance with the intent and requirements of
this Cleveland Building Code, except where a specific provision of the Ohio
Revised Code or the Ohio Administrative Code including OBC, or the Cleveland
Building and Fire Prevention Codes, provides otherwise.
   (c)   Those provisions of referenced standards which establish safety
requirements shall be considered mandatory and those provisions of referenced
standards exceeding safety requirements shall be considered as acceptable but
not required by this Building Code.
(Ord. No. 2370-01. Passed 5-13-02, eff. 5-20-02)
§ 3101.07 Technical Standards Supplemental to OBC – Repealed
(Ord. No. 2370-01. Passed 5-13-02, eff. 5-20-02)
§ 3101.08 Compliance for New Buildings
   (a)   Except as provided in Section
3101.02, buildings and other structures and parts thereof erected in the City
of Cleveland after June 27, 1949 shall comply with OBBC and this Building Code.
   (b)   The uniform minimum standards and requirements of OBBC shall be the
basis of the Cleveland Building Code, except that further and additional
requirements and regulations to OBBC may be imposed by the Cleveland Building
Code and shall be as are set forth in such Building Code.
§ 3101.09 Responsibility of Owner
   (a)   The owner of premises subject to the provisions of the Building Code
shall be responsible for compliance with the standards set forth herein. He or
she shall remain responsible therefor, regardless of the fact certain
responsibilities may also be placed on operators or agents. The owner shall
remain responsible for the elimination of any violation found on his or her
premises.
   (b)   Exception: An owner who enters into a written agreement with a person
or entity to perform work to improve, add to or construct on the owner’s
property shall be exempt from the responsibility for the errors or omissions of
the person or entity hired to perform the work, if the written agreement
specifically makes the person or entity performing the work responsible for
obtaining all required permits and approvals from the City.
(Ord. No. 2370-01. Passed 5-13-02, eff. 5-20-02)
§ 3101.10 Safety and Maintenance
   (a)   General Maintenance Requirements. All structures and all parts
thereof, both exterior and interior, shall be maintained in good repair and
shall be capable of performing the function for which such structure or part or
any feature thereof, was designed or intended to be used.
   All equipment and facilities appurtenant to a structure shall be maintained
in good and safe working order.
   (b)   Maintenance of Foundations. All foundations of every structure shall
be maintained structurally sound and in good repair.
   All foundations of every structure shall be maintained in such condition as
to prevent the accumulation of moisture within the space enclosed within such
foundation.
   (c)   Maintenance of Exterior Walls and Roofs. All exterior walls of every
structure secondary and appurtenant shall be maintained weathertight and shall
be maintained so as to resist decay or deterioration from any cause.
   In order to insure maintenance of weathertight exterior walls resistant of
decay or deterioration, all such walls, windows, sashes and window frames shall
be painted periodically and all loose masonry units and disintegrated mortar
joints shall be properly bonded and repainted.
   All roofs of every structure shall be maintained weathertight, devoid of
leaks and shall be equipped with gutters and downspouts connected to a public
storm sewer or combined storm and sanitary sewer.
   Broken window glass shall be replaced with glass or other suitable material
that will effect a good appearance.
   (d)   Maintenance of Interior Walls and Floors. All interior walls and
floors of every structure shall be maintained free of holes, large cracks and
any loose and deteriorated material.
   (e)   Maintenance of Exterior Property Areas. Exterior property areas of all
premises shall be kept free of any object, wrecked, dismantled, inoperative,
discarded, unused or unlicensed motor vehicles, except where permitted under
Zoning Code ordinances.
   The premises shall be maintained free of any debris, material or condition
which may create a health, accident or fire hazard, or which is a public
nuisance.
   Fences shall be maintained in good vertical and horizontal alignment and
shall be protected from decay by application of paint or other preservative
material.
   (f)   Damaged Buildings. A building damaged by fire or other causes shall be
repaired to its original condition and as may otherwise be accepted as good
engineering practice.
   The owner of the premises shall at all times prior to and while repairs are
being done maintain the premises free of trash and debris.
   If for a valid reason a damaged building cannot be promptly repaired, all
damaged glass windows and all damaged entrance doors shall be replaced, or the
openings shall be securely boarded up to prevent unlawful entry and painted in
a manner to harmonize with the neighboring buildings.
§ 3101.11 Removal of Graffiti
   (a)   The exterior of all privately owned dwelling structures and premises
shall be free from graffiti when such graffiti is visible from a right-of-way.
Owners on whose property graffiti is displayed shall completely remove the
graffiti or shall completely and uniformly cover the graffiti with appropriate
wall finish.
   (b)   Whenever the Commissioner finds a structure or portion thereof to be
in violation of division (a) hereof, said Commissioner shall forward by
certified mail to the owner in control of such structure or portion thereof a
written notice of violation describing the location of the graffiti to be
removed or covered. Such notice and order shall be sent by certified mail to
the owner’s tax mailing address, if available, as indicated on the County tax
duplicate, and a copy of such notice shall be posted simultaneously in a
conspicuous place on the premises to which it relates. Such notice of violation
shall require the owner to remove or cover the graffiti in accordance with
division (a) hereof or appeal the order to the Board of Building Standards and
Building Appeals in accordance with division (c) within fourteen (14) days of
receipt of the notice. Such mailing and posting shall be deemed legal service
of such notice.
   (c)   The owner shall have a right to appeal the notice and decision of the
Commissioner and appear before the Board of Building Standards and Building
Appeals at a specified time and place to show cause why said owner should not
comply with such notice.
   (d)   This Council determines that graffiti constitutes a public nuisance
which must be abated. For this reason, if the owner fails to remove or cover
the graffiti or appeal the order of the Commissioner within fourteen (14) days
of receipt of the notice, the Commissioner shall cause the graffiti to be
abated and any expenses or costs incurred under this section shall be paid by
the owner of the dwelling structure or premises. If the owner fails to pay for
the cost within thirty (30) days after the receipt from the Director of
Community Development of a statement of the charges and costs incurred therein,
then the Director of Community Development may certify the amount to the
Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses. The Commissioner of Assessments and
Licenses shall make written return to the County Auditor of the action under
this Code, with a statement of the charges for their services, the amount paid
for the performing of such labor and a proper description of the premises for
the purpose of making the same a lien upon such lands, to be collected as other
taxes and returned to the City deposited with the General Fund with special
accounting thereof in accordance with RC 715.261.
   Notwithstanding the method of collection set forth above, the Director of
Law may take any action necessary to collect the costs of graffiti abatement
from the owner or other responsible party or parties.
   (e)   For purposes of this section, “graffiti” means any unauthorized
inscription, word, figure or design which is marked, etched, scratched, drawn,
applied or painted on any structural component of any building, structure, or
other facility regardless of the nature of the material of the structural
component. Such inscription, word, figure or design shall be deemed
unauthorized if the property owner has not granted written permission prior to
its application to the structure.
(Ord. No. 550-90. Passed 6-18-90, eff. 6-27-90)
CHAPTER 3103 – ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY
3103.01   Powers and Duties of Director of Building and Housing
3103.02   Conflict of Interest
3103.03   Nonliability of Enforcing Officials
3103.04   Right of Entry and Inspection
3103.05   Permission to Enter Adjoining Premises
3103.06   Inspections; Type and Procedure
3103.07   Stop Work Orders
3103.08   Permit or Approval Revocation
3103.09   Unsafe Structures and Exterior Property Nuisances; Violations and
Remedial Notices; Cost Recovery
3103.091   Utility Shut-Off in Vacant and Unsafe Structures
3103.092   Prohibiting Corporations from Owning or Transferring Real Property
Without Registering with the Ohio Secretary of State
3103.10   Abandoned Service Stations
3103.11   Restraining Order
3103.111   Ticketing by Employees of the Department of Public Service
3103.12   Requirements Not Covered by Code
3103.13   Alternate Materials and Construction
3103.14   Re-Use of Used Materials
3103.15   Tests of Materials or Methods
3103.16   Prohibition of Urea Formaldehyde Foam Insulation
3103.17   Prefabricated Assemblies
3103.18   Exceptions and Variances
3103.19   Board of Zoning Appeals Jurisdiction
3103.20   Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals; Duties and
Procedure
3103.21   Board Hearing and Time Extension Fees
3103.22   Other Legal Action
3103.23   Illegal Conversion of Residential Occupancy Buildings
3103.24   Rules and Regulations
3103.25   Violations Generally
3103.99   Penalty
   Note: The legislative history of this chapter, except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 1116-A-85, passed
February 10, 1986.
Cross-reference:
   Board to hear license appeals, CO
3107.14
   Compliance for new buildings, CO
3101.08
   Compliance responsibility of owner, CO
3101.09
   Maintenance requirements, CO
3101.10
§ 3103.01 Powers and Duties of Director of Building and Housing
   (a)   General Duties. The Director of Building and Housing with the
assistance of officials of the divisions of the City having jurisdiction, is
hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of OBC and this
Building code, to administer and direct the Department of Building and Housing
and to establish policies, procedures and standards for its efficient
operation, to review plans and specifications, to issue building permits and
certificates, to conduct inspections, to issue rules and regulations for the
operation of the Department consistent with OBC and this Building Code, to
maintain records and make reports, and to perform such other duties and
services as may be necessary to execute the provisions of OBC and this Building
Code, and be consistent herewith, or as may be imposed upon the Director by law
or by ordinance or by direction of the Mayor.
   (b)   Deputy. The Director shall designate as his or her deputy a qualified
person who shall exercise all powers of the Director during his or her absence
or disability. The Deputy Director shall be appointed and may be removed by the
Director in accordance with the Civil Service provisions of the charter.
   (c)   Records. The Director shall keep, or cause to be kept, permanent,
accurate records of all of the business of the Department. The records of the
Department shall be open to public inspection during business hours as
designated therefore by the Director.
   (d)   Acknowledgements and Reports. The Director shall promptly acknowledge
receipt of all official communications, notices and reports. The Director shall
prepare annual reports as mandated or required by the Mayor.
   (e)   Cooperation of Other City Departments. The officials of other City
departments and divisions having jurisdiction or control of construction, use
or occupancy under the provisions of this Building Code or under other
applicable laws, ordinances, rules, or regulations, shall cooperate and assist
in the enforcement of the provisions of OBC or this Building Code. Any City
employee empowered to make inspections of buildings, structures or premises,
shall promptly report to the administrative officer having jurisdiction any
violation of OBC or this Building Code perceived in the performance of his or
her duties.
   Any administrative officer directed or empowered to act under any provision
of OBC or this Building Code shall act promptly, and without unnecessary delay.
   (f)   Authority to Act. Whenever in OBC or this Building Code an
Administrative Officer is directed or empowered to perform duties or exercise
authority it shall be interpreted to mean such administrative officer or his or
her duly authorized representative or inspector.
   (g)   Authorizing Procedures for Fire Insurance Proceeds. The City of
Cleveland adopts and accepts the provisions and procedures set forth in RC
3929.86, particularly divisions (c) and (d), providing for the transfer and
receipt of portions of fire insurance proceeds. The Director of Building and
Housing is designated as the officer of the City of Cleveland to carry out the
duties under that Section. The fire insurance proceeds received shall be placed
in Fund No. 80 SF 085 to be used for demolition, boarding up, repairing, or
otherwise securing of properties. As stated in the relevant provisions of the
Ohio Revised Code, excess funds shall be returned to the insured when repair,
removal, or securing of the building or structure has been performed by the
City or completed by another entity. For purposes of this section, repair,
removal or securing is not completed until the structure or building is
demolished or able to be occupied for its intended and legal use as verified by
the Director of Building and Housing.
(Ord. No. 951-04. Passed 10-11-04, eff. 10-13-04)
§ 3103.02 Conflict of Interest
   No officer or employee of the Division of Building and Housing shall be
financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material or appliances for
the construction, alteration or maintenance of a building or other structure,
or in the making of plans or of specifications therefor, unless he or she is
the owner of such building or structure. No such officer or employee shall
engage in any work which is inconsistent with his or her duties or with
interests of the Division.
§ 3103.03 Nonliability of Enforcing Officials
   Any officer or employee charged with the enforcement of OBBC or this
Building Code, acting for the City in good faith and without malice, shall not
thereby render himself or herself personally liable for any damage that may
accrue to persons or property as a result of any act or omission in the
performance of his or her official duties. Any suit brought against any officer
or employee because of any act or omission in the enforcement of any provision
of OBBC or this Building Code shall be defended by the Department of Law until
final termination of the proceedings.
§ 3103.04 Right of Entry and Inspection
   (a)   The Director and the Fire Chief or any of their assistants may, at any
reasonable hour, enter any dwelling, multifamily dwelling, building, structure
or premises within the City to perform any duty imposed on them by OBBC or this
Building Code, or the City Housing or Fire Prevention Codes subject to the
requirements and authority of Section
367.03.
   (b)   No person shall refuse to permit such emergency entry or inspection,
nor shall any person hinder, obstruct, resist or abuse any person making or
attempting to make such entry or inspection.
(Ord. No. 1039-2023. Passed 2-5-24, eff. 2-6-24)
§ 3103.05 Permission to Enter Adjoining Premises
   (a)   For the purpose of performing repairs, alterations or maintenance on
the exterior of any dwelling, building or structure, necessary to effect
compliance with the provisions of any Ohio statute, OBBC, the City’s Building
or Housing Codes or any other City ordinance, or any lawful rule adopted or
order issued pursuant thereto, a property owner or his or her agent or employee
shall obtain the consent to enter the adjoining premises from the owner, agent
or occupant of such premises. If consent is granted, the party requesting
permission to enter shall preserve and protect from injury at all times and at
his or her own expense such adjoining structure or premises.
   (b)   Should consent be denied, the party seeking permission to enter the
adjoining premises may apply in writing to the Commissioner who shall conduct
the necessary investigation into the matter, and upon good cause shown, may
order the issuance of a permit to enter the adjoining premises. Such order may
be appealed to the Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals by the
owner, agent or occupant of the adjoining premises, or by the party seeking
permission to enter the adjoining premises, if such permission is denied.
   (c)   The procedure for appeal under this section shall be as follows:
      (1)   The appeal shall be in writing and be submitted to the Board within
five (5) regular business days from the date notice is received that a permit
has or has not been issued, which notice shall be given by the Commissioner to
the party seeking to enter the adjoining premises, and to the owner, agent or
occupant of such premises.
      (2)   Upon the filing of an appeal, a hearing shall be held before the
Board, at a time and place fixed by the Board.
      (3)   Except in cases of emergency as set forth in division (j) of
Section
3103.09, the filing of an appeal shall suspend the issuance of a permit to
enter the adjoining premises until the appeal is acted upon by the Board.
(Ord. No. 1233-15. Passed 11-9-15, eff. 11-11-15)
§ 3103.06 Inspections; Type and Procedure
   (a)   Existing Premises.
      (1)   When deemed necessary to ascertain existing conditions, the
Commissioner shall examine or cause to be examined all buildings or other
structures or premises for which an application has been received for a permit
to enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish or change the occupancy or use
classification thereof, before a permit or Certificate of Occupancy therefor is
issued.
      (2)   The Commissioner shall inspect or cause to be inspected from time
to time, as he or she deems necessary, all buildings or structures, including
appurtenances and accessories thereto, liable to become a hazard to public
safety through deterioration, dilapidation, corrosion or obsolescence, to
verify proper maintenance as prescribed in Section
3101.10, continued compliance with the applicable provisions of OBBC and this
Building Code and with other applicable laws, ordinances, rules and
regulations, and continued compliance with the terms of any Certificate of
Occupancy, approval and operation.
   (b)   At Site of Work. Administrative officers having jurisdictions under
OBBC or this Building Code shall inspect or cause to be inspected all buildings
and structures from time to time during and upon completion of the work for
which a permit was issued. Such administrative officers shall make a record of
every such examination and inspection and of all violations of OBBC or this
Building Code.
   (c)   At Point of Manufacture. When deemed necessary by the administrative
officer having jurisdiction, such officer may make or cause to be made an
inspection of materials and assemblies at the point of manufacture or
fabrication. However, inspections beyond the City limits shall be made at the
expense of the person, firm or corporation requesting such inspection. The
officer may make a record of every such examination and inspection.
   (d)   By Whom. Except when OBBC or this Building Code directs other
administrative officers to make inspections, the inspections called for by
these requirements shall be made by the Commissioner. The Commissioner may
accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection organizations, and of
registered architects and registered professional engineers, provided that
after investigation he or she is satisfied as to their qualifications and
reliability. But no approval called for by any provision of OBBC or this
Building Code shall be based on such reports unless the same are in writing and
certified by a registered architect or registered professional engineer, or by
a responsible officer of an inspection organization.
§ 3103.07 Stop Work Orders
   (a)   Upon notice from the Commissioner or any other administrative officer
having jurisdiction that work on any building or structure is being done
contrary to the provisions of OBBC or this Building Code or in a dangerous or
unsafe manner, such work shall be immediately stopped.
   (b)   Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the
property or to his or her agent or to the person doing the work, and shall
state the conditions under which work may be resumed. However, in instances
where immediate action is deemed necessary for public safety or in the public
interest, the administrative officer having jurisdiction may require the work
be stopped upon verbal order pending the issuance of a written order.
§ 3103.08 Permit or Approval Revocation
   The administrative officer having jurisdiction shall revoke a permit or
approval issued under the provisions of this Building Code in case there has
been any false statement or misrepresentation as to a material fact in the
application or plans on which the permit or approval was based, or whenever any
permit or approval has been issued in error and conditions are such that a
permit or approval should not have been issued.
§ 3103.09 Unsafe Structures and Exterior Property Nuisances; Violations and
Remedial Notices; Cost Recovery
   (a)   Legislative Findings. Council of the City of Cleveland finds that:
      (1)   Structures that are vacant and open to entry at doors, windows or
other points accessible to the general public:
         A.   Attract children to enter;
         B.   Become harborage for vermin;
         C.   Serve as temporary abode for derelicts, vagrants and criminals;
and
         D.   Are likely to be damaged by vandals or set ablaze by arsonists.
      (2)   Unkept grounds surrounding vacant, open structures invite the
dumping of garbage and rubbish;
      (3)   Thousands of structures in this City are made of wood-frame
construction that is more combustible than other building types;
      (4)   Thousands of structures in this City are situated on narrow lots
and in close proximity to one another, increasing the risk of conflagration and
spread of insect and rodent infestation;
      (5)   Population loss and economic decline experienced by the City in
recent years has caused the incidence of vacant, open structures, high grass,
weeds, junk, debris, and junk motor vehicles to increase significantly;
      (6)   Vacant, open structures often become dilapidated because they are
not repaired by the owners or persons in control of the structures;
      (7)   Structures that are vacant and open to entry, high grass, weeds,
junk, debris, and junk motor vehicles depress the market value of surrounding
properties;
      (8)   Vacant and unsafe structures in which utility services have not
been shut-off create a serious risk of explosion, accidental fire and flood.
      (9)   The existence of certain hazardous conditions may require a
structure to be vacated; these conditions include but are not limited to:
         A.   Danger of structural collapse;
         B.   Inadequate heat or use of dangerous heating mechanism;
         C.   Danger of fire; and
         D.   Lack of plumbing in safe working order.
      (10)   Structures that remain boarded for an extended period of time
contribute to blight, cause a decrease in neighboring property values, create
targets for arson, and lead to the cancellation of homeowners’ insurance for
neighboring property owners;
      (11)   The following conditions provide harborage and breeding grounds
for pests or otherwise create human-health problems:
         A.   Grass over eight (8) inches in height;
         B.   Noxious weeds including Russian, Canadian, common, or musk
thistle; shatter cane; Johnsongrass; wild lettuce; wild mustard; wild parsley;
wild parsnip; wild carrot; giant hogweed; ragweed; wild plants that can cause
skin reaction upon contact or produce or aggravate hay fever, asthma, allergic
respiratory reaction, or similar conditions; and all other noxious weeds,
including those listed as prohibited noxious weeds in OAC 901:5-37-01, as it
may be amended;
         C.   Refuse, including but not limited to, trash, junk, garbage and
food waste, offal, animal wastes, tires, and all other waste materials;
         D.   Stagnant surface water.
      (12)   As used in this chapter, “junk” motor vehicle means a motor
vehicle that meets all of the following criteria:
         A.   Three (3) model years’ old or older;
         B.   Apparently inoperable; and
         C.   Extensively damaged, including, but not limited to, any of the
following: missing wheels, tires, engine, motor, or transmission.
   (b)   Declaration of Nuisance.
      (1)   All buildings or structures that are injurious to or a menace to
the public health, safety or welfare, or are structurally unsafe, unsanitary or
not provided with adequate safe egress, or constitute a fire hazard, or are
vacant and open to public entry, or are otherwise dangerous to human life or
injurious to the public, or in relation to existing use constitute a hazard to
the public health, safety or welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance,
dilapidation, obsolescence or abandonment, are, severally, for the purposes of
this Building Code, declared to be “unsafe structures”. All unsafe structures
or conditions are declared to be public nuisances. The public nuisance shall be
abated by correction of the violations to the minimum standards of the Codified
Ordinances of Cleveland, Ohio, 1976, applicable City rules and regulations, the
Revised Code, and Ohio Administrative Code, including the Ohio Building Code,
or by demolition.
      (2)   The condition described under division (a)(8) of this section is
declared to be a nuisance because of the risk of harm from explosion,
accidental fire or flooding and shall be abated by shut-off of the services.
      (3)   The conditions listed in division (a)(11) of this section are
declared to be nuisances that shall be removed, destroyed, or abated from any
property on which they are found.
         A.   The Director may post a seventy-two (72) hour notice to abate any
nuisance under division (a)(11) of this section and, if the nuisance is not
abated within seventy-two (72) hours, may abate the nuisance on the property
where the seventy-two (72) hour notice was posted.
         B.   If the nuisance for which the Director has posted a notice to
abate is for the nuisance of high grass, noxious weeds, or related overgrowth
or brush, or if notice has been posted for the same under Section
209.01, the Director may cause such nuisance to be abated or removed during the
remainder of the growing season without further posting of notice. Such notice
may be appealed during the remainder of the growing season under subsection (g)
of this section.
      (4)   Junk motor vehicles as defined in division (a)(12) of this section
are declared to be nuisances that shall be removed or abated from any property
on which they are found. Junk motor vehicles are declared to be a nuisance
because:
         A.   They harbor rodents, vermin, and other pests;
         B.   They contain toxic substances and flammable liquids and fumes;
         C.   They attract children to enter;
         D.   They serve as temporary abode for derelicts, vagrants and
criminals;
         E.   They diminish neighboring property values; and
         F.   They are likely to be damaged by vandals or set ablaze by
arsonists.
   (c)   Effective Boarding Pending Rehabilitation.
      (1)   Permits. Pending the correction of the violations to the minimum
standards of the Codified Ordinances of Cleveland, Ohio, 1976, applicable City
rules and regulations, the Revised Code, and the Ohio Administrative Code,
including the Ohio Building Code, the owner of a structure may secure the
structure through effective boarding. In order to effectively board the
structure, the owner of the structure shall apply, within three (3) days of
receiving a notice of violation, to the Department of Building and Housing for
a permit to board. The Department of Building and Housing shall review the
condition of the structure, determine if it can be effectively boarded, and
grant or deny the owner’s permit to board, setting forth special requirements,
if any, necessary for compliance with minimum standards for effective boarding.
The owner shall effectively board the structure within three (3) days of the
issuance of a boarding permit, or within any other time limit that the Director
deems appropriate. Structures that are boarded without first obtaining a
boarding permit or structures that do not comply with the boarding permit shall
continue to be considered public nuisances subject to demolition. Within thirty
(30) days of the issuance of a permit to board, the owner of the structure
shall apply for a rehabilitation permit under Section
3105.06 of the Codified Ordinances of Cleveland, Ohio, 1976. The Director may
grant an extension of time for acquiring a rehabilitation permit on the owner’s
written request and for good cause shown. Failure of the owner to obtain a
rehabilitation permit after effective boarding will result in the structure
being deemed a public nuisance, and scheduled for demolition.
      (2)   Materials. The effective boarding of a structure shall include, but
not be limited to, doors, windows, or other areas of the structure open to
ingress and egress and to weather elements at any and all levels of the
structure. The openings shall be secured by plywood, not less than one-half (1/
2) inch thick, or other material of equal strength, cut and fit into the
openings. Openings in excess of forty-eight (48) inches wide shall be framed
with two (2) inches by four (4) inches lumber and plywood, or equivalent
material fastened twenty-four (24) inches on center onto frame. The plywood or
equivalent material shall be fastened into the openings by screw type nails or
lag screws.
      (3)   Maintenance. Upon effectively boarding the structure, the owner
shall monitor and maintain the structure and its surrounding premises in a
safe, sanitary and secured condition. Any portion of the exterior structure
that is deemed to be potentially hazardous due to deteriorated conditions, or
to be structurally unsound, shall be removed or treated in a manner so as to
eliminate the hazard. The exterior premises shall be maintained free of high
weeds, debris, junk vehicles, and conditions that may provide harborage for
rodents. Failure of the owner to properly maintain the building in the above
condition, will result in the structure being deemed a public nuisance, and
scheduled for demolition.
      (4)   Rehabilitation. Rehabilitation of the structure shall begin within
thirty (30) days of receiving a rehabilitation permit under Section
3105.06 of the Codified Ordinances of Cleveland, Ohio, 1976 unless the time
period is extended with permission from the Director. If rehabilitation of the
effectively boarded structure does not begin within this time period, or if the
rehabilitation permit is otherwise invalidated or revoked, then the Director
may declare that the nuisance has not been abated and schedule the structure
for demolition.
   (d)   Examination and Condemnation.
      (1)   The Director is authorized to examine or cause to be examined every
building or other structure reported to be unsafe or damaged or injurious to or
a menace to the public, and shall make a written record of the examination.
      (2)   The Director may designate as a public nuisance those particular
structures or conditions found to be unsafe under division (b) of this section.
      (3)   The Director may also declare that a nuisance structure which, due
to its advanced state of dilapidation, substantial fire damage or structural
infirmity, is an immediate hazard to human life or health, may only be abated
by immediate repair and rehabilitation to the minimum standards of the Codified
Ordinances of Cleveland, Ohio, 1976, applicable City rules and regulations, the
Revised Code, and Ohio Administrative Code, including the Ohio Building Code,
or by demolition.
      (4)   Whenever the Director finds a vacant structure open to entry at
doors, windows or other points accessible to the general public, he or she may
cause the structure to be secured at those points of entry. The Director shall
be authorized at any time to enter the premises to secure the structure in
order to lessen the severity of the public nuisance. In securing the structure,
the Director may call any department, division or bureau of the City for
whatever assistance may be necessary, or may, by private contract, secure such
structure and may notify utilities to shut-off service to the property under
Section
3103.091. This securing shall not be deemed to constitute “effective boarding”
under division (b) of this section, and it does not abate the nuisance
condition of an unsafe structure, as declared under division (d)(2) of this
section, unless so declared in writing by the Director. Later notice, issued
under division (e)(1) below, shall include the fact that the Director has found
it necessary to take appropriate action to secure the structure.
   (e)   Notice of Violation.
      (1)   Whenever the Director finds a building, structure or a portion of
those to be unsafe and determines it or the property on which it is located to
be a public nuisance as defined in this chapter, he or she shall provide to the
owner, agent or person in control of the building, structure or portion of
those and to any mortgagee of record a written notice of violation stating the
defects in the building or structure. The notice of violation shall require the
owner within a stated time to abate the nuisance condition of the building or
structure by correction of the violations and defects to the minimum standards
of the Codified Ordinances of Cleveland, Ohio, 1976, applicable City rules and
regulations, the Revised Code, and Ohio Administrative Code, including the Ohio
Building Code, or by demolition and removal of the building, structure, or a
portion of those.
      (2)   The notice of violation under division (e)(1) of this section shall
also state that if the nuisance is not abated within the required time that the
Director may take appropriate action to repair, remove, or otherwise abate the
public nuisance and that the owner, agent or person in control shall be
responsible for the costs.
      (3)   A notice of violation under division (e)(1) of this section shall
be served by one (1) or more of the following methods:
         A.   Personal service;
         B.   Residence service at the owner's address by leaving a copy of the
notice of violation with a person of suitable age and discretion then residing
therein;
         C.   Certified mail to an address where it is reasonably calculated
under the circumstances to reach the owner. When determining such an address,
the City shall examine:
            1.   Information the responsible party provided to the City, such
as rental registration information or the address used on an appeal or an
application; or
            2.   Information that a City representative, such as an inspector,
has discovered during the performance of their duties; or
            3.   Information from common and readily available sources such as
printed or online directories, credit bureaus, county property records, board
of election records, motor vehicle records, court records or other state,
county, municipal or federal records.
         The City is not required to use all of the sources described in
division (e)(3)C. and is not required to use any one of them; the City must use
whatever combination of them is reasonably expected to be successful. The
address found can be the property or premises which is the subject of the
violation.
         D.   Regular mail and posting as follows:
            1.   Regular mail service to the owner at an address found under
division (e)(3) above, which may be the address of the property that is the
subject of the violation; and
            2.   Regular mail service to the property address that is the
subject of the violation notice if that address is different from the address
in division (e)(3)D.1.; and
            3.   Posting of the notice of violation on the building, premises
or real estate or appurtenance thereto that is the subject of the violation
notice.
         E.   Service made by publication electronically or once in a newspaper
of general circulation in the City.
      (4)   An owner, agent or person in control of the structure or building,
a mortgagee of record, or a lien holder of record who has received a notice of
violation or a notice to make corrections to the minimum standards of the
Codified Ordinances of Cleveland, Ohio, 1976, applicable City rules and
regulations, the Revised Code, and Ohio Administrative Code, including the Ohio
Building Code, or to demolish and remove, as provided for in this section,
shall inform prospective purchasers, vendees, grantees, assignees, lessees, or
land contractees of the notice of violation or the notice to make corrections,
or to demolish and remove. No person shall transfer to a vendee, grantee,
assignee, lessee, land contractee or any other transferee any interest in a
building, structure or a portion of those after receiving a notice of violation
to make corrections, or to demolish and remove the same, without first
providing the transferee with a copy of the notice.
      (5)   A.   No person, agent, firm or corporation shall sell, by land
contract or otherwise, any interest in any structure or building without
furnishing the buyer, prior to the sale a copy of any outstanding notice or
order from the City, including any notice of violation or any outstanding
notice to make corrections to the minimum standards of the Codified Ordinances
of Cleveland, Ohio 1976, applicable City rules and regulations, the Revised
Code, including the Ohio Building Code, or any outstanding notice to demolish
and remove. No buyer or grantee, by land contract or otherwise, shall obtain
any interest in any structure or building without obtaining from the seller,
prior to sale, the documents described above.
         B.   No person, agent, firm or corporation acting in the capacity of
an escrow agent in any real estate transaction involving the sale of a
structure or building situated in the City, shall disburse any funds unless the
provisions of this division have been met.
         C.   Any buyer or grantee, by land contract or otherwise, of a
structure or building, with the exception of those properties required to be
registered under Chapter
3106, shall begin at the date of transfer to comply with any notice or order
obtained or to be obtained under this division and, within ten (10) days of the
date of transfer, shall notify the Director, in writing, of the actions that
will be taken to comply. If the grantee fails to provide a written plan, or to
comply with the notice, within ten days, the grantee shall be in violation of
Section
3103.25(e). If the Director considers the written plan to be acceptable, he or
she shall notify the grantee and the grantee shall be bound by the written plan
as an extension of time under the notice and shall be in violation of Section
3103.25(e) if the violations are not corrected by the time set forth in the
written plan. If the Director considers the written plan to be unacceptable, he
or she shall issue to the grantee a notice with dates for compliance.
   (f)   Vacating Buildings and Prohibiting Use. The Director may also require
in the notice issued under division (e)(1) of this section that the building,
structure or a portion of those be vacated, not be reoccupied, or used until
the specified repairs and improvements are completed, inspected, and approved
by the Director. The Director may cause to be posted at each entrance to the
building or structure a notice as follows: “THIS STRUCTURE IS IN A DANGEROUS
CONDITION AND HAS BEEN CONDEMNED AND ITS USE HAS BEEN PROHIBITED BY THE
DIRECTOR OF BUILDING AND HOUSING.” The notice shall remain posted until the
required corrections are made or demolition is completed. No person shall
remove the notice without written permission of the Director, nor shall any
person use or enter the building or structure except for the purpose of making
the required corrections or demolishing or effectively boarding the building or
structure, or securing the structure under division (d)(4) of this section.
   (g)   Right to Appeal. The owner, agent or person in control shall have a
right to appeal from the notice and decision of the Director as provided in
this section and appear before the Board of Building Standards and Building
Appeals at a specified time and place to show cause why he or she should not
comply with the notice. Any notice served by the Director shall automatically
become a final order if a written notice of appeal before the Board is not
filed in the office of the Board within the time set forth in the notice from
the Director. In the absence of an appeal, all actions taken shall constitute a
valid exercise of the police powers of the City of Cleveland.
   (h)   Noncompliance with Notice.
      (1)   Director Authorized to Demolish, Remove, or Abate. In case the
owner, agent or person in control fails, neglects or refuses to comply with the
notice to repair or rehabilitate, or to demolish and remove a public nuisance
or unsafe building, structure or a portion of those, the Director may take
appropriate action to demolish and remove an unsafe structure or to remove or
abate any condition that is defined as a nuisance under this chapter.
      (2)   Action by Director of Law. The Director may advise the Director of
Law of the facts in the case, who may institute appropriate action in the court
to cause correction of the violations and defects, or demolition and removal,
or effective boarding of the building or structure pending rehabilitation.
      (3)   Rehabilitation Permits Not Bar to Director’s Action to Abate. The
securing of rehabilitation permits for the building or structure shall not in
and of itself bar the Director from taking action to abate the nuisance.
      (4)   Effective Boarding by Director. The Director may, with respect to
any condemned structure, also take appropriate action to effectively board the
structure, or to secure it under division (d)(4) of this section. The Director
shall specifically state in writing his or her findings with respect to the
structure, and shall determine whether to secure or to effectively board, based
on factors which may include the following: the distance of the structure from
neighboring structures, the type of structure, the extent to which the
structure is secured, the likelihood of vandalism or arson, the extent of the
deterioration, the economic likelihood of eventual rehabilitation of the
structure, or cost of securing or effectively boarding the structure.
      (5)   Failure to Comply with Notice. In case the owner, agent or person
in control fails, neglects or refuses to comply with the notice to repair or
rehabilitate, or to demolish and remove a public nuisance or unsafe building,
structure or a portion of those, or to remove or abate any other condition that
is defined as a nuisance under this chapter, the Director may take appropriate
action to take repair or maintenance measures or cause utility services to be
shut-off under Section
3103.091 or to otherwise abate the public nuisance. The Director shall
specifically state in writing the findings with respect to the structure, and
shall determine whether to perform repair or maintenance based on factors which
may include the following: the distance of the structure from neighboring
structures, the type of structure, the extent of deterioration, the likelihood
of vandalism or arson, the economic likelihood of eventual complete
rehabilitation of the structure, the cost of repair or maintenance.
      (6)   Notice of Intent to Demolish and Remove or Repair. Except as
provided in division (1) of this section, the Director shall give written
notice as provided in this section to the owner, agent, or person in control,
mortgagee of record and lien holders of record of the City's intention to
demolish and remove or repair the unsafe building or structure at least thirty
(30) days before the intended action by the City. The notice shall include a
copy of the violation notice. A condemned structure, once effectively boarded
by the owner pending rehabilitation that later becomes open to entry, upon a
finding by the Director that the structure can no longer be effectively
boarded, may then be demolished and removed, subject to the Director giving
written notice as stated in this division (h)(6).
   (i)   Junk Motor Vehicle Removal.
      (1)   Notice. The Director shall send written notice, by certified mail
with return receipt requested, to the person having the right of possession of
the property on which a junk motor vehicle, as defined in this chapter, is
left. This notice shall notify the person having right of possession of the
property that within ten (10) days of mailing of the notice, the junk motor
vehicle either shall be covered by being housed in a garage or other suitable
structure or removed from the property. The notice shall also be posted in a
conspicuous place on the property.
      (2)   Director Authorized to Remove Junk Motor Vehicles. The Director is
authorized to provide for and order the removal of a junk motor vehicle when
the junk motor vehicle has not been either covered by being housed in a garage
or other suitable structure or removed from the property, within ten (10) days
of the date of mailing and posting of the notice as set forth above.
   (j)   Cases of Emergency. In cases of emergency that, in the opinion of the
Director, involve immediate danger to human life or health, the Director shall
promptly cause the building, structure or a portion of those to be made safe or
removed. For this purpose he or she may at once enter the structure or land on
which it stands, or any abutting land or structure, with assistance and at the
cost as he or she deems necessary. He or she may request the Director of Public
Safety to enforce the orders he or she gives that are necessary to cause the
building, structure or a portion of those to be made safe or removed. The
Director of Public Safety has the authority to enforce the orders. He or she
may order adjacent structures and premises to be vacated, and protect the
public by an appropriate fence or other means as may be necessary, and for this
purpose may close a public or private way.
   (k)   Costs to Be Paid by Property Owner.
      (1)   Any and all expenses or costs, including but not limited to
attorneys fees, costs of inspection, administrative staff and support staff,
property maintenance costs, court costs, title search fees, process server
fees, skip tracing expenses, and costs of collection or prosecution, including
discovery and deposition expenses, incurred under this section relating to the
demolition, repair, alteration, securing or boarding of a building or structure
or for abating any other nuisance shall be paid by the owner of such building
or structure, except when such expenses or costs are incurred with respect to a
government or school building owned by a governmental entity or political
subdivision and are funded by federal money.
      (2)    Any and all owners of a building or structure, who appear in the
chain of title from the time of receipt of a notice of condemnation until
demolition of the building or structure, shall be jointly and severally
responsible for all costs and expenses incurred relating to the demolition and
all costs and expenses of prosecution or collection related thereto. In the
case of a junk motor vehicle, any and all expenses or costs incurred under this
section to remove the vehicle shall be paid by the person having the right of
possession of the premises where the vehicle is located.
      (3)   Whenever an inspection is made after the compliance date stated on
a Notice of Violation of the Building Code, the Housing Code, or the Zoning
Code or after a compliance date determined by a court of competent jurisdiction
to determine whether the violation has been remedied and the violation has not
been remedied, or an additional permit is obtained for work previously
permitted and the original permit has expired or was appropriately voided, a
fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be charged for each inspection,
except that this fee shall not apply to one (1) family and two (2) family
owner-occupied dwelling structures.
      (4)   If within thirty (30) days from the date the Director of Building
and Housing sends a statement of charges and costs incurred to the last known
address of the property owner or the tax mailing address listed at the Cuyahoga
County Recorder’s office and its successor in interest as the custodian of the
real property tax records for Cuyahoga County, the owner fails to pay for the
costs of removal, repair, alteration, securing or boarding or of inspections of
violations that have not been remedied, or the person having possession fails
to pay for the cost of removing a junk vehicle, the Director may certify the
amount to the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses, including collection
agency fees. The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses may make written
return to the County Auditor of the action under this section with a statement
of the charges for services, the amount paid for the performing of labor and a
proper description of the premises. Certification to the County Auditor is for
the purpose of making expenses and costs a lien upon the lands, to be collected
as other taxes and returned to the City with the General Fund, with special
accounting under RC 715.261.
      (5)   Notwithstanding the method of collection set forth in this
division, the Director of Law, in the Director’s sole discretion, may take any
action necessary to collect the costs of demolition, boarding, or other
nuisance abatement from the owner or other responsible party, including but not
limited to filing of legal proceedings, referring the amount due to outside
counsel by the Law Director for collection action, including filing civil
complaints, and initiating post judgment execution actions.
(Ord. No. 388-2024. Passed 4-1-24, eff. 4-3-24)
§ 3103.091 Utility Shut-Off in Vacant and Unsafe Structures
   (a)   Any structure determined by the Director of Building and Housing to be
vacant and unsafe as defined in Section
3103.09 and for which utility service, including gas, electric and water, or
other utility as identified by the Director of Building and Housing, has not
been shut-off poses an immediate risk of harm from explosion, fire, or flooding
and is therefore declared to be a nuisance which shall be abated by shut-off of
all utility service.
   (b)   When notified by the Director or his or her designee, no Utility shall
fail to shut-off its service to any vacant and unsafe structure within ten (10)
calendar days of receipt of written notice. Notice shall be served on the
Utility by facsimile, e-mail, or certified mail. The handing of the notice to
the person designated to receive the notice shall be deemed actual notice and
is legal and valid service and no other form of service is necessary. It shall
be the responsibility of the Utility to designate a person to receive the
notice provided for in this section. Beginning June 1, 2008, and as often as
necessary to ensure that the City has current information, the Utility shall
provide to the Director the name, address, telephone number, fax number, and
email address of the person designated to receive City notices.
   (c)   No later than two (2) business days following the utility service
shut-off, the Utility shall notify the Director of the date and time that the
Utility shut-off the utility service. The notice will be in the form requested
by the Director.
   (d)   For purposes of this section:
      (1)   “Utility” means any company, in the business of providing
electrical, water, gas, telephone, cable, or other utility service to a
building or structure.
      (2)   “Vacant” means that no person actually and legally resides in any
part of the structure or that no person conducts a lawful business in any part
of the structure.
      (3)   “Shut-off” means to stop the flow of gas, electricity, water or
other utility service from entering the premises. For underground utilities,
shut-off shall be accomplished by disconnecting the service at the street and
for overhead utilities, disconnection shall be at the pole.
   (e)   In the event of any actual or threatened violation of this section or
an emergency situation, the Director of Law, in addition to other remedies
provided by law, may institute proper suit in equity or at law to prevent or
terminate such violation or remedy such situation.
   (f)   The Director may promulgate rules and regulations to enforce this
section.
(Ord. No. 835-10. Passed 8-18-10, eff. 8-20-10)
§ 3103.092 Prohibiting Corporations from Owning or Transferring Real Property
Without Registering with the Ohio Secretary of State.
   (a)   No corporation, partnership, limited-liability company or other
business entity, whether domestic or foreign, shall buy, own, sell, or transfer
real property in the City of Cleveland without filing articles of incorporation
and identifying a statutory agent, filing articles of organization and
identifying a statutory agent, or being licensed by the Ohio Secretary of State
and identifying a statutory agent in accordance with RC Chapters 1701, 1702,
1703 and 1705.
   (b)   No officer of a corporation, partnership, limited-liability company or
any other business entity shall transact business to buy, own, sell or transfer
real property in the City of Cleveland unless the business entity has filed
articles of incorporation and identified a statutory agent, filed articles of
organization and identified a statutory agent, or been licensed by the Ohio
Secretary of State and identified a statutory agent in accordance with RC
Chapters 1701, 1702, 1703 and 1705.
   (c)   Any corporation, partnership limited-liability company or any other
business entity or officer who fails to comply with the requirements of
divisions (a) and (b) of this section is in violation of this chapter and shall
be charged as an organization or individual with a first degree misdemeanor.
Each property bought, owned, sold or transferred by a business entity that is
not in compliance with these requirements is a separate violation.
(Ord. No. 1520-11. Passed 11-14-11, eff. 11-16-11)
§ 3103.10 Abandoned Service Stations
   (a)   If any service station becomes abandoned, such service station shall
be presumed to be a nuisance adversely affecting or endangering surrounding
property values and to be detrimental to the public health, safety,
convenience, comfort, property or general welfare of the City and shall be
abated. For purposes of this section, an “abandoned service station” is defined
as a closed service station which has been inoperative for at least three (3)
consecutive months.
   (b)   Whenever any service station closes or discontinues operations for
thirty (30) or more days then the owner shall give written notice to the
Commissioner setting forth therein the location of the closed service station,
the date of closure and the name and address of the owner and of the lessee, if
any.
   (c)   The owner or lessee of a closed service station shall at all times
from and after the closure thereof maintain the service station premises in a
neat, clean and safe condition, cutting all grass and removing all rubbish,
refuse and weeds, in accordance with the provisions of the Codified Ordinances.
If glass windows are broken then such glass shall be promptly replaced or the
window shall be boarded up and painted in a manner satisfactory to the
Commissioner.
   (d)   The parking of motor vehicles on closed service station premises shall
be prohibited, and the owner or lessee shall maintain and display in the window
of service station building or elsewhere on the premises in a conspicuous place
a sign of at least ten (10) square feet in area notifying the public that
parking is prohibited. The owner or lessee of a closed service station shall,
within seven (7) days after the closure thereof, erect and maintain a physical
barrier which effectively blocks access to the service station premises and
prevents the parking of vehicles thereon.
   (e)   Whenever the Commissioner finds any closed service station to be an
abandoned service station within the meaning of this section, he or she shall
give notice in the same manner as service of summons in civil cases or by
certified mail addressed to the owner at his or her last known address or at
the address to which tax bills are sent and to the lessee, if any, directing
the owner and lessee within sixty (60) days of issuance of such notice to abate
the nuisance caused by such abandonment in conformity with the provisions of
this section as follows:
      (1)   By reopening the service station and continuing the operation
thereof for a period of not less than ninety (90) consecutive days; or
      (2)   By converting the service station to a use and occupancy permitted
under the Zoning and Building Codes; or
      (3)   By razing all structures on the premises including pump islands,
poles and signs, and remove or inert all flammable liquid storage tanks, and
remove all debris and leave the premises in a clean, orderly and safe
condition.
   (f)   In any event, if the service station is not reopened for operation
within sixty (60) days of issuance by the Commissioner of the notice to abate
the nuisance caused by the abandonment of such station as provided for in
subsection (e) hereof, then all signs, pumps and poles shall be removed and all
flammable liquid storage tanks shall be removed or abandoned in place in
accordance with accepted safe practice as prescribed by the National Fire
Protection Association in Appendix C to NFiPA Standard No. 30 entitled
“Flammable and Combustible Liquids Code”, under the supervision of the City
Division of Fire. All holes and depressions shall be filled to the grade level
of the lot.
   (g)   The owner or lessee may, not less than ten (10) days prior to the
expiration of the sixty (60) day compliance date, make written application to
the Commissioner for a ninety (90) day extension of time for razing the service
station building, and provided that the owner or lessee has complied with the
foregoing provisions of this section during the period following the closure of
the service station, the Commissioner for good cause shown may grant such
extension. In like manner the owner or lessee may, not less than ten (10) days
prior to the expiration of the initial ninety (90) day extension period, apply
for an additional ninety (90) day extension of time for razing the service
station building and provided that the owner or lessee has complied with the
foregoing provisions of this section during the period following the closure of
the service station, the Commissioner may grant such additional extension for
good cause shown. For purposes of this section, good cause for granting any
such extension of time shall be a showing that there is a reasonable
possibility that the service station premises will be altered, adapted and used
for some other permitted business use, or any showing, which in the judgment of
the Commissioner is deemed good and sufficient reason for the granting of such
extension.
   (h)   Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any owner or lessee to comply
with the provisions of this section after receipt of the aforesaid notice to
abate the nuisance caused by any abandoned service station, the Commissioner
shall at the expense of the owner take such action as may be necessary or
appropriate to abate such nuisance.
   (i)   If Council declares that an emergency curtailing the operation of
motor vehicles exists in that a state of general economic depression exists,
then the provisions of this section do not apply.
§ 3103.11 Restraining Order
   Whenever any person, firm or corporation fails, neglects or refuses to
comply with a stop order issued under the provisions of Section
3103.07, or fails, neglects or refuses to comply with a notice to repair,
rehabilitate or demolish a building or other structure declared unsafe under
the provisions of Section
3103.09, and whenever any building or other structure is used or occupied so as
to be in violation of, or not in conformity with, any provision of OBBC or this
Building Code, the Commissioner or any other administrative officer having
jurisdiction may, in his or her discretion, through the Director of Law,
institute an appropriate action at law or in equity to restrain the execution
of work in violation of this Building Code, to compel the removal of work
executed in violation of this Building Code, and to prevent the occupation or
use of such building or other structure.
§ 3103.111 Ticketing by Employees of the Department of Public Service
   In addition to any other means of enforcement provided for in these Codified
Ordinances, the Director of Public Service and any employee in the Division of
Streets serving in the capacity of foreman or above, when commissioned by the
Director of Public Safety as special police, may enforce the minor misdemeanor
offense contained in division (a) of Section
3101.11 through the issuance of citations in accordance with Rule 4.1 of the
Rules of Criminal Procedure.
(Ord. No. 1424-99. Passed 11-29-99, eff. 12-6-99)
§ 3103.12 Requirements Not Covered by Code
   Any requirement necessary for the strength or stability of an existing or
proposed building or structure, or for the safety or health of the occupants
thereof, not specifically covered by OBBC or this Building Code, or not readily
interpretable from the provisions of this Building Code, shall be determined by
the Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals. Any questions regarding
such requirement shall be referred to the Board.
§ 3103.13 Alternate Materials and Construction
   Alternate materials and methods of construction may be used even though not
specifically authorized by OBBC or this Building Code, provided such alternate
has been approved by the Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals.
Materials and constructions which have been approved by the Board shall be used
and installed in accordance with the terms of approval.
§ 3103.14 Re-Use of Used Materials
   Used materials shall be re-used only when approved for re-use by the
Commissioner. The Commissioner may require tests to determine the strength and
suitability of such materials, and may prescribe the maximum allowable stress
and other conditions under which such materials may be re-used.
§ 3103.15 Tests of Materials or Methods
   (a)   Whenever there is insufficient evidence that any material or
construction authorized by OBBC or this Building Code conforms to the
requirements of this Building Code, or that any material or construction
authorized or approved by the Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals
conforms to the terms of authorization or approval given by the Board, the
Commissioner may require tests as proof of compliance to be made at the expense
of the owner by an approved agency.
   (b)   Tests shall be made in accordance with generally recognized standards
for the material or construction in question, but in the absence of such
standards the Board shall specify the test procedure. Duly authenticated tests
by a competent person or laboratory may be accepted by the Commissioner in lieu
of tests made under the Commissioner’s supervision.
   (c)   Copies of the results of all such tests shall be kept on file in the
office of the Commissioner for a period of not less than five (5) years after
the acceptance of the structure or materials or assembly of materials.
   (d)   The Commissioner may require tests to be repeated if at any time there
is reason to believe that the material or construction no longer conforms to
the requirements on which its approval was based.
§ 3103.16 Prohibition of Urea Formaldehyde Foam Insulation
   No person shall sell or install urea formaldehyde foam insulation within the
City.
§ 3103.17 Prefabricated Assemblies
   (a)   No provision of this Building Code shall be interpreted to prohibit or
prevent the use of assemblies prefabricated off the site or at the site of
construction, provided such assemblies conform to the provisions of OBBC or
this Building Code or to the terms of an approval given by the Board of
Building Standards and Building Appeals.
   (b)   Where the component parts of prefabricated assemblies are not readily
accessible to inspection at the site, the Commissioner may accept certification
that the assembly as installed at the site is identical with specimens upon
which approval was based. If mechanical and electrical equipment are so
installed as not to be readily accessible to inspection at the site,
certification may be required that such equipment complies with applicable laws
and ordinances, or the terms and conditions upon which approval was based.
§ 3103.18 Exceptions and Variances
   The Commissioner shall have no power to allow any exception or variance from
the provisions of this Building Code beyond the extent permitted by Section
3103.01, or from any rule, regulation, approval, determination or order of the
Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals, or from any determination or
order of the Board of Zoning Appeals.
§ 3103.19 Board of Zoning Appeals Jurisdiction
   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall be constituted and shall have jurisdiction
as defined in the Charter and Chapter
329 of the Zoning Code.
   Notwithstanding any other provision in the Codified Ordinances, the Board of
Zoning Appeals shall hear and decide all appeals from decisions of the
Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses concerning the refusal to issue or the
revocation or suspension of a license, except when such decision is based upon
the structural soundness of the place of business licensed or for which license
application has been made, or relates to the licensing of any persons to engage
in any of the trades or occupations for which a license is required under the
provisions of the Building Code, such as plumber or electrician.
§ 3103.20 Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals; Duties and
Procedure
   (a)   Membership and Jurisdiction. The Board of Building Standards and
Building Appeals shall be constituted and shall have jurisdiction as defined in
the Charter.
   (b)   Meetings.
      (1)   Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the Chairperson,
and at such other times as the Board may determine. The Chairperson, or in his
or her absence the acting chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the
attendance of witnesses. All hearings before the Board shall be open to the
public, and shall be before at least three (3) members of the Board or their
alternates, who shall constitute a quorum. In varying the application of any
provision of the Building Code or of any rule or regulation coming under the
jurisdiction of the Board, and in modifying or reversing any order of the
Director or other administrative officer or agency, affirmative votes of three
(3) members or their alternates acting thereon in public hearing shall be
required.
      (2)   The Board shall keep a detailed record of its proceedings, which
shall set forth the reasons for its decisions, the vote of each member or
alternate participating therein, the absence of a member, and any failure of a
member or alternate to vote. Such record shall be available to the public, and
an abstract thereof shall be published in the City Record.
      (3)   No member of the Board or his or her alternate shall act in a case
in which he or she has financial or personal interest.
   (c)   Publication of Rules and Regulations and Decisions.
      (1)   Every rule or regulation, and every amendment or repeal thereof,
and every order, requirement, decision or determination of the Board shall
immediately be filed in the office of the Board, and the office of the Director
and in the office of any other administrative official or agency directly
affected thereby, and shall be open to public inspection. When action has been
taken upon an appeal, a certified copy of the Board’s decision shall be sent by
mail or otherwise to the appellant.
      (2)   The Board shall publish in the City Record every order,
requirement, decision and determination of the Board and the reasons therefor
whenever it deems it practical to do so; and such other matters as the Board
may deem advisable to publish.
      (3)   At least ten (10) days’ notice of intention to adopt, amend or
repeal any rule or regulation shall be given by publication in the City Record,
and a public hearing shall be held before any action is taken thereon. The
adopted rules, regulations and amendments, and changes thereof, shall be
published in the City Record and shall take effect on the date set therefor by
the Board but not less than twenty (20) days after publication in the City
Record.
   (d)   Inspections. Any member of the Board, or any officer or employee of
the City, when authorized in writing by the Chairperson of the Board, and upon
presentation of proper credentials, may at any time, enter, inspect and examine
any premises, buildings or structures for the purpose of carrying out the
duties of the Board, and shall report his or her findings in writing to the
Board.
   (e)   Procedure on Appeals.
      (1)   An appeal may be made by any person aggrieved, or by the head of
any department or division of the City.
      (2)   Such appeal shall be made within thirty (30) days after the
decision from which appeal is taken is rendered, by filing with the officer or
agency from whose decision the appeal is taken, and with the Board, a notice of
appeal specifying the grounds thereof. However, in the case of a dangerous or
unsafe condition, the administrative officer having jurisdiction may, in his or
her order, limit the time for such appeal to a shorter period. The officer or
agency from whose decision the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the
Board all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from
was taken.
      (3)   An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from, unless the officer or agency from whom the appeal is taken shall
file with the Board, after the notice of appeal has been filed with the officer
or agency, a certificate, a copy of which shall forthwith be mailed to the
appellant at the address stated in the notice of appeal, that, by reason of
facts stated in the certificate, a stay would in the officer’s or agency’s
opinion, cause immediate peril to life or property, in which case proceedings
shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted
by the Board, or by a court of competent jurisdiction upon application, and
upon notice to the officer or agency from whom the appeal is taken, and on due
cause shown.
      (4)   The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of appeals
and give due notice thereof to the parties, and decide the same within a
reasonable time. At the hearing any party may appear in person, or by agent or
attorney.
   (f)   Approval of Materials and Types of Construction.
      (1)   Approval by the Board of any material, type of construction,
appliance, device or appurtenance proposed for use pursuant to this Building
Code shall be given upon acceptable evidence, assembled and submitted by the
applicant, that such material, type of construction, appliance, device or
appurtenance conforms to the applicable requirements of this Building Code or,
where no specific requirements apply, to the intent and purpose of this
Building Code. Such evidence, or a summary thereof, shall be included in the
records of the Board and be available for public inspection.
      (2)   Any tests required by the Board in acting upon any application for
approval of any material, type of construction, device or appliance proposed
for use pursuant to this Building Code shall be made at the expense of the
applicant.
      (3)   The Board shall maintain an up-to-date list of approvals. Such list
shall be available for public inspections, and mimeographed or other
reproductions of such list shall be prepared and made available to the public
at intervals not exceeding one (1) year.
   (g)   Decisions.
      (1)   The Board shall in every case reach a decision without unreasonable
or unnecessary delay.
      (2)   Whenever any decision of the Board reverses or modifies any order,
requirement, decision or determination of any administrative officer or agency,
or, in connection therewith, varies or modifies any provision of this Building
Code, such administrative officer or agency shall take action immediately in
accordance with such decision.
      (3)   The City of Cleveland or a person aggrieved by a decision of the
Board may, within ten (10) days after the posting or publication of such
decision, apply to the appropriate court to correct errors of law in such
decision.
   (h)   Reports. The Board shall annually, not later than January 31, submit a
report to Council covering the work of the Board during the preceding year, and
shall incorporate in such report its recommendations as to desirable amendments
to the Building Code.
(Ord. No. 1238-06. Passed 8-9-06, eff. 8-16-06)
§ 3103.21 Board Hearing and Time Extension Fees
   When submitting an application for a hearing before the Board of Building
Standards and Building Appeals, the application shall be accompanied by fee
payment in full as follows:
 
Type Hearing                                                      Fee
Owner occupied single-family dwelling appeal                      $15.00
Single-family (non-owner-occupied) 2and 3 family dwelling appeals $30.00
Other type building appeals                                       $130.00
Product approvals and any other appeals                           $65.00
Time extension appeal                                             $20.00
 
(Ord. No. 2393-02. Passed 2-3-03, eff. 2-3-03)
§ 3103.22 Other Legal Action
   The imposition of any penalty shall not preclude the Director of Law from
instituting an appropriate action or proceeding in a court of proper
jurisdiction to prevent an unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use; or to restrain, correct or
abate a violation, or to prevent the occupancy of a building, structure, or
premises, or to prevent an illegal act, conduct, business, or use, in or about
any premises, or to require compliance with provisions of OBBC or this Building
Code or other applicable laws, ordinances, rules or regulations, or the orders
or determinations of the Commissioner, the Board of Zoning Appeals or the Board
of Building Standards and Building Appeals.
§ 3103.23 Illegal Conversion of Residential Occupancy Buildings
   (a)   No owner, vendee in possession, mortgagees or receiver in possession,
lessee or joint lessee of the whole thereof, nor shall any other person, firm
or corporation control, maintain or conduct any residential occupancy building
which has been illegally converted without the required permit issued by the
Commissioner of Building and Housing and which is used or occupied without a
Certificate of Occupancy issued by the Commissioner.
   (b)   No contractor shall illegally convert any residential occupancy
building or any part thereof by performing or causing to be performed any
construction, repairs or alterations in or for such building without first
obtaining the required permit issued by the Commissioner of Building and
Housing or perform or cause to be performed in any residential occupancy
building or any part thereof, any construction, repairs or alterations contrary
to the drawings, plans or permit applications as approved by the Division of
Building and Housing in issuing the required permit.
   As used in this section, “contractor” means any person who undertakes to or
offers to undertake to or purports to have the capacity to undertake to or
submits a bid to, or does himself or herself or by or through others,
construct, repair, alter, add to, subtract from, or improve any building or
other structure or any part thereof. The term contractor includes
subcontractor.
§ 3103.24 Rules and Regulations
   (a)   The Director of Community Development is hereby authorized to adopt
such written rules and regulations as may be necessary for the proper
interpretations and enforcement of this Building Code. Such rules and
regulations shall not conflict with or waive any of the provisions of this
Building Code or of these Codified Ordinances. Such rules and regulations shall
be submitted to the Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals for
approval, and no such rule or regulation shall be adopted without such
approval. Failure of the Board to approve, disapprove or modify such rules and
regulations within ninety (90) days after submission shall be deemed to
constitute approval hereof.
   (b)   Such rules and regulations, upon adoption, shall be published in the
City Record for two (2) consecutive weeks, and shall be in effect on and from
fifteen (15) days after the second publication therein. Such rules and
regulations shall have the force and effect of this Building Code, and shall
continue in effect until revoked by the Director with the approval of the Board
or by action of Council.
§ 3103.25 Violations Generally
   (a)   No person shall fail to comply with any provision of OBC or this
Building Code or any code adopted therein or any rule or regulation promulgated
thereunder or fail to comply with any lawful order issued thereunder, including
but not limited to any notice to repair, rehabilitate or demolish a building or
other structure or fail to comply with a notice requiring the abatement or
removal of a violation or requiring compliance with any provision of this
Building Code or cause or permit the same to be done.
   (b)   No person shall fail or neglect promptly to notify the administrative
officer having jurisdiction that work under a permit issued pursuant to the
provisions of OBC or this Building Code has been begun.
   (c)   No person shall perform any work or install any appliance, device or
equipment without first obtaining the permit required therefor under OBC or
this Building Code; nor refuse, neglect or fail to obtain any permit required
under OBC or this Building Code for the storage, use or handling of a hazardous
substance; nor block, wedge or otherwise hold in an open position any self-
closing door required under OBC or this Building Code to be maintained in a
normally closed position.
   (d)   No person shall perpetrate a fraud or misrepresent a material fact by
reason of which any permit or approval required under OBC or this Building Code
is obtained; nor pursue any trade or business or perform any work or service
for which a license, certificate of registration or certificate of
qualification is required under OBC or this Building Code without possessing
such license or certificate.
   (e)   No person shall fail to comply with any stop work order issued under
the provisions of this Building Code; nor refuse, neglect or fail to comply
with a notice to repair, rehabilitate or demolish a building or other structure
declared to be unsafe under the provisions of this Building Code; nor maintain
a use or occupancy prohibited by this Building Code; nor refuse, neglect or
fail to maintain stair enclosures, stairways, fire escapes, exit passageways or
other required means of egress in a safe and usable condition as required by
OBC or this Building Code.
   (f)   No person shall refuse, neglect or fail to comply with a written order
issued under the provisions of this Building Code requiring the immediate
abatement of a dangerous condition when immediate compliance with such order is
essential for the public health, safety and welfare.
   (g)   No person shall convert any residential occupancy building or any part
thereof by performing or causing to be performed any construction, repair or
alteration in or for such building without first obtaining the required permit.
   (h)   No person shall fail to install, repair, or alter material or
equipment in a workmanlike manner. For the purposes of this Building Code,
workmanlike manner shall be defined as work that occurs in accordance with the
standards set forth in the latest edition of the “Residential Construction
Performance Guidelines for Professional Builders and Remodelers” as published
by the National Association of Home Builders.
   (i)   No person shall fail to perform work in a workmanlike manner pursuant
to division (h) of Section
3103.25.
   (j)   No person shall abandon work for more than ninety (90) days in a
substantially incomplete state. For purposes of this Building Code, work that
is abandoned for more than ninety (90) days in a substantially incomplete state
shall be considered work that is not performed in a workmanlike manner pursuant
to division (h) of Section
3103.25.
(Ord. No. 1039-2023. Passed 2-5-24, eff. 2-6-24)
§ 3103.99 Penalty
   (a)   Whoever violates any provision of this Building Code for which no
other penalty is provided or any rule or regulation or order promulgated
thereunder, or any code adopted herein, or fails to comply with the lawful
order issued pursuant thereto is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
Each day during which noncompliance or a violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
   (b)   Whoever violates Sections
3103.10,
3103.091,
3105.01,
3105.02,
3105.05,
3109.11,
3125.01,
3101.11,
3113.03,
3113.10,
3113.16 or division (e) of Section
3101.10 as a first offense of those sections shall be guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. In addition to any other method of enforcement provided for in
this chapter, the above listed minor misdemeanors may be enforced by the
issuance of a citation in compliance with Rule 4.1 of the Ohio Rules of
Criminal Procedure.
   (c)   Organizations convicted of an offense shall be fined as provided by RC
2901.23 and 2929.31.
   (d)   Whoever violates Sections
3101.11,
3103.091,
3113.03,
3113.10,
3113.16 or division (e) of Section
3101.10 as a second offense of those sections shall be guilty of a fourth
degree misdemeanor. Whoever violates Sections
3101.11,
3103.091,
3113.03,
3113.10,
3113.16 or division (e) of Section
3101.10 as a third or subsequent offense of those sections shall be guilty of a
first degree misdemeanor.
   (e)   A court of competent jurisdiction may require whoever is convicted of
or pleads guilty to a violation of this Building Code, to pay to the City’s
Department of Building and Housing, the fee for inspection of violations that
have not been remedied, which fee is described in Sections
3103.09 and
3105.26, and the expenses or costs incurred under Section
3103.09 for the removal, repair, alteration, securing or boarding of a building
or structure and under Section
3103.091 for termination of utility services.
(Ord. No. 1112-A-07. Passed 6-2-08, eff. 6-2-08)
CHAPTER 3104 – CIVIL ENFORCEMENT
3104.01   Civil Enforcement System Established
3104.02   Civil Offenses
3104.03   Notice of Civil Offense and Civil Fine; Procedures
3104.04   Appeal
3104.05   Default
3104.06   Collection
3104.07   Rules and Regulations
3104.08   Definitions
3104.99   Civil Fines; Late Penalties
§ 3104.01 Civil Enforcement System Established
   (a)   Civil Enforcement System Established. The City of Cleveland hereby
adopts a civil enforcement system for the infractions made subject to a civil
fine by this chapter. This civil enforcement system imposes monetary liability
on the Responsible Parties.
   (b)   Liability Imposed. Each Responsible Party of a parcel at which an
infraction has occurred is liable to the City of Cleveland in the amounts
established in Section
3104.99. Responsible Parties shall be jointly and severally liable for the
civil offenses specified under this chapter.
   (c)   Noncriminal Offense; No Conviction. The infractions established by
this chapter are noncriminal. The imposition of liability upon the Responsible
Parties under this section shall not be deemed a conviction for any purpose.
   (d)   Other Costs and Penalties Not Abrogated. Nothing in this section shall
be construed as altering or limiting the effects of any other section of these
Codified Ordinances, the criminal penalties imposed by any such other section,
or the ability of the Director of Building and Housing, or such other officials
of the divisions of the City having jurisdiction, to enforce those sections.
(Ord. No. 1039-2023. Passed 2-5-24, eff. 2-6-24)
§ 3104.02 Civil Offenses
   In addition to any other means of enforcement provided for in these Codified
Ordinances, each of the following sections may be enforced through the issuance
of a Notice of Civil Offense to the Responsible Parties:
   1.   Section
337.23 Accessory Uses in Residence Districts
   2.   Section
337.231 Portable Storage Containers
   3.   Section
347.02 Restrictions on the Keeping of Farm Animals and Bees
   4.   Section
347.08 Regulations for Trash Areas and Refuse Containers
   5.   Section
347.10 Temporary Use Permits
   6.   Section
347.121 Hookah Lounges and Vapor Lounges
   7.   Section
349.02 Existing Off-Street Parking Facilities
   8.   Section
349.04 Required Parking Spaces
   9.   Section
349.13 Permitted Garages and Parking Space in Residence Districts
   10.   Section
357.13 Yard Encroachments Permitted
   11.   Section
357.14 Yard Encroachments Prohibited
   12.   Section
365.02 Non-Owner-Occupied Residential Rental Unit Registration Required;
Application for and Issuance of Certificate of Rental Registration; Certificate
of Approving Rental Occupancy; Revocation
   13.   Section
365.04 Lead-Safe Certification Required for Residential Rental Units Built
Before January 1, 1978
   14.   Section
369.08 Rubbish and Garbage Disposal
   15.   Section
369.13 General Maintenance Requirements
   16.   Section
369.14 Maintenance of Foundations
   17.   Section
369.15 Maintenance of Exterior Walls and Roof
   18.   Section
369.16 Maintenance of Interior Walls and Floors
   19.   Section
369.17 Infestation by Pests
   20.   Section
369.18 Exterior Property Areas
   21.   Section
369.19 Secondary or Appurtenant Structure
   22.   Section
371.03 Minimum Requirements for Fire-Protective Features
   23.   Section
371.05 Lighting of Public Hallways and Common Areas
   24.   Section
371.07 Rubbish and Garbage Disposal Facilities
   25.   Section
371.10 Sanitation Responsibilities of Owner and Occupant
   26.   Section
371.11 Required Heating Capacity
   27.   Section
371.13 Identification of Dwelling Units
   28.   Section
391.17 Maintenance
   29.   Section
392.02 Smoke Detection and Alarm Systems – Installation Required
   30.   Section
392.021 Carbon Monoxide Alarms; Installation Required in Rental Dwelling Units
   31.   Section
392.03 Testing, Inspection, and Notification
   32.   Section
392.04 Maintenance
   33.   Section
392.05 Tampering
   34.   Section
3101.10(e) Safety and Maintenance – Maintenance of Exterior Property Areas
   35.   Section
3101.11 Removal of Graffiti
   36.   Section
3103.09(f) Unsafe Structures and Exterior Property Nuisances; Violations and
Remedial Notices; Cost Recovery – Vacating Buildings and Prohibited Use
   37.   Section
3103.091 Utility Shut-Off in Vacant and Unsafe Structures
   38.   Section
3103.10 Abandoned Service Stations
   39.   Section
3103.25 Violations Generally
   40.   Section
3105.01 Permits Required; Exceptions
   41.   Section
3105.02 Permit Applications; Plans and Specifications
   42.   Section
3105.05 Plans Required at Work Site
   43.   Section
3106.02 Duties of Responsible Party
   44.   Section
3106.03 Vacant Building Registration Required
   45.   Section
3106.04 Vacant Building Inspection, Obligation to Correct Violations, and
Issuance of Certificate of Correction
   46.   Section
3106.06 Inspection Required for Transfer of Vacant Residential Property;
Correction Required Following Transfer
   47.   Section
3109.11 Retractable Awnings
   48.   Section
3125.01 Protection of Excavations
   49.   Section
3141.05 Responsibility of Owner
(Ord. No. 388-2024. Passed 4-1-24, eff. 4-3-24)
§ 3104.03 Notice of Civil Offense and Civil Fine; Procedures
   (a)   Any city officer or employee authorized to enforce the City’s
Building, Housing, Zoning, Health, or Fire Prevention Codes may issue a notice
of civil offense and civil fine to a Responsible Party.
   (b)   A notice of civil offense and civil fine shall:
      (1)   Identify the Owner, Operator, or Local Agent in Charge of the
premises;
      (2)   Indicate the offense or offenses charged, the civil fine, and date,
time, and location of the offense or offenses charged;
      (3)   Be signed, dated and attested by the issuing officer or employee;
      (4)   Advise the Responsible Party being charged that all available
collection remedies and costs of collection will be pursued in the event the
civil fine and other charges are not timely paid; and
      (5)   Advise the Responsible Party that failure to appeal the notice or
pay the costs imposed shall constitute a waiver of the right to contest the
notice and shall be considered an admission. The notice shall further state
that if the Notice of Civil Offense is not appealed or paid in that period,
then a default finding of civil liability shall be imposed upon respondents for
the costs established in Section
3104.99.
   (c)   The notice of civil offense shall be served upon the Responsible Party
charged by one or more of the following means:
      (1)   By personal delivery to the Responsible Party charged;
      (2)   By delivery to an adult at the address of the Responsible Party
charged;
      (3)   By posting a copy of the notice in a conspicuous location on the
real property where the violation occurred if the real property is owned or
occupied by the Responsible Party charged;
      (4)   By mail addressed to the Responsible Party charged at an address
shown on a public record identifying the Responsible Party being charged as the
owner, operator, or Local Agent in Charge of the real property to which the
offense relates. If mail service is attempted via mail with a “certificate of
mailing” or via certified or registered mail and the mail is not returned by
the postal service within 15 calendar days of mailing, the delivery of the
notice shall be presumed.
      (5)   In addition to divisions (c)(1) - (c)(4), service may be made by
publication electronically or once in a newspaper of general circulation in the
City.
(Ord. No. 1039-2023. Passed 2-5-24, eff. 2-6-24)
§ 3104.04 Appeal
   (a)   Any person who is potentially liable for the costs under this chapter
may appeal the imposition of liability to the Director of Building and Housing
or his or her designee, in the manner described in the Notice.
   (b)   The appeal shall be taken not later than thirty (30) days from the
date of issuance of the Notice. Failure to appeal the Notice or pay the costs
imposed within this time period shall constitute a waiver of the right to
contest the Notice and shall be considered an admission.
   (c)   Appeal – Process. The Director shall establish an administrative
appeal process for persons to appeal Notices issued under this chapter. The
administrative appeal process shall allow the appellant the right to present
appellant’s case in person at an administrative hearing, or submit evidence by
mail or electronically for an administrative review, including proof of
correction of the violations that are the subject of the Notice. The strict
rules of evidence applicable to courts of law shall not apply in any
administrative hearing or administrative review. The Notice charging the
offense shall constitute prima facie evidence that the offense identified in
the Notice occurred and that the Responsible Parties to whom the Notice was
mailed are liable to the City of Cleveland for the costs imposed by this
section. The decision of the Director shall be in writing following the
administrative hearing or administrative review.
   (d)   (1)   If the Director finds by a preponderance of evidence that an
appellant is liable under this chapter for the costs assessed, then the
Director shall deny the appeal and order the appellant to pay the costs
identified in the Notice.
      (2)   If the Director finds by a preponderance of evidence that an
appellant is liable under this chapter for the costs assessed but that there
are reasons for the commission of the infraction that mitigate the offense or
that the violations have been corrected, then the Director shall deny the
appeal and order the appellant to pay the costs identified in the Notice, but
may in the interest of equity reduce the costs assessed.
      (3)   If the Director finds by a preponderance of evidence that the
appellant is not liable under this chapter for the costs assessed, then the
Director shall grant the appeal and dismiss the Notice.
   (e)   Appeal of the Director’s Decision. Any person subject to an adverse
decision of the Director may appeal that decision to the Board of Building
Standards and Building Appeals. The notice of appeal shall be in writing and
shall be filed with the Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals within
thirty (30) days of the decision of the Director. The Board shall approve,
modify or annul the finding from which the appeal is taken.
(Ord. No. 1039-2023. Passed 2-5-24, eff. 2-6-24)
§ 3104.05 Default
   If a person who has been served with a notice of a civil offense fails to
timely pay the civil fine or appeal the Notice, or attend a requested appeal
hearing, the person is in default, and the civil fine as specified by Section
3104.99 is due.
(Ord. No. 1039-2023. Passed 2-5-24, eff. 2-6-24)
§ 3104.06 Collection
   The costs imposed by this chapter may be enforced and collected by means of
a civil action or any other means provided for in these Codified Ordinances or
the Ohio Revised Code. The costs imposed under this chapter may be recovered as
provided in RC 715.261, including certifying the costs and expense to the
County Auditor, to be placed on the property as a lien to be collected as other
taxes and returned to the City.
(Ord. No. 388-2024. Passed 4-1-24, eff. 4-3-24)
§ 3104.07 Rules and Regulations
   The Director may issue rules and regulations to carry out the provisions of
this chapter, which shall be effective thirty (30) days after their publication
in the City Record.
(Ord. No. 1039-2023. Passed 2-5-24, eff. 2-6-24)
§ 3104.08 Definitions
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   “Director” means the Director of Building and Housing and in the case
of appeals, the Director of Building and Housing or his or her designee.
   (b)   “Local Agent in Charge” shall have the same meaning as defined in
Section
365.01.
   (c)   “Operator” shall have the same meaning as defined in Section
363.11.
   (d)   “Owner” shall have the same meaning as defined in Section
363.12.
   (e)   “Responsible Party” and “Responsible Parties” mean the Owner,
Operator, and/or Local Agent in Charge.
(Ord. No. 1039-2023. Passed 2-5-24, eff. 2-6-24)
§ 3104.99 Civil Fines; Late Penalties
   (a)   The costs imposed by this section upon the Responsible Parties for the
commission of an infraction shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each
offense.
   (b)   If the costs established in division (a) remain unpaid thirty (30)
days after the Notice of Civil Offense is issued or thirty (30) days after the
conclusion of all appeals, an additional fine shall be assessed fifty dollars
($50.00).
(Ord. No. 1039-2023. Passed 2-5-24, eff. 2-6-24)
CHAPTER 3105 – PERMITS AND OCCUPANCY CERTIFICATES
3105.01   Permits Required; Exceptions
3105.02   Permit Applications; Plans and Specifications
3105.03   Permit Application Review; Plan Affidavit
3105.04   Permit Approval Procedure; Insurance and Bond
3105.05   Plans Required at Work Site
3105.06   Time Limit for Work Commencement and Suspension
3105.07   Professional Work Supervision; Completion Affidavit
3105.08   Special Foundation Permit
3105.09   Written Notice Prior to Commencing Work
3105.10   When Certificate of Occupancy is Required
3105.11   Issuance of Certificates of Occupancy
3105.12   Temporary Certificates
3105.13   Posting of Safe Floor Loads
3105.14   Posting of Number of Persons Permitted
3105.15   Maintaining Posted Certificates, Placards and Signs
3105.16   Payment of Permit Fees
3105.17   Payment for Water Used in Construction Work
3105.18   Calculating Aggregate Floor Area as Fee Basis
3105.19   Establishing Cost as Fee Basis
3105.20   Determining Value of Destroyed Parts
3105.21   Sign Measurement Standards
3105.22   Fee Payment Procedure
3105.23   Minimum Fee for Permit
3105.24   Refund of Permit Fees
3105.25   Schedule of Permit Fees
3105.26   Schedule of Inspection Fees
3105.27   Schedule of Certificate Fees
3105.28   Plan Examination Fee Schedule
3105.29   Festival and Carnival Permit Fees for Charitable Organizations
   Note: The legislative history of this chapter, except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 1116-A-85, passed
February 10, 1986.
Cross-reference:
   Demolition or moving permit, CO
3115.04
   Electrical wiring permits, CO
3137.05
   Elevator permits, CO
3141.03
   Gas piping permits, CO
3135.03
   HVAC permits, CO
3131.01
   Permit revocation, CO
3103.08
   Plumbing permits, CO
3133.02
   Refrigeration permits, CO
3139.04
   Right of entry and inspection, CO
3103.04,
3103.06,
3103.20
   Sign permits, CO
3113.03
   Stop work orders, CO
3103.07
§ 3105.01 Permits Required; Exceptions
   (a)   Except as provided in OAC 4101:2-1-13(B), no person, firm or
corporation shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move or demolish a
building or structure, or install any equipment or other appurtenances the
installation of which is regulated by this OBBC or Building Code, or cause the
same to be done, without first making application to the Commissioner and
obtaining a permit therefor unless OBBC or this Building Code specifically
provides that such work may be done without a permit.
   (b)   Separate application shall be made to the Commissioner and separate
permits obtained for electrical work, plumbing, elevators, moving stairways,
power operated dumbwaiters, heating devices and installations, mechanical
refrigeration systems, outdoor signs and display structures, and for such other
equipment and appurtenances for which separate permits are required by OBBC or
this Building Code, or by the rules for applications and permits issued by the
Commissioner.
   (c)   Separate applications shall be made to the Fire Chief and separate
permits obtained from the Chief for the storage, use or handling of
combustibles, hazardous chemicals, explosives, flammables, and other dangerous
substances, articles, compounds, or mixtures, and for the installation or
alteration of required fire alarm systems and required fire- extinguishing
equipment.
§ 3105.02 Permit Applications; Plans and Specifications
   (a)   Form.
      (1)   An application for a permit required under OBC or Section
3105.01 signed by the owner or his or her authorized agent, shall be filed with
the Commissioner on a form furnished by him or her and shall provide such
information as may reasonably be required by the Commissioner for an
intelligent understanding of the proposed work.
      (2)   When separate permits from the Fire Chief are required in
connection therewith, the applications for such separate permits shall be filed
with the Commissioner who shall promptly transmit such applications and the
relevant plans and specifications for action by the Division of Fire.
      (3)   If application is made by a person other than the owner in fee, the
Commissioner may require that it be accompanied by a duly verified affidavit of
the owner in fee or the person making the application, stating that the
proposed work is authorized by the owner in fee, and that the person making the
application is authorized to make such application.
      (4)   When separate permits from the Division of Water are required in
connection therewith, the application for a permit required under OBC or
Section
3105.01 shall be accompanied by a site plan. The Commissioner shall promptly
transmit such site plan to the Division of Water to determine the location of
any previously installed service connections and to make arrangements to plug
or cap such service connections pursuant to Section
531.07.
   (b)   Plans and Specifications.
      (1)   When required by the Commissioner, two (2) or more copies of plans
and specifications shall accompany each application. Plans shall be drawn to
scale with sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of the work
proposed. Such plans and specifications together shall contain information
sufficient to indicate that the work proposed will conform to the provisions of
this Building Code and all other applicable laws, ordinances, rules and
regulations. Such information shall be specific, and OBC or this Building Code
shall not be cited as a whole or a part, nor shall the term “legal” or its
equivalent, be used as a substitute for specific information. Each set of plans
and specifications shall give the address of the work and the name and address
of the owner and of the person who prepared them.
      (2)   The Commissioner may require a plot plan by a qualified surveyor
showing the topography of the site, and the location of the proposed building
or structure on the site or lot, and of buildings and structures on adjoining
property. He or she may also require details, computations, stress diagrams,
and other data necessary to describe the construction and basis for
calculations. (See Section
327.02(e) of the Zoning Code.)
      (3)   When plans contemplate structural changes or structural work
affecting public health or safety, the Commissioner may require that they shall
be prepared by and bear the seal of a registered architect or registered
professional engineer, and he or she may require that they be accompanied by an
affidavit of such registered architect or registered professional engineer
stating that he or she has supervised the preparation of the plans, and that to
the best of his or her knowledge and belief the structure, if built in
accordance with the plans, will conform to OBC and this Building Code, except
as specifically noted otherwise.
      (4)   When approved plans and specifications are not required, work shall
be installed in accordance with the material manufacturer’s installation
requirements for the conditions that exist and work shall be performed in the
manner intended.
(Ord. No. 2370-01. Passed 5-13-02, eff. 5-20-02)
§ 3105.03 Permit Application Review; Plan Affidavit
   (a)   The Commissioner shall examine or cause to be examined each
application for permit and the plans, specifications and computations, filed
therewith, and with the assistance of other departments and divisions of the
City having jurisdiction, shall ascertain by such examination whether the
construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of
this OBBC and Building Code and other pertinent laws, ordinances, rules and
regulations. When permits are required from other administrative officers or
agencies, he or she shall promptly transmit or cause to be transmitted all
pertinent data for action by such administrative officers or agencies, and
shall be the coordinating officer in the handling of such applications, plans,
specifications, data and permits.
   (b)   If the plans submitted conform to the laws as to egress, type of
construction, and general arrangement, and are accompanied by drawings showing
the structural design and by a statement that the plans and design conform to
the requirements of law as to strength, stresses, loads, and stability, and are
filed and sworn to by a registered architect or registered professional
engineer, and separate permits are secured as required by Section
3105.01, the Commissioner may without further examination accept such
affidavit; provided that the architect or engineer who made such affidavit
agrees to submit to the Commissioner on the completion of the building or other
structure, a certification that the structure has been erected in accordance
with the approved plans and the structural provision of OBBC and this Building
Code, and that all required inspections and approvals have been secured.
§ 3105.04 Permit Approval Procedure; Insurance and Bond
   (a)   Approval.
      (1)   The Commissioner and other administrative officers having
jurisdiction shall act upon an application for a permit without unreasonable or
unnecessary delay. If the administrative officer having jurisdiction is
satisfied that the work described in an application for permit and the plans
filed therewith conform to the requirements of OBBC and this Building Code and
other applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, he or she shall issue
a permit therefor to the applicant upon payment of the fee, if any, prescribed
by ordinance.
      (2)   When the administrative officer having jurisdiction issues a
permit, he or she shall endorse in writing or stamp on both sets of plans and
specifications “DRAWINGS ON WHICH PERMIT WAS ISSUED”. Such plans and
specifications shall not be changed, modified or altered in any manner affected
by this Building Code without authorization from the administrative officer
having jurisdiction, and all work shall be done in accordance with stamped
plans and specifications.
   (b)   Deposit or Bond. When any work is to be done beyond the street or
alley line or on or above public property which may cause the City to sustain
loss, damage or injury to public property, or to be put to expense in
correcting conditions resulting therefrom, the Director of Public Service may
require the person, firm or corporation proposing to do such work, or the owner
for whom such work is to be done, to post a deposit or furnish a bond in the
form determined by the Director of Law and in the amount determined by the
Director of Public Service, to indemnify the City against any costs that may be
incurred and any loss, damage, or injury that may be sustained by the City
because of such work, and as guarantee of compliance with OBBC and this
Building Code and other applicable law, ordinances, rules and regulations. Such
required deposit or bond shall be posted before any permit is issued for work
beyond the street or alley line or on or above public property.
   (c)   Amendments. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the filing of
amendments to an application, or to the plans and specifications accompanying
such application, at any time before the completion of the work. However, such
amendments shall be submitted and approved before any work proposed under such
amendment is begun. Such amendments, after approval, shall be filed with and
deemed a part of the original application.
   (d)   Disapproval. If the applications for a permit, or the plans and
specifications filed therewith, or the application for approval of an
amendment, describes work which does not conform to the requirements of OBBC
and this Building Code or other applicable laws, ordinances, rules or
regulations, or does not contain sufficient information, the administrative
officer having jurisdiction shall return the plans and specifications to the
applicant with his or her refusal to issue such permit or approval. When
requested by the applicant, such refusal shall be in writing, and shall contain
the reasons therefor.
§ 3105.05 Plans Required at Work Site
   One (1) set of stamped plans, specifications and computations shall be
retained by the administrative officer having jurisdiction and one (1) set of
stamped plans and specifications shall be returned to the applicant. The latter
set shall be kept at the site of the work at all times during which the work
authorized thereby is in progress and shall be open to inspection at all
reasonable times by the administrative officer or officers having jurisdiction
and their authorized representatives.
§ 3105.06 Time Limit for Work Commencement and Suspension
   (a)   A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the
work and shall not be construed as authority to violate, cancel, alter or set
aside any of the provisions of OBBC or of this Building Code, or other
applicable laws, ordinances, rules or regulations, nor shall such issuance of a
permit prevent the administrative officer having jurisdiction from thereafter
requiring a correction of errors in plans or in construction, or of violations
of OBBC or this Building Code or of other applicable laws, ordinances, rules or
regulations.
   (b)   Any permit issued for work not regulated by the OBBC shall become
invalid unless the work authorized by it shall have been commenced within three
(3) months after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is
suspended or abandoned for a period of six (6) months after the time the work
is commenced. However, for cause, one (1) or more extensions of time, for
periods not exceeding thirty (30) days each may be allowed in writing by the
administrative officer having jurisdiction.
   (c)   No person shall commence any work ordered by the Commissioner whether
due to a violation, defect or otherwise, without obtaining all permits required
by this Building Code to authorize such work. If not specified in the order of
the Commissioner, all such work shall be completed within thirty (30) days,
unless an extension for good cause is authorized in writing by the
Commissioner.
   (d)   Work requiring OBBC plan approval shall be as regulated in the OBBC.
Starting and completion times for permits resulting from an adjudication order
or violation notice shall be determined by the building official, taking into
account the nature and type of hazards present.
(Ord. No. 1267-89. Passed 5-8-89, eff. 5-9-89)
§ 3105.07 Professional Work Supervision; Completion Affidavit
   Whenever a permit is to be issued by the Commissioner in reliance upon an
affidavit, as provided in Section
3105.03(b), or whenever the work to be covered by a permit to be issued by the
Commissioner involves construction under conditions which, in the opinion of
the Commissioner, are hazardous or complex, the Commissioner shall require that
the architect or engineer who signed the affidavit or made the plans or
computations shall supervise such work, be responsible for its conformity with
the approved plans, and forthwith upon its completion make and file with the
Commissioner a written affidavit that the work has been done in conformity with
the approved plans and with the structural provisions of OBBC and this Building
Code. If such architect or engineer is not available, the owner shall employ in
his or her stead another registered architect or registered professional
engineer whose qualifications are approved by the Commissioner.
§ 3105.08 Special Foundation Permit
   When application for a permit to erect or enlarge a building has been filed,
and pending issuance of such permit, the Commissioner may, at his or her
discretion, issue a special permit for the foundations of such building. The
holder of such a special permit shall proceed at his or her own risk and
without assurance that a permit for the superstructure will be granted.
§ 3105.09 Written Notice Prior to Commencing Work
   No operations or use of premises requiring a permit shall be commenced until
the permit therefor has been obtained and is on hand at the site of the
operations or use. When work is to be done, not less than twelve (12) hours’
written notice of the commencement of such work shall be given to the
administrative officer having jurisdiction. Failure to give such notice shall
be a violation of this Building Code and shall subject the permit holder liable
to the penalty provided by Section
3103.99.
§ 3105.10 When Certificate of Occupancy is Required
   (a)   Housing Certificates. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be
deemed to require the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy by the
Commissioner of Building for any building or structure for which a Certificate
of Occupancy has been issued or is required to be issued by the Commissioner of
Housing under the authority of the Codified Ordinances or other applicable law
or regulation.
   (b)   New Premises. No new building or other structure or part thereof shall
be occupied and no previously unused premises shall be used or occupied until
after the Commissioner of Building has issued a Certificate of Occupancy
therefor.
   (c)   Change in Use or Occupancy; Additions, Extensions or Alterations.
      (1)   Whenever there is a change in the use or occupancy of a building or
other structure or premises or part thereof which new use or occupancy results
in reclassification of the building or other structure or premises or part
thereof, under a different occupancy or use classification of the Zoning Code
of the City, OBBC Chapter 4101:2-3, and or this Building Code, such building or
other structure or premises shall not be used or occupied until a Certificate
of Occupancy therefor is issued by the Commissioner.
      (2)   Whenever a building or other structure for which a Certificate of
Occupancy has not been previously issued is enlarged or altered, the use or
occupancy of such building or other structure, if not discontinued while work
was done, shall not be continued for more than thirty (30) days after
completion of the work, and if vacated while work was done, such building or
other structure shall not be used or occupied, until a Certificate of Occupancy
is issued by the Commissioner.
§ 3105.11 Issuance of Certificates of Occupancy
   (a)   Procedure. Application for a Certificate of Occupancy may be made by
the owner or his or her authorized representative on forms obtained from the
Commissioner.
   (b)   Contents of Certificate. When a building or structure is entitled
thereto, the Commissioner shall issue a Certificate of Occupancy. The
Certificate shall certify compliance with OBBC and this Building Code, and the
purpose for which the building or structure may be used in its several parts.
The Certificate of Occupancy shall specify: the use group in accordance with
the provision of OAC Chapter 4101:2-3; the type of construction as defined in
OAC Chapter 4101:2-4; the maximum live load on all floors as prescribed in OAC
Chapter 4101:2-9; the occupant load in the building and all parts thereof as
defined in OAC Chapters 4101:2-2 and 4101:2-8; and any special stipulations and
conditions of the building permit.
   (c)   Existing Premises. Upon written request from the owner of an existing
building or structure, the Commissioner shall issue a Certificate of Occupancy,
provided there are no violations of law or orders of the Commissioner pending,
and it is established after inspection and investigation that the alleged use
of the building or structure has heretofore existed. This Building Code shall
not require the removal, alteration or abandonment of, or prevent the
continuance of, the use and occupancy of a lawfully existing building or
structure, unless such use is deemed to endanger public safety and welfare.
   (d)   Approval of Division of Fire. No Certificate of Occupancy shall be
issued for any building, structure, enclosure, place or premises where
combustibles, chemicals, explosives, flammables or other dangerous substances,
articles, compounds or mixtures are used, stored or handled, or wherein fire
alarm systems or fire extinguishing equipment is required by law, until the
Fire Chief has given his or her approval in writing of the installations under
his or her jurisdiction. Such approval shall be recorded on the Certificate of
Occupancy.
   (e)   Approval of Equipment or Appurtenances. When separate approvals are
required by OBBC and this Building Code or by other applicable laws,
ordinances, rules or regulations for the installation or use of equipment or
appurtenances, it shall be unlawful to use or permit the use of such equipment
or appurtenances until such approvals have been given. When the use of such
equipment or appurtenances is essential for the use or occupancy of the
building or other structure, the Commissioner shall withhold the issuance of a
Certificate of Occupancy until such approvals have been given.
   (f)   Sidewalk Repairs Required. No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued
for any building or structure or part thereof until the sidewalks abutting the
premises have been inspected and the sidewalk inspector has stated in writing
that said sidewalks are in compliance with specifications prescribed by the
Director of Public Service pursuant to Chapter
505.
      (1)   Nothing shall prevent the Commissioner from issuing a temporary
Certificate of Occupancy pursuant to Section
3105.12 in the event that weather or circumstances prevent an owner from
immediately complying with this division and if the provisions of Section
3105.12 otherwise apply; provided that no such temporary Certificate of
Occupancy shall be issued for sidewalk repair purposes for a period of more
than six (6) months.
      (2)   In the event that an owner’s sidewalk fails to comply with the
specifications prescribed by the Director of Public Service pursuant to Chapter
505, the Commissioner has refused to issue a Certificate of Occupancy with
respect to the premises which said sidewalk abuts, and no appeal is pending
pursuant to Section
3103.20, the Commissioner shall send the name of said owner and the address and
permanent parcel number of said premises to the Director of Public Service for
inclusion in the next sidewalk repair resolution to be submitted to the Council
of the City pursuant to Section
164 of the Charter of the City. With respect to said premises, the Director of
Public Service shall notify the Commissioner when sidewalk repairs have been
completed, either by the owner or by the City, pursuant to Section
165 of the Charter of the City, and provided that all other requirements for
issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy have been met, the Commissioner shall
issue such a certificate.
      (3)   This division shall not apply to one (1), two (2) or three (3)
family dwellings or to any building or structure with respect to which the work
which is the cause of the requirement to secure a Certificate of Occupancy is
estimated, on the permit application therefor, to cost less than fifteen
thousand dollars ($15,000.00) or is to be performed entirely on the interior of
the building or structure.
   (g)   Copies to Division of Fire. Whenever a Certificate of Occupancy is
issued, a copy shall be forwarded to the Fire Chief.
   (h)   Posting of Certificates. The Certificates of Occupancy issued for
buildings of residential, institutional and assembly occupancy classifications,
and for other buildings when deemed necessary for control of the occupancy,
shall be securely affixed in a conspicuous place in the building, where
directed by the Commissioner.
(Ord. No. 1582-90. Passed 4-29-91, eff. 6-8-91)
§ 3105.12 Temporary Certificates
   A temporary Certificate of Occupancy may be issued by the Commissioner for
the use of a portion or portions of a building or other structure which may be
safely occupied prior to final completion of the building or other structure.
§ 3105.13 Posting of Safe Floor Loads
   In every building or other structure, or part thereof, used for mercantile,
business, factory, high hazard or storage occupancy, placards, secured from the
Commissioner and marked with the safe floor loads approved by the Commissioner
shall be securely affixed by the owner of the building or his or her duly
authorized agent in conspicuous places where directed by the Commissioner.
§ 3105.14 Posting of Number of Persons Permitted
   (a)   In rooms or spaces of the assembly occupancies specified in OAC 4101:
2-1-28 and BOCA Section 302.0, the number of persons who may legally occupy
such space shall be marked on placards by the Commissioner and such placards
shall be securely affixed by the owner of the building or his or her authorized
agent near the entrances to such room or space so as to be conspicuously
visible to persons entering such room or space. It shall be a violation of this
Building Code to occupy, or permit such room or space to be occupied, at any
one time by more than the number of persons marked on such placard.
   (b)   The Commissioner may also require the posting of placards stating the
maximum number of persons who may legally occupy certain buildings and parts of
buildings of factory and high hazard occupancy classifications as provided in
BOCA Sections 304.0 and 305.0.
§ 3105.15 Maintaining Posted Certificates, Placards and Signs
   Whenever the provisions of OBBC or this Building Code require the posting of
Certificates of Occupancy, placards or warning or other signs, such
certificates, placards and signs shall be firmly affixed, shall remain in the
designated places, and shall be readable at all times and, if lost, removed or
defaced, shall be immediately replaced by a duplicate. Duplicates of
Certificates of Occupancy, and of placards specified in Section
3105.13 and
3105.14 shall be obtained from the Commissioner.
§ 3105.16 Payment of Permit Fees
   (a)   A permit shall not be issued until the fee prescribed therefor has
been paid to the City Treasurer. The fee to be paid for a permit to be issued
by the Commissioner shall be determined in the Division of Building and Housing
and shall be noted on the application when such application is otherwise ready
for issuance of the permit. Upon payment of the fee a receipt shall be given.
   (b)   The fees prescribed in this chapter shall be additive and, unless
otherwise specifically provided, separate fees shall be paid for each of the
items listed.
   (c)   The fees prescribed in division (d) of Section
3105.25 shall apply when a building or structure is demolished or torn down, or
so removed as to require re-assembly as new construction if re-built, or is
moved to a site outside the limits of the City.
   (d)   The fees prescribed in division (e) of Section
3105.25 shall apply when such buildings or structures are moved as a unit from
a location within the City to a new site within the City. Re-located structures
such as marquees, signs, awnings, tanks, and grandstands, and other similar
structures new or re-used, which require erection or assembly when re-located
shall be subject to the permit fees prescribed for corresponding new
structures. Buildings or structures moved out of the City shall be subject to
the fees prescribed in divisions (d) and (e) of Section
3105.25. Buildings or structures moved into the City shall be subject to the
permit fees prescribed for new buildings and the permit fees prescribed under
division (e) of Section
3105.25.
   (e)   The permit fees prescribed in this chapter shall apply to all permits
for buildings or other structures, or parts thereof, obtained after June 27,
1949 including existing buildings or structures which are relocated or re-
erected.
(Ord. No. 1233-15. Passed 11-9-15, eff. 11-11-15)
§ 3105.17 Payment for Water Used in Construction Work
   The fees specified in this chapter do not include the cost of water used in
construction work. Before any permit is issued for work for which water will be
required, arrangements shall be made with the Division of Water for payment for
all water used, and a certificate stating that the rules and regulations of the
Division of Water have been complied with shall be secured from such Division.
§ 3105.18 Calculating Aggregate Floor Area as Fee Basis
   Except for electrical and mechanical permits, where aggregate floor area is
the basis for establishing the amount of the permit fee, such aggregate floor
area shall be calculated as follows:
   (a)   The aggregate floor shall be the sum of the gross horizontal areas of
the several floors of the building or other structures, including interior
balconies and mezzanines, if any, and including basements, cellars, and usable
parts of attics; except that attic floors in dwelling houses and row houses
shall not be included in the aggregate floor area unless they are at least
fifty percent (50%) used for habitable rooms, kitchens, bathrooms, toilet rooms
or for other similar living purposes;
   (b)   All horizontal dimensions shall be taken from the exterior faces of
walls, including walls or other enclosures of enclosed porches, dormers,
penthouses and sidewalk vaults, and including the areas of open porches and
open porticos. The measurements shall not include the areas of outer or inner
courts; or the areas of outside terraces, or steps, or of similar open
structures outside of the enclosing exterior walls. The permit fee for
structures outside the enclosing exterior walls of a building shall be based
upon the estimated costs thereof established as hereinafter specified in
Section
3105.19; provided that no permit fee shall be assessed for appurtenances such
as outside terraces, steps, platforms and similar open structures, constructed
on dwelling houses and row houses at the same time as such houses are built;
   (c)   Whenever a story height of a building exceeds fifteen (15) feet
measured as herein specified for “H,” the aggregate floor area of such floor
shall be deemed to be H/15 times the measured floor area thereof. “H” shall be
the height measured from the floor level of such story to the floor level of
the story above, or where such story is the uppermost story of the building and
has a finished ceiling, shall be the height measured from the floor level of
such story to a level one (1) foot above the average ceiling level within the
measured floor area. Where no ceiling is provided in the uppermost story of a
building and the roof is supported on girders or trusses, “H” shall be measured
to the midheight of such girders or trusses; with sloping roof and no ceiling,
“H” shall be measured to the mid- height of the sloping roof; with exposed roof
joists on bearing walls, “H” shall be measured to a level one (1) foot above
the average level of the roof joists;
   (d)   For all electrical and mechanical permit fees the aggregate floor
areas shall be calculated as set forth in subsections (a) and (b) hereof.
§ 3105.19 Establishing Cost as Fee Basis
   (a)   Where the permit fee is based upon the cost of the work done under the
permit, such costs shall be the actual cost as certified by the owner or by the
authorized representative of the owner, and as approved by the Commissioner.
   (b)   The Commissioner may, at any time after application for a permit is
filed, up to three (3) months after completion of the building or other
structure, require the submission of authoritative estimates or actual cost
data to substantiate the estimated cost stated in the application for a permit,
and the payment of additional fees when it is demonstrated that the actual cost
of the work is in excess of the estimated cost on which permit fees were paid.
§ 3105.20 Determining Value of Destroyed Parts
   In determining the proportionate value of a destroyed part of a building or
other structure, or of additions, alterations or repairs made to a building or
other structure, all parts, whether existing, new, or destroyed, and including
plumbing, heating and ventilating equipment, electrical wiring and equipment,
and other necessary fixed equipment, shall be valued at costs current at the
time of evaluation. However, parts which do not serve a required purpose such
as decorative painting, molded or cast plaster decorations, and wall, floor or
ceiling finishes intended for comfort or enhancement, shall not be included in
such valuation.
§ 3105.21 Sign Measurement Standards
   Sign face area, sign height and sign location, as regulated in OBBC and this
Building Code, shall be measured according to the following standards.
   (a)   Sign Face Area. Standards to compute the amount of sign face area
permitted by these regulations are herein established as follows:
      (1)   Measurement of Sign Face Area.
         A.   Panel Signs. Sign face area shall be measured to include the
surface area of the smallest single rectangle enclosing the sign panel. For two
(2) sided free-standing signs, which conform to the standards of OBBC and
Chapter
3113 of this Building Code, only one (1) side shall be included in the
measurement. For any free-standing sign, measurement of sign face area shall
also include any portion of the structural supports which extends above the
base of the sign panel. However, the entire structural support shall be
included in the measurement if such supports are designed and used to convey
part of the sign’s message.
         B.   Nonpanel Signs. Sign face area shall be measured to include the
surface area of the smallest single rectangle enclosing the letters or
characters of the sign.
      (2)   Measurement of Building Frontage. The frontage of a building shall
be the width of the facade(s) of the building, excluding any roof overhang or
non-bearing decorative walls, which faces the principal street or contains the
main entrance. If a building is divided into units, the building unit frontage
shall be the width of that unit as measured from the party wall centerlines, on
the frontage of the building.
      (3)   Measurement of Temporary Window Sign Coverage. In determining the
percentage of window area covered by temporary signs, each facade or side of
the building shall be considered separately. Window area shall be measured to
include all windows and the glass portions of doors but shall exclude all such
area covered by permanent signs or other relatively permanent material.
   (b)   Sign Height. The height of freestanding signs shall be measured from
the base of the sign at its point of attachment to the ground to its topmost
element. However, if the support of a free-standing sign is attached to a wall
or other man-made base, including a graded earth mound, the sign height shall
be measured from the grade of the nearest street, drive or parking area, as
determined by the Commissioner of Building and Housing.
   (c)   Sign Location. In determining the location of signs in relation to lot
lines, including district and street right-of-way lines, distances shall be
measured from the vertical projection of the lot line to the closest point on
the sign. For corner lots, two (2) lot lines shall be considered street right-
of-way lines.
§ 3105.22 Fee Payment Procedure
   The Commissioner shall by rule establish the procedure for payment of fees
for inspections and for certificates of approval, operation, and occupancy.
However, no certificate shall be issued until the required fee has been paid.
All fees shall be paid to the City Treasurer.
§ 3105.23 Minimum Fee for Permit
   The minimum fee for any required permit shall be ten dollars ($10.00). Where
no permit fee is prescribed by this chapter, the fee for a required permit
shall be twenty dollars ($20.00).
(Ord. No. 774-86. Passed 6-2-86, eff. 6-4-86)
§ 3105.24 Refund of Permit Fees
   Whenever the work for which a permit has been issued has been abandoned and
is not to be done, such permit may be returned to the Commissioner for
cancellation and after a deduction of thirty dollars ($30.00) from the permit
fee has been made, one-half (1/2) of the balance of the permit fee, if any,
shall be refunded by the City Treasurer on certificate from the Commissioner.
§ 3105.25 Schedule of Permit Fees
   When fees are calculated on an estimated construction or repair cost, the
value of work shall include all structural, electrical, plumbing and HVAC,
interior finish, normal site preparation including excavation and backfill,
overhead and profit. Architectural/Engineering fees, costs of land and off-
site costs need not be included. The value estimate of the proposed work may be
determined by the Department of Building and Housing in accordance with
generally accepted methods of estimating as prescribed by BOCA or the R.S.
Means Cost Data Service that is effective on the date application is made for
the permit.
   NOTE: Other permit fees, such as for electrical, plumbing, HVAC, elevators
and plan processing are separate.
   Except for permit fees for work performed on one (1), two (2), three (3)
family dwellings, their accessory structures and other miscellaneous items
listed in division (E) of RC 3781.10, the permit fees herein include the
required surcharge pursuant to division (E) of RC 3781.10.
   For permit and plan examination fees for work performed on one (1), two (2),
or three (3) family dwellings or their accessory structures, the permit fees do
not include the required one percent (1%) surcharge. For permits issued for
that work, the required surcharge shall be calculated on the final cost of each
permit issued and shall be separately itemized.
 Minimum Fee
                                                                                          Minimum
                                                                                          Fee
(a)   One-Family, Two-Family, or Three-Family Dwelling Houses:
   (1)   New buildings and additions, or parts of same: $10.00 for each $1,000.00 or$150.00
fraction of estimated cost
   (2)   Alterations and repairs: $5.00 for each $1,000.00 or fraction of estimated $30.00
(b)   Buildings or Structures as Regulated by the Ohio Building Code:
   (1)   New buildings or structures, additions to existing buildings or structures, and
first tenants’ space buildouts in new construction: $12.00 for each $1,000.00 or fractio$300.00
of estimated cost less than $1,000,000.00
      From $1,000,001.00 up, $12,000.00 plus $7.00 for each $1,000.00 or fraction of
estimated cost above $1,000,000.00
   (2)   Alterations or repairs to existing buildings or structures: $15.00 for each$150.00
$1,000.00 or fraction thereof of estimated cost less than $1,000,000.00
      From $1,000,001.00 up, $15,000.00 plus $11.00 for each $1,000.00 or fraction of
estimated cost above $1,000,000.00
(c)   Miscellaneous Buildings/Structures:
   (1)   Private garages, tool sheds, residential antennas, and other accessory     $50.00
structures or buildings
   (2)   Fences, guardrails or barriers for 1, 2 or 3 family                        $50.00
   (3)   Fences, guardrails or barriers for Commercial $15.00 per $1,000.00 or fract$150.00
thereof of estimated cost
   (4)   Swimming pools (private/residential)                                       $50.00
   (5)   Effective boarding pending repairs of rehabilitation                       $50.00
(d)   Demolition or Removal of Buildings or Structures (Consult Section
3105.16(C)):
   (1)   For 1-family, 2-family, or 3-family dwelling houses or accessory structures:
$10.00 for each 1,000 square feet or fraction of floor area (excluding basement floor or  $50.00
cellar floor areas)
   (2)   For buildings and structures as regulated by the Ohio Building Code $15.00 $300.00
each 1,000 square feet or fraction of floor area
(e)   Moving of Building or Structures:
   (1)   1, 2 or 3-family dwellings                                                 $300.00
   (2)   Other than (e)(1) above                                                    $600.00
(f)   Outdoor Signs and Display Structures; Other Wall Signs for Which a Permit is     $50.00
Required: $12.00 for each $1,000.00 or fraction of estimated cost
(g)   Marquees, Awnings and Canopies: $12.00 for each $1,000.00 or fraction of estimate$50.00
cost
(h)   Temporary Tents:
   (1)   120 square feet or less                                                    No
                                                                                          charge
   (2)   Over 120 square feet                                                       $75.00
                                                                                          each
   No fee shall be charged for tents used in conjunction with a funeral service or for
religious organizations which are utilizing tents for temporary purposes not to exceed 2
weeks.
(i)   Zoning Fees (Shall Be Added to Applicable Building Permits as Follows):
   (1)   Commercial and Multi-Family and Parking Lots                               $150.00
   (2)   Temporary Uses                                                             $30.00
   (3)   Signs, Fences and Appurtenant Structures                                   $20.00
(j)   Heating, Ventilation, Air Conditioning, and Refrigeration:
   (1)   1, 2, and 3-family dwellings: The minimum fee for any permit shall be:     $50.00
      A.   Installation of each central heating and/or air conditioning system(s)$50.00
      B.   Repairs, alterations, or extensions of central heating and/or air cond$50.00ng
systems; or
      C.   Installation of each fuel-fired unit heater, space heater, or decorati$50.00
appliance; or
      D.   Installation of each solid fuel burning device; fireplace, insert, woo$50.00
burning stove/oven, etc.
   (2)   For buildings and structures as regulated by the Ohio Building Code: The mi$50.00
fee for any permit shall be:
      A.   Installation of each central heating, ventilation, and/or air conditio$50.00
unit (equipment)
      B.   Installation of each duct heater or reheat coil                       $30.00
      C.   Installation of each fuel-fired unit heater, space heater, or decorati$30.00
appliance
      D.   Installation of steam or hot water radiation devices; each floor or le$30.00
      E.   Installation of each solid-fuel burning device; fireplace, insert, woo$30.00
burning stove/oven, etc.
      F.   Installation of fuel-gas piping; for each 100 lineal feet or fraction $13.00
      G.   Installation of duct work, V.A.V. boxes, exhaust fans, exhaust hoods, fire or
volume dampers, and other connecting appurtenances: For each $1,000.00 valuation or       $13.00
fraction of job cost (Material + Labor)
   (3)   Installation of Refrigeration Systems: For each new or altered refrigeration
system as per following rated tons of refrigeration (1 ton = 12,000 B.T.U.):
      A.   Up to 25 tons capacity                                                $50.00
      B.   Over 25 tons capacity                                                 $100.00
      C.   For each walk-in cooler, freezer, or dairy/deli case refrigeration sys$50.00
   (4)   Repairs and/or alterations of existing equipment or systems                $50.00
(k)   Plumbing Fixtures, Appliances and Piping: Note: Use (1), (2), and (3) below to   $50.00
calculate fee: The minimum fee for any permit shall be:
   (1)   For the installation of each plumbing fixture, appliance or device such as water
closets, urinals, bathtubs or showers, sinks, drinking fountains, dishwashers, laundry    $8.00
trays, clothes washers, floor drains, roof drains, hot water heating devices,             each
interceptors, sump pumps, air conditioning units, catch basins, area drains, manholes and
other similar equipment, or fixtures
   (2)   For the installation of piping for plumbing systems:
      A.   Gas piping – For each 100 lineal feet or fraction                   $13.00
      B.   Drains, waste piping from plumbing fixtures – for each 100 lineal fe$13.00
fraction
      C.   Storm and/or foundation drains/sewers – for each 100 lineal feet or $13.00on
      D.   Sanitary drains/sewers – for each 100 lineal feet or fraction       $13.00
      E.   Water distribution piping – for each 100 lineal feet or fraction    $13.00
      F.   Connection to potable water line for non-potable uses such as irrigati$50.00re
suppression system, etc.
   (3)   For the following miscellaneous:
      A.   Repairs to existing plumbing fixtures and/or systems                  $50.00
(l)   Electric Wiring and Equipment: Note: Use (1) or (2) below to calculate fee; the  $50.00
minimum fee for any permit shall be:
   (1)   For new construction additions, alterations to existing buildings: For each$50.00
1,000 square feet or part
   (2)   For each item as follows:
      A.   Temporary lighting and/or power installations, or low voltage wiring systems
(CATV cable, fire alarm devices, computer devices, data communication and other similar   $50.00
equipment)
      B.   Signs: Business I.D., advertisement, and directional, etc.:
         1.   For the first electrical sign                                   $50.00
         2.   Add for each additional electric sign installed at the same time$30.00
      C.   Amusement rides and devices: each.
   Note: Also see Section                                                              $30.00
3105.29 – Festival and Carnival Permit Fees for Charitable Organizations
      D.   Repairs to existing electrical systems                                $50.00
   (3)   Blanket electrical permit for each year for each premises                  $200.00
(m)   Elevators, Powered Lifts, and Moving Walks:
   (1)   To install a passenger elevator $11.00 per $1,000.00 or fraction thereof of$350.00
estimated cost
   (2)   For each installation of moving stairways or moving walks, any manhoists,
special elevators, or stage or orchestra lifts included under Section                     $350.00
3141.04
   (3)   Installation of any power operated dumbwaiter or conveyor                  $200.00
   (4)   Installation of any wheelchair lift or stair climber                       $75.00
   (5)   Installation of any amusement device to convey persons in any direction as $50.00
form of amusement
   (6)   Any alteration or repair for which a permit is required under Section      $100.00
3141.03 for divisions (m)(1) through (m)(5) above
 
(Ord. No. 708-10. Passed 8-18-10, eff. 8-20-10)
§ 3105.26 Schedule of Inspection Fees
   There shall be no separate inspection fees except as provided in Section
3105.27 and this section:
   (a)   Special Inspections.
      (1)   Whenever an inspection has been requested and upon inspection the
work is not found to be ready for inspection, or where the address given in the
application for permit is faulty or inaccurate, there shall be charged a fee of
one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each inspection.
      (2)   For inspections required outside of regular working hours (special
events, witness testing of special equipment, etc.) the fee shall be one
hundred dollars ($100.00).
      (3)   Whenever a special inspection, not a routine inspection of work
being done under a permit, is requested, there shall be an inspection fee as
follows:
         Dwelling units at twenty dollars ($20.00), minimum fifty dollars
($50.00);
         Other structures at sixty dollars ($60.00) per story.
      (4)   Whenever an inspection is made after the compliance date stated on
a Notice of Violation of the Building Code, the Housing Code or the Zoning Code
or after a compliance date determined by a court of competent jurisdiction to
determine whether the violation has been remedied and the violation has not
been remedied, or an additional permit is obtained for work previously
permitted and the original permit has expired or was appropriately voided,
there shall be charged a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each
inspection, except that this fee shall not apply to one (1) family and two (2)
family owner-occupied dwelling structures.
   (b)   Annual Building Inspections.
      (1)   Eating Places: sixty-five ($65.00) per occupancy;
      (2)   Drinking Places: sixty-five ($65.00) per occupancy;
      (3)   Annual Inspections under Licensing Requirement: sixty-five ($65.00)
per occupancy,
   (c)   Late Fee, for Work Started Prior to Permit Issuance.
      (1)   Within seventy-two (72) hours of notification: Min one hundred
dollars ($100.00) + twenty-five percent (25%) of required permit fee;
      (2)   After seventy-two (72) hours: Min two hundred dollars ($200.00) +
twenty-five percent (25%) of required permit fee.
   (d)   Payment of charges for inspections enumerated above shall be made
before any additional permits will be issued to the permit holder.
(Ord. No. 708-10. Passed 8-18-10, eff. 8-20-10)
§ 3105.27 Schedule of Certificate Fees
   (a)   Certificates of Occupancy. When a Certificate of Occupancy is issued
upon completion of a new building or other structure; issued upon completion of
an enlargement of, or alteration to, an existing building or other structure;
when no additions or alterations have been made but there is a change in
occupancy classification of the building or other structure, irrespective of
whether or not alterations are required after inspection: sixty dollars
($60.00);
   When issued upon request of the owner of an existing building or other
structure: sixty dollars ($60.00);
   Duplicate: twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
   (b)   Certificates of Approval and Certificates of Operation. A separate
inspection fee shall not be required when the Certificate fee is paid.
 Certificate Fee Inspection Fee: Required (Annual or Semiannual) Inspection
                 Before Issuance of Certificates
                                                                                    Inspection
                                                                                    Fee:
                                                                                    Required
                                                                        Certificate (Annual or
                                                                        Fee         Semiannual)
                                                                                    Inspection
                                                                                    Before
                                                                                    Issuance of
                                                                                    Certificates
Plumbing                                                                None
Electrical work                                                         None
Refrigeration systems:
   New and altered installations                                     $20.00      $20.00
   New and altered installations of 1 H.P. motor                     $20.00      $20.00
   Certificate previously issued                                                 $30.00
   New certificate of operation                                      $30.00      $30.00
Elevators:
   First 5 floors traveled                                                       $150.00
   For each additional floor                                                     $18.00
   Residential elevator                                                          $90.00
      For each additional incline lift                                        $60.00
   Limited certificate, first issue                                              $175.00
   Each renewal limited certificate                                              $115.00
   Moving stairways and moving walks                                             $115.00
   For each unit of moving stairways or moving walks, new or altered             $115.00
installation
   For each unit of moving stairway or moving walks, existing                    $115.00
installation
   Certificate previously issued                                                 $115.00
   New certificate                                                               $115.00
Dumbwaiters and conveyors:
   For each dumbwaiter or conveyor, new or altered installation                  $60.00
   For existing installations                                                    $60.00
   Certificates previously issued                                                $60.00
   New certificates                                                              $60.00
   Amusement devices to convey persons in any direction as a form of             $60.00
amusement
   For each permanent amusement device                                           $60.00
   For each temporary amusement device                                           $60.00
Man-hoists, special elevators and stage or orchestra lifts included
under Section                                                                       $115.00
3141.04
   New or altered installation                                                   $115.00
   Existing installation                                                         $115.00
   Certificate previously issued                                                 $115.00
   New certificate                                                               $115.00
 
(Ord. No. 2393-02. Passed 2-3-03, eff. 2-3-03)
§ 3105.28 Plan Examination Fee Schedule
   The plan examination fee is payable at the time the plans are submitted and
is based on the floor area in square feet. If plans are submitted more than one
time, or if plans are revised after permit issuance, an additional plan
examination fee will be charged.
   (a)   A fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) per one thousand (1,000) square foot
or fraction of that shall be charged for any plan examined under this section.
   (b)   A fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) shall be charged for any plan which
is under one thousand (1,000) square foot. Projects such as parking lots,
signs, or fences which have no floor area shall be charged this minimum fee.
   (c)   A fee of two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) shall be charged for
all site development reviews.
(Ord. No. 708-10. Passed 8-18-10, eff. 8-20-10)
§ 3105.29 Festival and Carnival Permit Fees for Charitable Organizations
   The permit fee for festivals and open-air carnivals for a period of not more
than five (5) consecutive days and not more than two (2) carnivals in any
calendar year, sponsored by a charitable organization, as defined in division
(b) of Section
329.07 shall be computed in accordance with the following schedule:
Type of Permit Fee
Type of Permit                                                              Fee
Use Permit                                                                  $20.00
Plan Examination Fee                                                        $20.00
Certificate of Occupancy                                                    $25.00
First Electrical Permit – In accordance with the fee schedule in Section  $135.00
3105.25, to a maximum of:
Second Electrical permit, if required                                       $15.00
Permit to Erect and Operate Amusement Rides – In accordance with the fee
schedule in Sections                                                        $300.00
3105.25 and
3105.27, to a maximum of:
Permit for Temporary Tents, Private Property – In accordance with the fee
schedule in Section                                                         $25.00
3105.25 to a maximum of:
 
(Ord. No. 877-87. Passed 5-18-87, eff. 5-28-87)
CHAPTER 3106 – REGISTRATION OF VACANT BUILDINGS AND CERTIFICATES OF COMPLIANCE
FOR VACANT BUILDINGS
3106.01   Definitions
3106.02   Duties of Responsible Party
3106.03   Vacant Building Registration Required
3106.04   Vacant Building Inspection, Obligation to Correct Violations, and
Issuance of Certificate of Correction
3106.05   Bond Required for Registration of Non-Residential Property
3106.06   Inspection Required for Transfer of Vacant Residential Property;
Correction Required Following Transfer
3106.07   Fees
3106.08   Appeals
3106.09   Liability
3106.10   Time of Effect and Expiration of Section
3106.06
3106.99   Penalty
§ 3106.01 Definitions
   For the purpose of this chapter, words and phrases shall have the following
meanings:
   (a)   “Vacant building” or “vacant property” means a building that is not
occupied by its owner, lessee or other person in lawful possession, and at
which substantially all lawful business operations or substantially all
residential occupancy has ceased, or which is substantially devoid of content.
As used in this chapter, “vacant” shall have the same meaning as found in
division (b) of Section
209.02.
   (b)   “Responsible Party” means the owner, Local Agent in Charge as defined
in Section
365.01, other agent, lessee, or party in control of any vacant building, or a
party that has filed and is currently maintaining an open foreclosure action
regarding a vacant building.
   (c)   “Commercial building”, “commercial property”, and “commercial real
estate” shall have the same meaning as “commercial real estate” in RC 4703.20.
(Ord. No. 388-2024. Passed 4-1-24, eff. 4-3-24)
§ 3106.02 Duties of Responsible Party
   (a)   The Responsible Party shall maintain the vacant building in compliance
with City codes, with particular attention to the following:
      (1)   Property shall be maintained in a condition free of nuisance in
accordance with Chapter
209.
      (2)   All building exteriors shall have adequate weather-tight
protection, including paint, siding, and or similar finishes maintained in good
condition.
      (3)   All buildings and grounds must be secured against entry by
unauthorized persons, and against becoming a harborage for vermin. This
includes maintaining all exterior doors, windows, and yard fencing in a good
and secured condition. No boards, plywood or similar means or materials may be
used to secure windows and doors except as provided under Codified Ordinance
Section
3103.09. Doors and/or windows that are found to be defective shall be repaired
or replaced with similar doors or window units equipped with locking hardware.
      (4)   Property must be properly winterized, including but not limited to:
the proper disconnection of water supply and drainage systems; ensuring that
HVAC systems are functional and properly maintained; temporarily discontinuing
or adjusting utility services; clearing and maintaining the property’s exterior
to safeguard against ice buildup or other hazards; and other security measures
to deter and prevent unauthorized entry.
      (5)   Roofs on all buildings shall be in good, weathertight condition
with no leakage.
      (6)   Graffiti, tagging or similar markings must be removed or painted
over with an exterior grade paint that matches the exterior color of the
structure.
      (7)   Pools and spas shall be drained and kept dry. Properties with pools
and spas must comply with the minimum security fencing requirements of the
City.
   (b)   Compliance with this section does not relieve the Responsible Parties
of any obligations set forth in any covenants, conditions, restrictions,
homeowners’ association rules and regulations and/or codified ordinances or
building codes which may apply to the property.
(Ord. No. 1039-2023. Passed 2-5-24, eff. 2-6-24)
§ 3106.03 Vacant Building Registration Required
   (a)   The Responsible Party shall register the vacant building with the
Director of Building and Housing. A vacant lot, defined as a parcel that does
not contain any permanent lawful occupied structure, is not a vacant building.
A building with multiple residential units in which at least one unit is
occupied is not a vacant building. The Responsible Party shall maintain the
vacant building registration up-to-date.
   This registration requirement does not apply to vacant buildings owned by a
Governmental Entity before the Governmental Entity’s typical assessment for
demolition, or if the vacant building becomes intended for demolition following
the Governmental Entity’s typical assessment for demolition. This registration
requirement applies to vacant buildings that are owned by a Governmental Entity
that have been assessed and are not intended for demolition, or that are owned
by a Governmental Entity that does not assess for demolition.
   (b)   An application for registration of a vacant building shall be
submitted with the associated fee required in this chapter. The application
shall include all of the following information on forms provided by the
Director:
      (1)   The name of the party submitting the registration application and
whether the party is the owner, agent, lessee, or party in control of the
property, or a party who has filed a foreclosure action;
      (2)   The direct mailing address of the applicant; P.O. boxes are not an
acceptable address;
      (3)   A contact name, telephone number and email address for the
applicant;
      (4)   The name, address, telephone number and email address of a Local
Agent in Charge;
      (5)   The names and addresses of all known lien holders and all other
parties with an ownership interest in the building.
   (c)   Registration shall remain valid for twelve (12) months from the date
of issuance. The Responsible Party shall renew the registration upon expiration
for as long as the property remains vacant.
   (d)   The Responsible Party shall inspect the property at least one (1) time
each month on the interior and exterior of the property to verify that the
requirements of this section, the Codified Ordinances of the City, and any
other applicable laws are being met. Any interior and exterior inspections that
are required by loan servicers for a given vacant property, when applicable,
may satisfy this requirement, but all properties regardless of loan servicing
require such inspections. Written reports of such inspections shall be provided
to the Director upon request.
   (e)   The Director shall be authorized to enter into one (1) or more letter
agreements with a Responsible Party that is a Governmental Entity that reduces
or waives the requirements of this Chapter
3106.
(Ord. No. 1039-2023. Passed 2-5-24, eff. 2-6-24)
§ 3106.04 Vacant Building Inspection, Obligation to Correct Violations, and
Issuance of Certificate of Correction
   (a)   The Director may cause vacant building inspections to occur upon the
first registration of the building as a vacant building. Inspections may also
occur upon request by the Responsible Party; as warranted in the determination
of the Director based on exterior conditions; and/or the results of past
inspections; and/or from time to time at the discretion of the Director. An
application for a vacant building inspection required by this chapter shall be
made upon forms supplied by the Director. The inspections shall result in a
vacant building inspection report.
   (b)   Vacant building inspections shall include a general exterior
inspection of the dwelling structure and premises.
   (c)   The vacant building inspection report shall contain the following
information:
      (1)   The street address or other identifying characteristics of the
dwelling structure;
      (2)   The name and address of the owner(s); lessee or party in control;
      (3)   The authorized use and occupancy of the dwelling structure; and
      (4)   The listing of all known code violations existing at the time of
such inspection.
   (d)   Once the vacant building inspection report has been issued, the
Responsible Party shall apply for and obtain a certificate of correction. A
certificate of correction may only be issued upon correction of all vacant
building violations at that property, and the certificate shall state which
violations were remedied.
   (e)   No vacant building may become occupied without a certificate of
correction.
   (f)   All vacant buildings shall be subject to inspection for the purpose of
determining compliance with the provisions of this Housing Code, and all other
applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. Inspections shall be
conducted in accordance with this section.
   (g)   The Director and the Director’s duly authorized agents or inspectors
may enter at reasonable times any vacant property registered under this chapter
in accordance with the right of entry defined in Chapter
367.
(Ord. No. 1039-2023. Passed 2-5-24, eff. 2-6-24)
§ 3106.05 Bond Required for Registration of Non-Residential Property
   (a)   Upon registration of a commercial, industrial, or other non-
residential vacant building of under or equal to ten thousand (10,000) interior
square feet, as of July 1, 2024, the Responsible Party shall provide a cash
bond to the Director in the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). Upon
registration of a commercial, industrial, or other non-residential vacant
building of over ten thousand (10,000) interior square feet, as of July 1,
2024, the Responsible Party shall provide a cash bond to the Director in the
sum of fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00). Thereafter, the amounts may be
adjusted by the City of Cleveland on an annual basis, beginning July 1, 2025
and each year thereafter in proportion to the Consumer Price Index for
Northeast Ohio, as published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department
of Labor.
   Upon registration of a non-residential vacant property under Section
3106.03, the Responsible Party may apply to the Director for an exemption from
the bond requirement in this section. Upon such application, the Director may
cause a vacant building inspection to occur at the vacant property. The
exemption shall be granted only under one of the following conditions:
      (1)   The exemption shall be granted until the next annual registration
of the property if the property is not boarded up and has not been boarded up
by the City in the last three (3) years; no Notices of Violation have been
issued against the property with which the Responsible Party has not complied;
no formal complaints regarding the Responsible Party’s ownership or maintenance
of the property have been made in the last three (3) years and were found
meritorious; and the Responsible Owner is not delinquent regarding the vacant
property’s property tax balance.
      (2)   The exemption shall be granted until the next annual registration
of the property if the Responsible Party can demonstrate that there are
reasonable and substantial plans to correct the property’s code violations;
there has been substantial progress in correcting the property’s code
violations; and appropriate permits have been filed.
      (3)   The exemption shall be granted indefinitely if the Owner is a
Governmental Entity.
   (b)   Such bond may be used to ensure the continued maintenance of the
property in compliance with the provisions of this Housing Code throughout its
vacancy and to reimburse the City for any fees owed and expenses incurred in
inspecting, securing, repairing and/ or making such building safe by any legal
means including, but not limited to, demolition.
   (c)   If violations of the Codified Ordinances are identified by the City
and their correction would cost more than the value of the bond required under
division (a) of this section, then the City is authorized to require a higher
bond, based on the amount set in the report of such inspection. If the Bond is
entirely depleted, the Responsible Party shall provide another bond for the
greater of the cost of repairing the remaining, uncorrected violations or the
equivalent value as it was required to provide under division (a) of this
section, whichever is greater.
   (d)   The bond obligations of this section shall apply until the property is
no longer vacant or until title to the property has been transferred to a third
party.
   (e)   When the property is no longer vacant or the title to the property has
transferred, the remaining bond funds will be returned to the party making the
deposit upon proof of compliance with this chapter and if the owner submits a
written request for such refund.
(Ord. No. 388-2024. Passed 4-1-24, eff. 4-3-24)
§ 3106.06 Inspection Required for Transfer of Vacant Residential Property;
Correction Required Following Transfer
   (a)   To sell, transfer, or convey any interest in a residential vacant
property, or enter into an agreement regarding the same, shall require a vacant
building inspection that has occurred within one (1) year of the sale date. In
the event of resale within the one (1) year period, the vacant building
inspection report shall be transferred to any subsequent bona fide purchaser
and shall be valid for the remainder of that period.
   (b)   Prior to selling, transferring, or conveying any interest in or
entering into an agreement to sell, transfer or otherwise convey an interest in
any vacant residential property, the Responsible Party shall provide a copy of
a vacant building inspection that has occurred within one (1) year of the
proposed sale date to the prospective purchaser or title transferee prior to
conveyance of the title.
   (c)   An agreement to sell, transfer or otherwise convey an interest in a
vacant building shall include a copy of the vacant building inspection from the
Director.
   (d)   Following transfer, the Responsible Party, with the exception of a
Responsible Party that is a Governmental Entity, shall correct all code
violations at the vacant property and bring the property into compliance with
Section
365.04 within six (6) months of transfer or, if the Director determines that
the condition of the property poses a threat to health and safety such that it
should be corrected within a lesser time, within a lesser time established by
the Director. Failure to do so shall be a violation of Section
3103.25(e).
      (1)   The Responsible Party may request from the Director an extension of
time to correct the code violations. Such a request shall be made at least
thirty (30) days before the end of the Responsible Party’s time to comply, and
the request shall be made on a form provided by the Director. No single
extension may be for more than six (6) months. Responsible Parties may request
multiple extensions.
      (2)   The Director shall approve such a request for an extension so long
as the request for an extension is reasonable, the buyer has made substantial
progress in correcting the violations, and issuing an extension is in the best
interests of the City. If such an extension is approved, then failure to make
the corrections within the extended time shall be a violation of Section
3103.25(e).
      (3)   The Responsible Party may appeal any decision by the Director under
this section to the Board of Zoning Appeals, in writing within ten (10) days
from the date of the Director’s issuance of the decision. The Board may
sustain, disapprove, or modify the Director’s action, and the Board’s decision
shall be final.
(Ord. No. 388-2024. Passed 4-1-24, eff. 4-3-24)
   Note: Pursuant to Section
3106.10, this section is effective on August 6, 2024, and shall expire on
February 6, 2026.
§ 3106.07 Fees
   (a)   The annual registration fee required shall be:
      (1)   For residential structures with no more than three (3) residential
units, seventy dollars ($70.00) per unit.
      (2)   For all other structures, one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per
structure.
   (b)   The fee for a certificate of correction shall be seventy dollars
($70.00).
   (c)   There shall be no fee for one (1) re-inspection requested by the same
Responsible Party within twelve (12) months from the date of the initial
inspection to verify correction of violations stated within the vacant building
inspection. All subsequent re-inspections may be billed at one hundred and
fifty dollars ($150.00) per inspection.
   (d)   There shall be no fees levied under this chapter, including
application fees, inspection fees, and certificate of correction fees,
associated with vacant residential property that is owned by a Governmental
Entity as defined in Section
365.01. This fee exemption alone does not exempt any property or property owner
from the other requirements or responsibilities under this chapter.
   (e)   In the event of resale within the one (1) year period, this vacant
building inspection report shall be transferred to any subsequent bona fide
purchaser and shall be valid for the remainder of that period.
(Ord. No. 1039-2023. Passed 2-5-24, eff. 2-6-24)
§ 3106.08 Appeals
   The seller or transferor, or the purchaser or transferee of a vacant
building shall have the right to appeal to the Board of Building Standards and
Building Appeals from any order of, or written notice issued by the Director
within thirty (30) days from the date such notice was given, mailed, or issued.
Such appeal must be in writing. Failure to file a written appeal with the Board
within the time prescribed herein shall constitute a waiver of the right to
appeal. However, filing of an appeal from any such notice shall suspend action
on enforcement of such notice until the appeal is acted upon by the Board.
(Ord. No. 1039-2023. Passed 2-5-24, eff. 2-6-24)
§ 3106.09 Liability
   The issuance of a certificate of correction does not guarantee compliance
with the City’s Codes, nor does the Director nor his or her duly authorized
designee(s) accept any liability for non-compliance with same. Such certificate
shall be considered by all parties as the City’s best effort to make known to
the owners and purchasers of violations known on a given property at the time
the inspection is made.
   (a)   The City assumes no liability or responsibility for the failure to
report violations that may exist and makes no guarantee whatsoever, since there
may be further violations which were not detected, which may arise in the
future, or which may only be determined by a licensed electrician, plumber or
other specialist at the expense of the person desiring such an inspection.
   (b)   In issuing a vacant building inspection, the City does not thereby
insure, warrant or guarantee to the holder thereof, to his/her assignees, or
any other interested party that such inspection report contains all of the
violations of the Cleveland Codified Ordinances, State or Federal law.
   (c)   In issuing a certificate of correction document under the provisions
of this chapter, the City does not thereby insure, warrant or guarantee the
quality of repair or standard of work completed in the correction of violations
listed on a vacant building inspection. Such document should be construed only
as a statement by the City that some or all of the violations listed on the
certificate of inspection have been corrected to the City’s satisfaction.
(Ord. No. 1039-2023. Passed 2-5-24, eff. 2-6-24)
§ 3106.10 Time of Effect and Expiration of Section
3106.06
   (a)   Section
3106.06 shall take effect six (6) months following the effective date of this
chapter.
   (b)   Without further authorization from Cleveland City Council, Section
3106.06 shall expire two (2) years following the effective date of this
chapter.
(Ord. No. 1039-2023. Passed 2-5-24, eff. 2-6-24)
§ 3106.99 Penalty
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or of the rules and
regulations issued hereunder shall be fined not less than two hundred dollars
($200.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense.
Every day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense.
(Ord. No. 1039-2023. Passed 2-5-24, eff. 2-6-24)
CHAPTER 3107 – REGISTRATION OF CONTRACTORS
3107.01   Definitions
3107.02   Certificate of Registration or Limited Certificate of Registration
Required
3107.03   Exceptions to Required Certificate of Registration or Limited
Certificate of Registration
3107.04   Homeowner’s Exception
3107.05   Public Utility Exceptions
3107.06   Applications
3107.07   Qualifications for Certificates of Registration
3107.08   Qualifications for Limited Certificate of Registration
3107.09   Revocation and Suspension of Certificates of Registration and Limited
Certificates of Registration
3107.10   Qualifications for Certificates of Qualification
3107.11   Suspension or Revocation of Certificates of Qualification
3107.12   Fee Payment; Refunds and Renewals
3107.13   Expiration and Renewal
3107.14   Appeals
3107.15   Rulemaking Authority
3107.16 to 3107.38   Licensing and Qualification Certificates – Repealed
Statutory reference
   Power to license, RC 715.27
§ 3107.01 Definitions
   (a)   Certificate of Qualification. There are three (3) types of
Certificates of Qualification.
      (1)   Certificate of Qualification for Journeyman Plumbers. This
Certificate shall authorize the holder to perform the installation of all
plumbing work regulated by OBC or this Building Code while under the direct
supervision of a registered plumbing contractor. A Certificate of Qualification
for Journeyman Plumbers shall not entitle the holder to obtain a permit.
      (2)   Certificate of Qualification for Limited Premises Electrical
Maintenance. This Certificate shall authorize the holder or persons under the
holder’s direct supervision to install, maintain, alter and repair electrical
wiring and/or equipment on the premises specified in the Certificate. A
Certificate of Qualification for Limited Premises Electrical Maintenance shall
entitle the holder to obtain only a blanket electrical permit for work on the
premises for which the Certificate of Qualification has been issued and shall
not entitle the holder to obtain any other type of permit.
      (3)   Certificate of Qualification for Picture Machine Operator. This
Certificate shall authorize the holder to perform the operation of picture
machines as defined in Codified Ordinance Chapter
693.
   (b)   Limited Certificate of Registration. There are two (2) types of
Limited Certificates of Registration.
      (1)   Limited Certificate of Registration for Refrigeration Operator.
This Certificate shall authorize the holder to perform only the operation and
maintenance of a refrigeration system for which a Certificate of Operation has
been issued under Chapter
3139 of this Building Code. This Limited Certificate shall not authorize the
holder to perform alteration or repair of a refrigerating system.
      (2)   Limited Certificate of Registration for Fireplace Installers. This
Certificate shall authorize the holder to perform the installation of pre-
manufactured fireplaces and fireplace inserts and the installation is exempt
from the requirements for licensing by the Ohio Construction Industry Examining
Board.
   (c)   Certificate of Registration. A Certificate of Registration is issued
by the Director of Building and Housing to a Contractor to evidence that a
Contractor is registered with the Department of Building and Housing.
   (d)   Contractor. For the purposes of this chapter, Contractor means any
individual, firm, co-partnership, corporation, association or other
organization, or any combination of any of these, who or which by himself or
herself or itself, or by or through others, constructs, alters, repairs, adds
to, subtracts from, reconstructs or remodels any building, structure or
appurtenance, or who or which undertakes or offers to undertake any of these
tasks, or submits a bid to do so. A subcontractor is a Contractor for the
purposes of this chapter. Heating, ventilating and air conditioning
contractors, refrigeration contractors, electrical contractors, plumbing
contractors and hydronics contractors are Contractors for purposes of this
chapter.
   (e)   Ohio Construction Industry Examining Board. The Ohio Construction
Industry Examining Board (“OCIEB”) is the Board created in RC Chapter 4740.
(Ord. No. 377-03. Passed 5-19-03, eff. 5-27-03)
   Note: Former 3107.01 repealed by Ord. No. 377-03, passed 5-19-03, eff. 5-27-
03.
§ 3107.02 Certificate of Registration or Limited Certificate of Registration
Required
   (a)   No Contractor may perform general contracting, demolition, sewer
building, plumbing, electrical, heating, ventilation, air-conditioning (HVAC)
or refrigeration business in the City of Cleveland, whether that business is
performed on commercial, industrial, residential or other buildings and
structures unless that Contractor holds a current Certificate of Registration
or Limited Certificate of Registration for the type of work to be performed.
   (b)   A permit required by the provisions of OBC or the Cleveland Building
Code shall be issued only to a Contractor holding a valid Certificate or
Limited Certificate of Registration or to a homeowner exempted from
registration under this chapter and that permit may be issued to a Contractor
only for work in the areas for which the Contractor holds valid Certificates.
(Ord. No. 377-03. Passed 5-19-03, eff. 5-27-03)
   Note: Former 3107.02 repealed by Ord. No. 377-03, passed 5-19-03, eff. 5-27-
03.
§ 3107.03 Exceptions to Required Certificate of Registration or Limited
Certificate of Registration
   (a)   No provision of this Building Code shall be interpreted to require
that a heating, ventilating and air conditioning contractor who holds a valid
Certificate of Registration for that work shall hold a Certificate of
Registration as an electrical contractor in order to do any of the following
electrical work incidental to the following installations, or to obtain permits
to do that work, provided that the installations are made by or under the
direct supervision of the registered heating, ventilating and air conditioning
contractor, and in conformity with the provisions of OBC and this Building Code
and rules and regulations promulgated under it, and all permits, inspections,
and approvals required by OBC and this Building Code are obtained.
      (1)   In one (1), two (2) and three (3) family dwellings and individual
townhouses, for systems requiring motors of three (3) H.P. or less:
         A.   Installation of motors or other electrical equipment forming part
of the system;
         B.   Installation of and electrical connections for controls;
including thermostats, limit controls, pilot light and ignition controls, and
other controls for the operation of the system;
         C.   Installation of electrical power service connections to motors or
controls forming part of the system.
      (2)   In any building or structure, the replacement of electrical
equipment forming part of the system with equipment of like type and capacity
for the purpose of maintenance of the system, and the connection of existing
electrical terminal connections to replacement equipment.
   (b)   A Certificate of Registration as either a general contractor or an
electrical contractor shall be required to make low voltage wiring
installations, as those installations are defined in the National Electrics
Code.
   (c)   No provision of OBC or this Building Code shall be interpreted to
require that a heating, ventilating and air conditioning contractor who holds a
valid Certificate of Registration or the holder of a valid Certificate of
Registration for refrigeration contractor shall hold a Certificate of
Registration as a plumbing contractor in order to install, or to obtain permits
to install, any equipment forming part of heating, ventilating, air
conditioning or refrigerating systems when the equipment for those systems
requires no plumbing work other than a water connection or connections and a
waste connection or connections discharging as an indirect waste over an open
sink, floor drain or other similar open receptacle; or to install those
indirect wastes; provided that the installation of that equipment, water
connections, or indirect waste connections, is made by or under the direct
supervision of the holder of the Certificate of Registration as a heating,
ventilating or air conditioning contractor or the holder of a Certificate of
refrigeration contractor operator and in conformity with the provision of OBC
and this Building Code and rules promulgated under it, and all permits,
inspections, and approvals required by OBC and this Building Code are obtained.
   (d)   The holder of a Certificate of Registration for heating, ventilation
or air conditioning may install premanufactured fireplaces and fireplace
inserts.
   (e)   The holder of a Certificate of Registration as a general contractor
may perform electrical maintenance and incidental wiring and device
installation while maintaining an elevator or conveying system.
   (f)   The holder of a Certificate of Registration as a general contractor
may install sanitary or storm sewers up to no closer than five (5) feet from a
building structure regulated by OBM or this Building Code.
(Ord. No. 377-03. Passed 5-19-03, eff. 5-27-03)
   Note: Former 3107.03 repealed by Ord. No. 377-03, passed 5-19-03, eff. 5-27-
03.
§ 3107.04 Homeowner’s Exception
   (a)   No provision of this Building Code shall be interpreted to require
that the owner of a single, two (2) or three (3) family dwelling shall be
registered or certified under this chapter to personally perform work upon the
premises.
   (b)   All work done by an owner shall be in conformity with the provisions
of this Building Code and rules and regulations promulgated under it, and no
work shall be done unless all permits, inspections, and approvals required by
this Building Code are obtained.
   (c)   Any person who misrepresents any material fact in obtaining a permit
under the provisions of this section shall be in violation of this Building
Code and subject to the penalties provided in Section
3103.99.
(Ord. No. 377-03. Passed 5-19-03, eff. 5-27-03)
   Note: Former 3107.04 repealed by Ord. No. 377-03, passed 5-19-03, eff. 5-27-
03.
§ 3107.05 Public Utility Exceptions
   No provision of this Building Code shall be interpreted to require
registration or certification under this chapter for officials or employees of
public utility organizations to engage in the installation, alteration, repair,
maintenance or utilization of any device, appliance, installation or
appurtenance forming part of the equipment for generation, transmission, or
distribution of any commodity or service which such public utility organization
is authorized by law to furnish or provide.
(Ord. No. 377-03. Passed 5-19-03, eff. 5-27-03)
   Note: Former 3107.05 repealed by Ord. No. 377-03, passed 5-19-03, eff. 5-27-
03.
§ 3107.06 Applications
   (a)   The applications for a Certificate of Registration, Limited
Certificate of Registration or a Certificate of Qualification shall be in the
form prescribed by the Director, may require documentation determined by the
Director to be sufficient to show that the applicant meets the requirements for
issuance of the relevant Certificate, and shall be available in the office of
the Director.
   (b)   Every application shall state the name of the person, firm or
corporation applying for registration, limited registration or certification
and the name and address of the place of business or places of business of the
applicant. If the applicant is a firm, co-partnership, corporation, association
or any combination, the application shall contain the names and addresses of
all members or officers, together with a certified copy of the corporation
minutes or other certified evidence that the application has been duly
authorized. Every application shall inquire whether the contractor is a
certified renovator or dust sampling technician accredited by the EPA under 40
C.F.R. 745.225.
   (c)   Applications for Certificates of Registration, Limited Certificates of
Registration or Certificates of Qualification shall be sworn to by the
applicant before a notary public.
(Ord. No. 747-2019. Passed 7-24-19, eff. 7-26-19)
§ 3107.07 Qualifications for Certificates of Registration
   (a)   To obtain or renew a Certificate of Registration as a heating,
ventilating or air conditioning contractor, electrical contractor, plumbing
contractor, refrigeration contractor, or hydronics contractor, the applicant
shall:
      (1)   Have a valid and unexpired license issued by the Ohio Construction
Industry Examining Board as that type of contractor and present proof of that
license;
      (2)   Present proof of the insurance required in the Ohio Revised Code;
      (3)   Furnish and file with the Director a bond in the penal sum of
twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) to be approved as to form by the
Director of Law, guaranteeing full and faithful compliance by the applicant
with OBC and this Building Code and with pertinent rules and regulations
promulgated under it, binding the surety to correct or abate any violation of
OBC or this Building Code or of pertinent rules and regulations promulgated
under them whenever the applicant for registration, named as the principal on
the bond, refuses, neglects or fails to correct or abate the violation within a
reasonable time limit set by the Director.
   (b)   To obtain or renew a Certificate of Registration as a general
contractor, which includes sewer builders and demolition contractors, the
applicant shall:
      (1)   Be at least eighteen (18) years of age;
      (2)   Be a United States citizen;
      (3)   Maintain contractor’s liability insurance, including without
limitation, completed operations coverage, in an amount providing for the
payment of up to fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for one (1) person
injured, and up to one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for injury to
more than one (1) person in one (1) accident, resulting from doing the work
authorized by the Certificate of Registration and up to fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00) for property damage in the course of doing the work authorized by
the Certificate of Registration. The City shall be included as an additional
insured. The insurance shall be issued by an insurance company duly authorized
to do business and issue policies of insurance in the State of Ohio. The
applicant shall provide proof of this insurance acceptable to the Director;
      (4)   Furnish and file with the Director a bond in the penal sum of
twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) to be approved as to form by the
Director of Law, guaranteeing full and faithful compliance by the applicant
with OBC and this Building Code and with pertinent rules and regulations
promulgated under it, binding the surety to correct or abate any violation of
OBC or this Building Code or of pertinent rules and regulations promulgated
under them whenever the applicant for registration, named as the principal on
the bond, refuses, neglects or fails to correct or abate the violation within a
reasonable time limit set by the Director. A general contractor who performs
sewer building work or demolition work shall furnish and file a similar bond
for each of those types of work;
      (5)   Not have done any of the following:
         A.   Been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor involving
moral turpitude or of any felony less than three (3) years before application
for said Certificate of Registration, unless a longer period is established by
rules and regulations of the Director of Building and Housing;
         B.   Obtained or renewed a Certificate of Registration by fraud,
misrepresentation or deception;
         C.   Engaged in fraud, misrepresentation or deception in the conduct
of business;
         D.   Been convicted of repeated violations of the OBC or this Building
Code or other laws or ordinances regulating building construction in the City;
         E.   Been issued repeated violation notices by the Director for
violations of the OBC, this Building Code, the Zoning Code or the Housing Code,
and failed to correct those notices in a timely fashion.
   (c)   When an applicant for a Certificate of Registration is a firm or
corporation, at least one (1) member of that firm or corporation, shall
individually be qualified for registration under the provisions of this
section.
(Ord. No. 599-11. Passed 6-6-11, eff. 6-13-11)
§ 3107.08 Qualifications for Limited Certificate of Registration
   (a)   To obtain or renew a Limited Certificate of Registration for
Refrigeration Operator or Fireplace Installer, the applicant shall:
      (1)   Be at least eighteen (18) years of age;
      (2)   Be a United States citizen;
      (3)   Maintain contractor’s liability insurance, including without
limitation, completed operations coverage, in an amount providing for the
payment of up to fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for one (1) person
injured, and up to one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for injury to
more than one (1) person in one (1) accident, resulting from doing the work
authorized by the Certificate of Registration and up to fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00) for property damage in the course of doing the work authorized by
the Certificate of Registration. The City shall be included as an additional
insured. The insurance shall be issued by an insurance company duly authorized
to do business and issue policies of insurance in the State of Ohio. The
applicant shall provide proof of this insurance acceptable to the Director;
      (4)   Furnish and file with the Director a bond in the penal sum of
twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) to be approved as to form by the
Director of Law, guaranteeing full and faithful compliance by the applicant
with OBC and this Building Code and with pertinent rules and regulations
promulgated under it, binding the surety to correct or abate any violation of
OBC or this Building Code or of pertinent rules and regulations promulgated
under them whenever the applicant for registration, named as the principal on
the bond, refuses, neglects or fails to correct or abate the violation within a
reasonable time limit set by the Director;
      (5)   Not have done any of the following:
         A.   Been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor involving
moral turpitude or of any felony less than three (3) years before application
for said Certificate of Registration, unless a longer period is established by
rules and regulations of the Director of Building and Housing;
         B.   Obtained or renewed a Certificate of Registration by fraud,
misrepresentation or deception;
         C.   Engaged in fraud, misrepresentation or deception in the conduct
of business;
         D.   Been convicted of repeated violations of the OBC or this Building
Code or other laws or ordinances regulating building construction in the City;
         E.   Been issued repeated violation notices by the Director for
violations of the OBC, this Building Code, the Zoning Code or the Housing Code,
and failed to correct those notices in a timely fashion.
      (6)   If a Limited Certificate of Refrigeration Operator, be the owner or
owner’s agent of the refrigeration system and be familiar with the operation
and maintenance of the refrigeration system.
   (b)   When an applicant for a Limited Certificate Registration is a firm or
corporation, at least one (1) member of that firm or corporation, shall
individually be qualified for registration under the provisions of this
section.
(Ord. No. 599-11. Passed 6-6-11, eff. 6-13-11)
§ 3107.09 Revocation and Suspension of Certificates of Registration and Limited
Certificates of Registration
   (a)   The Director may revoke or suspend a Certificate of Registration or a
Limited Certificate of Registration for any of the following reasons:
      (1)   The holder is convicted of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude
or a felony during the renewal period of that Certificate of Registration;
      (2)   The holder obtained a Certificate by fraud, misrepresentation or
deception;
      (3)   The holder obtained a license from the Ohio Construction Industry
Examining Board by fraud, misrepresentation or deception;
      (4)   The holder engaged in fraud, misrepresentation or deception in the
conduct of business;
      (5)   The holder no longer holds a valid or unexpired license from the
Ohio Construction Industry Examining Board in the trade for which the holder is
registered;
      (6)   The holder no longer has a valid policy for the required insurance;
      (7)   The holder used its Certificate of Registration to obtain a permit
for another;
      (8)   The holder repeatedly failed to secure permits, inspections, and
approvals required by OBC or this Building Code;
      (9)   The holder repeatedly installed work in an unworkmanlike manner as
defined in this Building Code or not in conformity with permits issued;
      (10)   The holder repeatedly has been notified of violations of OBC or
this Building Code and, has failed or refused to promptly correct an
installation or part of it;
      (11)   There have been repeated incidents of returned checks for
insufficient funds or stop payment without just cause.
   (b)   No Certificate or Limited Certificate of Registration may be suspended
or revoked until the Director gives notice to the registrant and holds a
hearing at which the registrant may appear in person or be represented by
counsel.
   (c)   A Certificate or Limited Certificate of Registration may be suspended
for a prescribed period not to exceed six (6) months, and the notice of
suspension may require the person whose registration is suspended to correct
work improperly installed or correct any other condition because of which such
registration was suspended. Upon correction, the Certificate may be reinstated
unless a new period of suspension is imposed for cause, or the registration is
revoked.
   (d)   Whenever the OCIEB revokes or suspends a license of a holder of a
Certificate of Registration upon which the Certificate is based, the holder
shall immediately surrender his/her Certificate to the Director until which
time the license is reinstated by the OCIEB.
   (e)   Whenever the Director revokes or suspends a Certificate or Limited
Certificate of Registration, the holder shall immediately cease any work that
requires the issuance of a permit, except that work that is involved with the
correction of a violation of the OBC or this Building Code and that work that
is already in progress.
   (f)   Whenever the Director recommends the suspension or revocation of a
Certificate or Limited Certificate of Registration, he or she shall either
personally serve or send notice to the registrant via registered mail detailing
the reasons for the suspension or revocation, the length of the suspension,
whether or when a registrant whose Registration has been revoked may apply for
reinstatement, and the date the order becomes effective. During suspension or
revocation, the registrant may not obtain permits based on the revoked or
suspended Certificate of Registration.
(Ord. No. 1190-04. Passed 8-11-04, eff. 8-17-04)
§ 3107.10 Qualifications for Certificates of Qualification
   (a)   Journeyman Plumbers. A Certificate of Qualification for Journeyman
Plumber shall be granted only to persons who:
      (1)   Have had at least three (3) years experience as a plumber’s
apprentice, or the equivalent thereof in training or education;
      (2)   Satisfactorily complete an examination as approved by the Director,
which examination shall establish to the satisfaction of the Director that the
applicant has a working knowledge of the ordinances and codes governing the
installation of plumbing in the City and State and possesses the theoretical
and technical knowledge necessary to make plumbing installations in conformity
therewith. Unless modified by the Director with the approval of the Board of
Building Standards and Building Appeals, the most current IPC version of
“Journeyman Plumbing with Gas” exam modified to incorporate the Ohio Plumbing
Code as administered by Experior Assessments, LLC of St. Paul, MN (the testing
agency) shall be the accepted exam for the Certificate of Qualification for
Journeyman Plumber. Applicants must pay all related fees and make all
arrangements directly with the testing agency. Applicants shall furnish the
original notice of approval from the testing agency to the Director as evidence
of a passing score on said exam;
      (3)   Include in the application, a statement of schooling, training, and
experience, insofar as it is pertinent to the application, specifying under
experience specific jobs with dates, the length of time devoted to each job and
the name of the employer or other responsible person with direct knowledge of
the character and quality of the work performed by the applicant.
   (b)   Limited Premises Electrical Maintenance. To obtain or renew a
Certificate of Qualification for Limited Premises Electrical Maintenance, the
applicant shall:
      (1)   Satisfactorily complete an examination as approved by the Director,
which examination shall establish to the satisfaction of the Director that the
applicant has a working knowledge of the ordinances and codes governing
electrical maintenance in the City and State and possesses the theoretical and
technical knowledge necessary to perform electrical maintenance in conformity
therewith. Unless modified by the Director with the approval of the Board of
Building Standards and Building Appeals, the most current NEC version of
“Electrical Maintenance” exam as administered by Experior Assessments, LLC of
St. Paul, MN (the testing agency) shall be the accepted exam for the
Certificate of Qualification for Limited Premises Electrical Maintenance.
Applicants must pay all related fees and make all arrangements directly with
the testing agency. Applicants shall furnish the original notice of approval
from the testing agency to the Director as evidence of a passing score on the
exam;
      (2)   Be at least eighteen (18) years of age;
      (3)   Be a United States citizen;
      (4)   Not have done any of the following:
         A.   Have been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor
involving moral turpitude or of any felony less than three (3) years before
application for said Certificate of Qualification, unless a longer period is
established by rules and regulations of the Director of Building and Housing;
         B.   Have obtained or renewed a Certificate of Qualification by fraud,
misrepresentation or deception;
         C.   Have engaged in fraud, misrepresentation or deception in the
conduct of business;
         D.   Have been convicted of repeated violations of the OBC or this
Building Code or other laws or ordinances regulating building construction in
the City;
         E.    Have been issued repeated violation notices by the Director for
violations of the OBC, this Building Code, the Zoning Code or the Housing Code,
and failed to correct those notices in a timely fashion.
      (5)   Include in the application, a statement of schooling, training, and
experience, insofar as it is pertinent to the application, specifying under
experience specific jobs with dates, the length of time devoted to each job,
the name of the employer or other responsible person with direct knowledge of
the character and quality of the work performed by the applicant.
   (c)   Picture Machine Operator. A Certificate of Qualification for Picture
Machine Operator shall be granted only to persons who:
      (1)   Are at least eighteen (18) years of age:
      (2)   Satisfactorily complete an examination as approved by the Director,
which examination shall establish to the satisfaction of the Director that the
applicant has a working knowledge of the ordinances and codes governing the use
and operation of picture machines in the City and State and possesses the
theoretical and technical knowledge necessary to use and operate picture
machines. Applicants shall pay all related fees and make all arrangements
directly with the testing agency. Applicants shall furnish the original notice
of approval from the testing agency to the director as evidence of a passing
score on the exam.
(Ord. No. 1190-04. Passed 8-11-04, eff. 8-17-04)
§ 3107.11 Suspension or Revocation of Certificates of Qualification
   (a)   The Director may revoke or suspend a Certificate of Qualification for
any of the following reasons:
      (1)   The holder obtained a Certificate by fraud, misrepresentation or
deception;
      (2)   The holder repeatedly failed to secure permits, inspections, and
approvals required by OBC or this Building Code;
      (3)   The holder repeatedly installed work in an unworkmanlike manner as
defined in this Building Code or not in conformity with issued permits;
      (4)   The holder has been repeatedly notified of violations of OBC or
this Building Code and, has failed or refused to promptly correct an
installation or part of it;
      (5)   As to holders of a Certificate of Qualification for Picture Machine
Operator, the holder has been repeatedly notified of violations of applicable
provisions of the Codified Ordinances and has failed or refused to remedy the
violation, if a remedy is possible.
   (b)   No Certificate of Qualification may be suspended or revoked until the
Director gives notice to the registrant and holds a hearing at which the
certificate holder may appear in person or be represented by counsel.
   (c)   A Certificate of Qualification may be suspended for a prescribed
period not to exceed six (6) months, and the notice of suspension may require
the person whose registration is suspended to correct work improperly installed
or correct any other condition because of which such registration was
suspended. Upon correction, the Certificate may be reinstated unless a new
period of suspension is imposed for cause, or the Certificate is revoked.
   (d)   Whenever the Director recommends the suspension or revocation of a
Certificate of Qualification, he or she shall personally serve or send notice
to the Certificate holder via registered mail detailing the reasons for the
suspension or revocation, the length of the suspension, whether or when a
Certificate holder whose Certificate has been revoked may apply for
reinstatement, and the date the order becomes effective.
(Ord. No. 377-03. Passed 5-19-03, eff. 5-27-03)
   Note: Former 3107.11 repealed by Ord. No. 377-03, passed 5-19-03, eff. 5-27-
03.
§ 3107.12 Fee Payment; Refunds and Renewals
   (a)   Fees for Certificates of Registration, Limited Certificates of
Registration and Certificates of Qualification and renewals shall be paid to
the Director upon application for a Certificate.
   (b)   Fees shall not be refundable.
   (c)   Renewal fees shall be paid during the thirty (30) day period
immediately preceding the expiration date of the Certificate.
   (d)   Where a renewal fee is required, a Certificate which has lapsed
because of nonpayment of the renewal fee but which is otherwise valid may be
renewed during the three (3) month period following the expiration date upon
payment of an additional fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each month late
but no Certification which has lapsed more than three (3) months shall be
renewed.
   (e)   Fees for Certificates and renewals shall be as follows:
 
Certificate                         Initial Fee With Accepted Renewal Fee
                                    Application
Certificates of Registration        $150.00                   $120.00
Limited Certificate of Registration $150.00                   $120.00
for Fireplace Installer
Limited Certificate of Registration $30.00                    $30.00
for Refrigeration Operator
Certificates of Qualification       $80.00                    $80.00
Certificate of Qualification for    $30.00                    $30.00
Picture Machine Operator
 
(Ord. No. 377-03. Passed 5-19-03, eff. 5-27-03)
   Note: Former 3107.12 repealed by Ord. No. 377-03, passed 5-19-03, eff. 5-27-
03.
§ 3107.13 Expiration and Renewal
   (a)   Certificates and Limited Certificates of Registration. An applicant
may apply for a Certificate or Limited Certificate of Registration for a one
(1), two (2) or three (3) year period. The Director may issue and charge a pro-
rated fee for a Certificate or Limited Certificate of Registration which is
valid for an additional six (6) months past its expiration to effect staggered
registration.
   (b)   Certificates of Qualification. Certificates of Qualification shall be
valid for a one (1) year period.
   (c)   Renewal Period. Certificates shall be renewable during the thirty (30)
day period immediately preceding the expiration date. Renewal applications
shall be on forms prescribed by the Director.
   (d)   Revoked and Suspended Certificates. No Certificate shall be renewed if
it has been revoked or is currently suspended.
   (e)   Transfer of Certificates. Certificates are not transferable. However,
with the consent of the Director, the names of new members or officers of a
firm, co- partnership, corporation or association holding a Certificate of
Registration or a Limited Certificate of Registration may be substituted for,
or added to, those previously on record.
(Ord. No. 377-03. Passed 5-19-03, eff. 5-27-03)
   Note: Former 3107.13 repealed by Ord. No. 377-03, passed 5-19-03, eff. 5-27-
03.
§ 3107.14 Appeals
   Any revocation, suspension, or refusal to issue or renew a Certificate of
Registration, Limited Certificate of Registration or Certificate of
Qualification, and any other action or determination of any administrative
officer or other City agency under the provisions of this chapter, may be
appealed to the Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals as provided in
the Charter and this Building Code.
(Ord. No. 377-03. Passed 5-19-03, eff. 5-27-03)
   Note: Former 3107.14 repealed by Ord. No. 377-03, passed 5-19-03, eff. 5-27-
03. Section
3 of Ordinance No. 377-03, passed May 19, 2003, effective May 27, 2003, reads:
   (a)   Any person or Contractor who on December 31, 2002 held a valid
electrical or master plumbers license issued by the City of Cleveland may apply
for a Certificate of Registration renewal within the appropriate renewal period
or any authorized extensions of the renewal period, allowing that person or
Contractor to perform electrical or plumbing work on one, two or three family
structures only in the City of Cleveland without holding a license issued by
the Ohio Construction Industry Examining Board. Those persons or Contractors
may further renew the Certificate of Registration without a license issued by
the Ohio Construction Industry Examining Board as long as the Certificate of
Registration is not revoked or allowed to lapse.
   (b)   Any person or Contractor who on December 31, 2002 held a valid
Certificate of Registration as a heating, ventilating and air conditioning
contractor issued by the City of Cleveland may apply for a Certificate of
Registration renewal within the appropriate renewal period or any authorized
extensions of the renewal period, allowing that person or Contractor to perform
heating, ventilating or air conditioning work on one, two or three family
structures only in the City of Cleveland without holding a license issued by
the Ohio Construction Industry Examining Board. Those persons or Contractors
may renew the Certificate of Registration without a license issued by the Ohio
Construction Industry Examining Board as long as the Certificate of
Registration is not revoked or allowed to lapse.
   (c)   Any person who on December 31, 2002 held a valid limited premises
electrical license issued by the City of Cleveland may apply by September 30,
2003 for a Certificate of Qualification for Limited Premises Electrical
Maintenance without taking any further examinations. That Certificate may be
further renewed without taking further examinations.
   (d)   Any person who on December 31, 2002 held a valid master plumber or
journeyman plumber license issued by the City of Cleveland may apply by
September 30, 2003 for a Certificate of Qualification for Journeyman Plumber
without taking any further examinations. That Certificate may be further
renewed without further examinations.
   (e)   Any person who on December 31, 2002, held a valid picture machine
operator’s license issued by the City of Cleveland may apply by September 30,
2003 for a Certificate of Qualification for Picture Machine Operator without
taking any further examinations. The certificate may be further renewed without
taking further examinations.”
§ 3107.15 Rulemaking Authority
   The Director of Building and Housing is authorized to issue rules and
regulations regarding the length of time following conviction of a felony that
a person is prohibited from obtaining a Certificate of Registration or a
Certificate of Qualification under this chapter. Any such rule or regulation
shall be effective thirty (30) days after publication in the City Record.
(Ord. No. 1190-04. Passed 8-11-04, eff. 8-17-04)
§§ 3107.16 to 3107.38 Licensing and Qualification Certificates – Repealed
(Ord. No. 377-03. Passed 5-19-03, eff. 5-27-03)
CHAPTER 3109 – ENCROACHMENTS
3109.01   General Restrictions Beyond the Building Line; Fee
3109.02   Relations to Other Code Provisions
3109.03   Prohibited Projections and Encroachments
3109.04   Sidewalks, Driveways, Curbs and Pavements
3109.05   Footings
3109.06   Below Grade Structures
3109.07   Interference With Street Widening
3109.08   Permissible Projections on Buildings
3109.09   Marquees
3109.10   Fixed Awnings
3109.11   Retractable Awnings
3109.12   Entrance Canopies
3109.13   Canopies on Market Streets
3109.14   Temporary Canopies
3109.15   Temporary Reviewing Stands
3109.16   Storm Doors and Enclosures
3109.17   Sidewalk Vaults
3109.18   Sidewalk Elevators and Sidewalk Doors
3109.19   Prohibited Uses Under Grade Between Building Line and Curb Line
3109.20   Reservations on Under Sidewalk Uses
   Note: The legislative history of this chapter, except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 1116-A-85, passed
February 10, 1986.
Cross-reference:
   Fees for structures beyond the street or alley line, CO
3105.25
§ 3109.01 General Restrictions Beyond the Building Line; Fee
   (a)   No part of any building or other structure erected and no addition to
any existing building or other structure shall be constructed so as to encroach
upon public property or project beyond the street or alley line or setback or
specific building line except as provided in this chapter, Chapter
3113 or the Zoning Code (Chapters
325 to
359).
   (b)   Any part of a building or other structure, except permitted footings,
constructed so as to project beyond the street or alley line or specific
building line shall be constructed so that it may be removed at any time
without causing the building or other structure to become structurally unsafe
in whole or in part.
   (c)   A permit shall be required for all permitted projections and
encroachments beyond the building line and into required yard or court spaces
which are regulated by this chapter, except that permits shall be required for
retractable awnings only when located at the first story level and projecting,
when open, over public property. The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses
shall charge a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a permit issued under
this section, except for banners. For encroachment permits to attach banners to
utility or other poles in the right-of-way, the Commissioner of Assessments and
Licenses shall charge a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) per pole. No fee shall be
charged for encroachment permits to stretch a banner across the right-of-way.
   (d)   No permit to erect, alter, enlarge or maintain a projection beyond the
street or alley line, or to encroach upon public property, shall constitute a
permanent easement. Every such permit shall be revocable at any time by action
of Council, and the City shall not be liable for any damages to the owner by
reason of the revocation.
   (e)   All projections and all encroachments shall be kept and maintained in
a safe, sound and non- hazardous condition and in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter or, where applicable, with the provisions of Chapter
3113. All corrodible materials shall be kept protected from corrosion by
painting or shall be otherwise protected as approved by the Commissioner. All
conditions which are declared unsafe or in violation of this chapter by the
Commissioner shall be promptly abated by repair or by removal and rendered safe
and in compliance with this chapter. Should an owner fail to comply within a
reasonable time with any order of the Commissioner requiring the abatement of
any unsafe condition, the Commissioner shall act under the provisions of
Section
3103.09.
   (f)   Any permit issued for a projection beyond the street or alley line, or
for encroachment upon public property, shall be valid only while the projection
or encroachment is maintained in a safe, sound, and nonhazardous condition. The
Commissioner shall revoke any such permit when unsafe conditions are not
promptly corrected by the owner of the property.
   (g)   No projection beyond a street or alley line and no encroachment upon
public property, shall be constructed so as to interfere with trees on public
property, or with street lamps, hydrants, trolley or utility poles or wires, or
other public installations, or with any required means of egress.
   (h)   Except as may be limited or restricted by specific regulations, the
provisions of this chapter permitting projections beyond the street or alley
line shall apply also to projections on a public park or other permanent open
public space provided, however, that the provisions of this chapter permitting
underground installations between the street or alley line and the curb line,
and the erection of marquees, fixed awnings and entrance canopies shall apply
only between the street or alley line and a curb line.
(Ord. No. 2393-02. Passed 2-3-03, eff. 2-3-03)
§ 3109.02 Relations to Other Code Provisions
   (a)   For provisions governing the installation and maintenance of signs
consult OBBC, Chapter
3113 of this Building Code and the Zoning Code (Chapters
325 to
359).
   (b)   For provisions governing the use of sidewalks and streets during
construction, demolition or moving of buildings consult Chapter
3115.
   (c)   No installation permitted by this chapter shall be made so as to
violate any provision of the Zoning Code (Chapters
325 to
359).
   (d)   The provisions of this Building Code, including its enforcement and
penalty provisions, shall apply to any violation of Chapter
670B related to:
      (1)   An outdoor pay telephone that is attached to a building or
structure by any means, including the attachment of any portion of a pay
telephone, a frame or post to which a pay telephone is attached, or a wire or
conduit connecting a pay telephone or its lighting source to a building or
structure; or
      (2)   An outdoor pay telephone that is located on a parking lot, yard, or
any other part of a premises where such pay telephone is available for public
use.
   An outdoor pay telephone shall be considered a structure for the purposes of
the Building Code to the extent that it is erected on a stand alone basis on a
premises, and it shall be considered an appurtenance that is a part of a
building or other structure for purposes of this chapter to the extent that it
is attached or connected to a building or other structure.
   No building or encroachment permit shall be required for a pay telephone
that is permitted under Chapter
670B.
(Ord. No. 1989-01. Passed 10-22-01, eff. 11-1-01 without the signature of the
Mayor)
§ 3109.03 Prohibited Projections and Encroachments
   (a)   The following projections beyond street or alley lines and
encroachments upon public property are specifically prohibited.
      (1)   Steps which are not contained within permitted base courses;
      (2)   Steps which project beyond the permitted projection of base
courses;
      (3)   Areas for light and ventilation of below- grade rooms or spaces;
      (4)   The projection of doors when opening or opened in a horizontal
direction;
      (5)   Storm doors and enclosures;
      (6)   Fire escapes, fire tower balconies, balconies serving as horizontal
exists, or other similar means of egress, except when specifically approved by
the Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals;
      (7)   Under-grade uses prohibited by Section
3109.20.
   (b)   Sidewalks shall not be used for the display of goods, wares or
merchandise, or for other similar commercial purpose.
   (c)   The prohibitions of this section shall not be interpreted as
permitting the construction of any projections or encroachments not
specifically permitted by this Building Code.
§ 3109.04 Sidewalks, Driveways, Curbs and Pavements
   (a)   Any alteration, change, repair, removal or replacement of curbs, or of
pavements within the traveled right-of-way, shall be under the control and
direction of the Director of Public Service and shall be done by the City
through its duly authorized employees or contractors. For all newly-installed,
re-located, or reinstalled curbs, the curb elevation shall be the elevation
directed by the Commissioner of Engineering and Construction of the Department
of Public Service.
   (b)   No curb shall be cut, lowered or installed at lower than customary
height for access to premises unless the proposed use or the use of such
premises is permitted by this Building Code and a permit, when required, has
been issued for such use by the Commissioner.
   (c)   The length and location of each curb cut and lowered curb shall also
be subject to the approval of the Traffic Engineer and, where such curb abuts a
tree lawn, to the approval of the Commissioner of Shade Trees.
   (d)   The construction or alteration of sidewalks or driveways outside of a
street or alley line or on public property shall be performed under permits
from the Department of Public Service and in conformity with its regulations.
   (e)   Unless otherwise specifically approved by the Commissioner of
Engineering and Construction of the Department of Public Service under unusual
conditions or conditions which would otherwise result in undue hardship, all
sidewalks shall be in stalled with a rise of three-eighths (3/8) of an inch to
the foot from the top of the curb to the street or alley line, measured at
right angles to the curb, provided that at street intersections where the grade
of the intersecting street prevents compliance with these provisions, the
sidewalk shall be laid as directed by and to the acceptance of the Commissioner
of Engineering and Construction.
   (f)   Sidewalks shall be laid with the top surface properly roughened so
that they will not become slippery when covered with moisture.
§ 3109.05 Footings
   (a)   Footings located six (6) feet or more but less than ten (10) feet
below grade level may project not more than twelve (12) inches beyond the
street or alley line. Footings located ten (10) feet or more below grade level
may project not more than three (3) feet beyond the street or alley line.
   (b)   No other part required for structural support of a building, and no
foundation wall below grade level, shall project beyond the street or alley
line. Permissible projections above the grade level shall be supported by
corbelling, bracketing or cantilevering from supports and foundations
maintained within the street or alley line.
§ 3109.06 Below Grade Structures
   There shall be no restrictions on the extent of structures entirely below
grade level and located between a setback building line which is not a specific
building line, and the street or alley line.
§ 3109.07 Interference With Street Widening
   Where specific building lines are shown on the Zoning Maps, or where street
widening is contemplated, the Director of Public Service may limit the
projection of structures beyond a building line so that they will not interfere
with street widening.
§ 3109.08 Permissible Projections on Buildings
   (a)   The following projections shall be permitted beyond the street or
alley line or setback or specific building line, or a lot line which adjoins a
permanent open public space not less than ten (10) feet in width, provided that
such projections are not in violation of the provisions of Section
357.13 of the Zoning Code governing encroachment on required front and side
street yards, or of other provisions of this chapter.
      (1)   Main cornices twelve (12) feet or more above grade level: five
percent (5%) of the width of the street or alley or other permanent open public
space, but not exceeding five (5) feet;
      (2)   Belt courses, lintels, sill courses, pediments, subordinate
cornices, moldings and similar decorative projections: one and one-fourth
percent (1-1/4%) of the width of the street, alley or other permanent open
public space, but in no case more than ten (10) inches;
      (3)   Ordinary window sills and similar sills: not more than two (2)
inches;
      (4)   Base courses: one and one-fourth percent (1-1/4%) of the width of
the street, alley or other permanent open public space but not more than ten
(10) inches; except that when the width of an adjoining sidewalk is less than
ten (10) feet the maximum permissible projection shall be six (6) inches. In
all cases, the height of a projecting base course above grade level shall not
exceed three (3) feet;
      (5)   Rustications and quoins and similar decorative surfaces not more
than four (4) inches;
      (6)   Architraves, columns or pilasters or other decorative projections,
emphasizing entrances: not more than ten (10) inches;
      (7)   Bays or oriels located not less than twelve (12) feet above grade
level, and aggregating a vertical area in any story of not more than twenty
percent (20%) of the area of the facade in that story, may project three
percent (3%) of the width of the street, alley or other public open space upon
which they face but not more than three (3) feet;
      (8)   Noncombustible veneer when used for refacing existing buildings
only: not more than four (4) inches.
   (b)   In calculating the maximum projection as limited by the prescribed
percentage of the width of the street, alley or other permanent open public
space, such width may be measured between setback or specific building lines.
   (c)   For permitted projections into required rear yards and side yards see
Section
357.13(c) of the Zoning Code. For permitted projections into required courts
see Section
357.16(d) of the Zoning Code.
§ 3109.09 Marquees
   (a)   Application.
      (1)   The provisions of this section shall govern the erection of
marquees located between a setback building line, specific building line,
street line or alley line and the curb line.
      (2)   Fixed structures for shelter or shade attached to the face of a
building and located within a required interior side yard, rear yard or court,
shall, for the purposes of this Building Code, be deemed to be fixed awnings
and shall conform to the provisions of Section
3109.10.
   (b)   Definition. For purposes of this Building Code “marquee” means a fixed
structure constructed at the ground story level of a building to provide
shelter for sidewalks or walks; supported by cantilevering outward from the
face of a building, or by chains or rods, and not supported by posts or
columns; and capable of supporting safely a live load of sixty (60) pounds per
square foot of roof area and resisting safely an uplift of twenty (20) pounds
per square foot with no downward live load.
   (c)   Permitted Locations. A marquee located as specified in subsection (a)
(1) hereof and conforming to the provisions of this section may be erected on
any building except that no marquee shall extend over a window required to
provide natural light in a habitable room.
   (d)   Permissible Length.
      (1)   When glass or other fragile material is used on the roof surface or
in the roof construction of a marquee, or the roof slope of a marquee exceeds
one (1) in four (4), such marquee shall not extend more than ten (10) feet on
either side of an entrance doorway and the aggregate length of such marquees on
any street or alley frontage of a building shall not exceed twenty- five
percent (25%) of such frontage.
      (2)   When the roofs of marquees are constructed and finished with solid,
nonfragile material from which firefighting operations can be conducted and
have a slope of one (1) in four (4) or less, such marquees may be erected for
the full length of a street or alley frontage of a building.
   (e)   Maximum Projection.
      (1)   In Dwelling House Districts no marquee shall extend beyond the
limits specified in Section
357.13(b)(1) of the Zoning Code.
      (2)   No marquee shall extend so that the extreme outer edge is less than
two (2) feet from a vertical surface passing through the outer face of the
sidewalk curb.
   (f)   Minimum Clearance and Maximum Height. There shall not be less than ten
(10) feet in the clear between any point of a marquee and the sidewalk or walk
surface directly below. The roof of a marquee shall be not more than twenty
(20) feet above the highest level of the sidewalk or walk surface under such
marquee.
   (g)   Construction.
      (1)   The vertical dimension of the side or front face of a marquee shall
not exceed twenty-four (24) inches.
      (2)   Every marquee shall be constructed of noncombustible materials.
      (3)   Glass used in the roof construction or on the roof surface of a
marquee shall be wired glass not less than one-fourth (1/4) inch thick and no
light of such glass shall exceed seven hundred twenty (720) square inches in
area or forty-eight (48) inches in any dimension.
      (4)   The roofs of all marquees shall be equipped for drainage of storm
water therefrom into the public drainage system. No water from the roofs of
marquees shall be discharged in any fashion other than by piping connected into
an approved drainage system.
      (5)   Signs attached to marquees or erected on roofs of marquees shall
conform to the applicable provisions of Chapter
3113.
   (h)   Artificial Illumination. All sidewalks or walks under marquees shall
be illuminated so that there will be not less than one (1) foot-candle at the
sidewalk or walk level. Artificial illumination shall be provided by the owners
of marquees whenever and wherever natural illumination or street lighting does
not provide the intensity specified in this subsection.
§ 3109.10 Fixed Awnings
   (a)   Application. The provisions of this section shall govern the erection
of fixed awnings erected between a setback building line, specific building
line, street line or alley line and the curb line; or within a required yard or
court.
   (b)   Definition. For purposes of this Building Code a “fixed awning” means
a fixed structure supported by cantilevering or bracketing from the face of a
building, and constructed to provide shelter or shade.
   (c)   Permitted Locations.
      (1)   Fixed awnings conforming to the provisions of this section may be
erected on any building.
      (2)   A fixed awning located as specified in subsection (a) hereof shall
not be erected above the lowest story abutting a yard or court or facing a
street or alley.
   (d)   Permissible Length. There shall be no limitation on the permitted
length of fixed awnings, measured parallel to the face of the building to which
they are attached, when constructed and installed in conformity with the
provisions of this section.
   (e)   Maximum Projection.
      (1)   In Dwelling House Districts no fixed awning shall extend beyond the
limits specified in Section
357.13(b)(1) of the Zoning Code.
      (2)   No fixed awning shall extend so that the extreme outer edge is less
than two (2) feet from a vertical surface passing through the outer face of the
sidewalk curb and no fixed awning shall extend more than forty-two (42) inches
from the building face to which it is attached when over a window required to
provide natural light in a habitable room, or more than five (5) feet in other
instances; except that on one (1) story buildings fixed awnings may extend six
(6) feet from the building face when not over a window required to provide
natural light in a habitable room.
   (f)   Minimum Clearance and Maximum Height.
      (1)   There shall be not less than seven (7) feet, six (6) inches in the
clear between any point of a fixed awning and the sidewalk, walk, or ground
surface directly below, and no part of such awning shall be more than twelve
(12) feet above such sidewalk, walk, or ground surface, except that such latter
distance may be twenty (20) feet where the awning will not obstruct rescue
through windows above the awning.
      (2)   The maximum overall vertical dimension between top and bottom of
any such fixed awning measured at the building face shall be three (3) feet;
the maximum overall vertical dimension between top and bottom of such awning at
its outermost projection shall be ten (10) inches; and the maximum overall
vertical dimension between top and bottom at the midpoint of projection shall
be twenty-three (23) inches; except that under conditions where undue hardship
would otherwise result, the Commissioner may approve vertical dimensions of
four (4) feet at the building face and twenty-nine (29) inches at the midpoint
of projection.
   (g)   Construction.
      (1)   Fixed awnings shall be constructed throughout of noncombustible
material, except that glass or other fragile material shall not be used in any
part of such awning.
      (2)   Fixed awnings shall be constructed to withstand snow loads and
other loads incidental to serve performed, and maximum applied in any
direction.
      (3)   Fixed awnings shall be rigidly attached to the building or
structure by bracketing or cantilevering.
      (4)   Any fixed awning which is not constructed to permit the passage of
rain or snow through open slots, slats, or louvers in the roof of the awning,
or so arranged, designed, and erected that the discharge of rain water from the
fixed awning at any point is not excessive and does not create a nuisance,
shall be equipped with gutters or drains and downspouts to conduct water to the
public drainage system and prevent flow upon pedestrians.
      (5)   Ferrous metal or other material subject to corrosion when exposed
to the weather, used in the construction of fixed awnings, shall be not lighter
than twenty (20) U.S. gauge except that lighter gauge may be used for applied
members, supported nonstructural parts, and decorative trim.
   (h)   Signs. Signs attached to fixed awnings shall conform to the applicable
provisions of Chapter
3113.
§ 3109.11 Retractable Awnings
   (a)   Definition. For the purposes of this Building Code “retractable
awning” means a structure fastened to the face of a building which in a closed
position does not project more than twelve (12) inches from the face of such
building and which, when opened by the operation of folding arms or other
retractable supports, provides shelter or shade under canvas or metal or other
material no more flammable or combustible than canvas.
   (b)   Permitted Locations. Retractable awnings conforming to the provisions
of this section may be erected on any building.
   (c)   Permissible Length. There shall be no limitation on the permissible
length of retractable awnings.
   (d)   Maximum Projection and Minimum Clearance.
      (1)   In Dwelling House Districts no retractable awning shall project
beyond the limits specified in Section
357.13(b)(1) of the Zoning Code.
      (2)   No retractable awning shall project more than eight (8) feet over a
required front or side street yard or over public property when located at the
first story level nor more than forty-two (42) inches when located above the
first story level, and no retractable awning shall extend so that the extreme
outer edge is less than two (2) feet from a vertical surface passing through
the outer face of the sidewalk curb.
      (3)   No retractable awning shall project into a required rear yard or
interior side yard to a distance more than one-half (1/2) the width of such
yard; or into a required court to a distance more than one-half (1/2) the width
of the court; or in any case more than forty- two (42) inches; except that the
Commissioner may approve greater projection at the lowest story abutting an
interior side yard or rear yard or a court, or at the level of a setback,
provided light and ventilation are not materially obstructed thereby.
      (4)   In the closed position, no part of a retractable awning which is
less than seven (7) feet, six (6) inches above the sidewalk or walk level shall
project beyond the building line, and in the open position, no part of canvas
shall be less than six (6) feet, eight (8) inches above the sidewalk or walk
level and no part of metal or other nonyielding material shall be less than
seven (7) feet, six (6) inches above the sidewalk or walk level.
   (e)   Construction.
      (1)   The framework of retractable awnings shall be either of
noncorrodible metal or of metal properly protected against corrosion, or of
other approved incombustible material suitable for the purpose.
      (2)   All canvas hereafter installed on retractable awnings in connection
with business, mercantile, commercial or industrial occupancy, shall be
approved flameproofed canvas.
§ 3109.12 Entrance Canopies
   (a)   Definition. For purposes of this Building Code an “entrance canopy”
means a fixed or stationary canopy or hood constructed to provide protection at
the entrance of a building, either supported entirely from a building, or
supported partly from a building or from posts within the street or alley line,
and partly by not more than two (2) pipe posts located two (2) feet in from the
outer face of the curb.
   (b)   Limiting Dimensions.
      (1)   The maximum width of any entrance canopy shall be eight (8) feet;
no part of the horizontal supporting framework shall be less than eight (8)
feet above the sidewalk or walk level and no part of such canopy shall be more
than twelve (12) feet above the sidewalk or walk level.
      (2)   The minimum clearance under any canvas part of an entrance canopy
shall be six (6) feet, eight (8) inches.
      (3)   Side curtains of canvas may be attached to an entrance canopy
provided the width of the traveled sidewalk is not obstructed thereby; such
traveled width to be established by the Director of Public Service with due
consideration of the density of travel over the sidewalk.
   (c)   Permitted Locations. Entrance canopies may be constructed at the
entrances of buildings other than dwelling houses or row houses, except that
not more than one (1) entrance canopy shall be provided for each eighty (80)
feet of street frontage of a building.
   (d)   Construction.
      (1)   The framework of entrance canopies shall be either of noncorrodible
metal or of metal properly protected against corrosion, or other incombustible
material approved for the purpose.
      (2)   All canvas hereafter installed on any entrance canopy shall be
approved flameproofed canvas. Any other material used in covering an entrance
canopy shall be no more flammable or combustible than approved flameproofed
canvas.
§ 3109.13 Canopies on Market Streets
   (a)   Definitions. A “market street” means a street on which the buildings
are used primarily for the wholesale handling and sale of perishable foods and
which has been designated as a “market street” by the City Planning Commission.
   (b)   Permits and Construction.
      (1)   By special permit from the Commissioner and the Director of Public
Service, canvas awnings on pipe frames may be erected on a market street on
pipe supports located adjacent to the curb line, but not closer than one (1)
foot from the curb line, for the sole purpose of protection of perishable foods
in the process of loading, unloading or handling.
      (2)   The canvas covering for such canopies may extend from the building
to a horizontal support placed adjacent to the curb line and shall be arranged
so that it can be rolled up, removed or retracted; and shall be rolled up,
removed or retracted on days when not in actual use.
      (3)   No such canopy shall be more than fifty (50) feet in length
measured parallel to the building line, and there shall be a clearance of not
less than four (4) feet from every common lot line, and not less than eight (8)
feet between adjacent canopies.
      (4)   The horizontal members of such canopies shall be not less than ten
(10) feet above curb level and the total height at any point shall not exceed
twelve (12) feet above curb level.
      (5)   All canvas hereafter installed on sidewalk canopies on market
streets shall be approved flameproofed canvas.
§ 3109.14 Temporary Canopies
   (a)   Temporary canopies may be erected on sidewalks in connection with
special events of a public nature for periods not exceeding two (2) weeks, and
for other purposes for periods not exceeding forty-eight (48) hours, provided
that no public hazard is created thereby and a permit therefor is obtained from
the Director of Public Service.
   (b)   The arrangement of such temporary canopies shall afford at least six
(6) feet of unobstructed sidewalk width for the use of the public, or such
greater unobstructed width as may be directed by the Director of Public
Service.
§ 3109.15 Temporary Reviewing Stands
   (a)   No temporary reviewing stands shall be erected except under permit
from the Commissioner and in accordance with plans and specifications approved
by him or her.
   (b)   No temporary reviewing stand shall be placed upon public property
without a permit from the Director of Public Service, and no such stand shall
be so located when a charge is made for space in such stand by any person or
persons other than a general committee having charge of a public demonstration.
   (c)   No temporary reviewing stand shall be erected upon public property so
as to obstruct more than two-thirds (2/3) of the width between the curb line
and the street line.
§ 3109.16 Storm Doors and Enclosures
   (a)   Storm doors and storm enclosures shall not project beyond the street
or alley line.
   (b)   Storm enclosures may project beyond a building line into a front yard
or side street yard as permitted for front and side street yard encroachments
under Section
357.13(b)(4) of the Zoning Code.
§ 3109.17 Sidewalk Vaults
   (a)   Except as may be further limited where specific building lines are
established or where street widening is contemplated, the space which may be
occupied for a sidewalk vault shall be limited to the space between the street
or alley line and a line four and one-half (4-1/2) feet from and parallel to
the outer face of the curb to the outside face of the retaining wall of the
vault; provided that spurs for sidewalk elevators, coal holes, and chutes shall
be constructed so that the outer edge of sidewalk doors and coal holes shall be
two (2) feet from the outer face of the curb.
   (b)   Sidewalk vaults shall be designed to support the live loads specified
in OBBC. Walls of sidewalk vaults shall be designed to resist all loads
including possible surcharge from fixed or moving loads.
   (c)   The structural slab or arch forming the roof of the vault shall be not
less than four and one-half (4-1/2) inches below the finished surface of the
sidewalk, and the sidewalk shall be installed in conformity with the rules and
regulations of the Director of Public Service.
   (d)   No glass light shall be installed in the roof of any sidewalk vault.
   (e)   Manholes or other openings shall be provided in the roof of a sidewalk
vault only when their need is conclusively demonstrated to the satisfaction of
the Director of Public Service. Manholes or other opening covers installed in
the roof of any sidewalk vault shall be approved type and shall not exceed
thirty (30) inches in diameter or, when rectangular, shall not exceed thirty
(30) inches along any side; shall be of metal or other approved incombustible
material constructed to support the sidewalk loads prescribed by this Building
Code and to prevent persons from slipping thereon; shall normally be kept
closed; and shall have covers and frames flush with the sidewalk or walk. When
covers are removed, the opening shall be properly protected and safeguarded.
   (f)   When approved by the Director of Public Service under provisions of
subsection (e) hereof, gratings not larger than necessary to provide required
ventilation may be installed in the roofs of sidewalk vaults.
   Such gratings shall be of metal or other approved incombustible material
constructed to support the sidewalk loads prescribed by this Building Code;
shall be flush with the sidewalk, and shall be arranged so that no hazard will
be created thereby. Gratings constructed of iron or steel bars shall have bars
spaced not more than seventy-three hundredths (0.73) inch apart, and shall be
of an approved nonslip type.
   (g)   Sidewalk vaults shall be paved as required for cellars and shall be
maintained in a dry and sanitary condition.
§ 3109.18 Sidewalk Elevators and Sidewalk Doors
   (a)   No sidewalk door or doors for any purpose shall exceed four (4) feet
in one (1) dimension and six (6) feet in the other dimension, nor shall the
dimension at right angles to the curb be more than one-third (1/3) of the
sidewalk width.
   (b)   No sidewalk door or doors shall be installed in any sidewalk six (6)
feet or less in width, measured at right angles to the curb.
   (c)   No sidewalk elevator or sidewalk door or doors shall be installed in
any sidewalk in front of any building where unloading space for off-street
unloading and loading is available or required by this Building Code, except
that in cases of undue hardship such installations may be permitted by the
Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals.
   (d)   All sidewalk doors shall be constructed of noncombustible material;
shall be capable of supporting the sidewalk loads prescribed by this Building
Code; and shall have surfaces which will prevent persons from slipping on them.
No glass lights shall be installed within such doors and any perforations or
gratings within them shall conform to the requirements hereinbefore specified
for gratings in sidewalk vault roofs.
   (e)   All sidewalk doors shall be installed so that one (1) side is two (2)
feet from the outer face of the curb and parallel to the curb, and so that all
portions of the frame and the door or doors are flush with the sidewalk
surface.
   (f)   Not more than one (1) sidewalk door or pair of doors shall be
installed for each eighty (80) feet of frontage of a building.
   (g)   All sidewalk doors shall be kept closed and sidewalks unobstructed
except when sidewalk doors are in actual use for the transfer of objects
through such doors. When closed, sidewalk doors shall be securely fastened from
the underside. When open, sidewalk openings shall be properly protected and
safeguarded.
§ 3109.19 Prohibited Uses Under Grade Between Building Line and Curb Line
   (a)   No gas or gasoline engine, or storage tank for the storage of gasoline
or other flammable liquid with a flash point of one hundred degrees Fahrenheit
(100°F) or less, nor any pipe or fixture generating or emitting gas or noxious
or offensive odor, shall be installed under any street or alley.
   (b)   No fill pipe opening for tanks or containers of flammable liquid with
a flash point of one hundred degrees Fahrenheit (100°F) or less shall be
located outside of a street or alley line or on public property. Fill pipe
openings for liquids with a flash point above one hundred degrees Fahrenheit
(100°F) installed outside of a street or alley line shall be two (2) feet from
the outer face of the curb.
   (c)   No opening in the space between the street or alley line and the curb
line shall be used for the emission of vitiated air or as an exhaust opening or
intake opening for a ventilating system, or for any similar purpose, except
that gratings may be installed for natural ventilation as permitted by Section
3109.17(f).
   (d)   No equipment, the operation of which is noisy and objectionably
audible at the street level, shall be installed under the grade level between
the building line and curb line.
   (e)   Every application for the construction of a vault or other structure
under the grade level between the building line and the curb line shall clearly
state the intended use and occupancy of such vault or space and the tanks,
machinery, or equipment intended to be placed therein, and such vault space or
structure shall be used for no other than the approved purpose unless such
other purpose is approved by the Commissioner and the Director of Public
Service.
§ 3109.20 Reservations on Under Sidewalk Uses
   (a)   No vault or other structure below the sidewalk level shall be
constructed between the street or alley line and the curb line so as to
interfere with or obstruct any existing or proposed installation of the City,
or any existing installation of public utility companies, except as such
installation may be relocated by the owners thereof.
   (b)   The City reserves the right to construct at any time, under, over, or
through such vault space or under sidewalk structure any installation needed
for the public service without liability or compensation to the owner of such
vault or under sidewalk structure.
   (c)   Every application for a permit for a sidewalk vault or other under
sidewalk structure shall be accompanied by a written recorded agreement upon an
official blank, signed by the owner of the abutting property, contracting to
release and relinquish the whole or part of such vault space or other under
sidewalk space if so directed by ordinance of Council, and to remove all
machinery, fixtures and structural parts of the vault which conflict with or
obstruct proposed installations of the City or, when so directed, to alter such
vault or other under sidewalk structure so as not to conflict with or obstruct
proposed installations of the City, and to construct any retaining walls or
other structures necessary to support walk and roadway loads and resist lateral
pressures where such vault or other under sidewalk structure is removed in
whole or in part; all without cost to the City and without compensation
therefor from the City.
   (d)   Where specific building lines are shown on the Zoning Maps, or where
street widening is contemplated, the Director of Public Service may limit the
dimensions of under sidewalk structures so that they will not interfere with
street widening.
CHAPTER 3111 – OHIO BUILDING CODE
3111.01   Adoption and Purpose
3111.02   Application
3111.03   Approvals and Appeals
3111.04   Amendments to Code – Repealed
   Note: The legislative history of this chapter, except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 1116-A-85, passed
February 10, 1986.
Statutory reference:
   OBC referenced standards, OAC Ch. 4101:1-35
§ 3111.01 Adoption and Purpose
   The Ohio Basic Building Code (OBBC) as promulgated by the Ohio Board of
Building Standards, effective January 1, 1989, and as amended by the Ohio Board
of Building Standards, is hereby adopted and incorporated by the City of
Cleveland as fully as if set out at length herein. The Ohio Basic Building
Code, for which the designated OBBC may be used, contains OAC Chapters 4101:2-
1 to 4101:2-51, and is adopted for the purposes specified in OAC 4101:2-1-05.
(Ord. No. 1698-89. Passed 6-19-89, eff. 6-28-89)
§ 3111.02 Application
   (a)   The Ohio Basic Building Code as adopted herein applies to all
buildings except as follows:
      (1)   Single-family, two (2) family and three (3) family dwelling houses
which are not constructed of industrialized units, except where the context
specifies mandatory applicability;
      (2)   Buildings owned by and used for a function of the United States
government;
      (3)   Existing buildings where their location, parts, equipment and other
items do not constitute a serious hazard;
      (4)   Buildings constructed in accordance with plans which have been
approved prior to the effective date of the Ohio Basic Building Code adoption;
      (5)   Buildings or structures which are incident to the use for
agricultural purposes of the land on which such buildings or structures are
located, provided such buildings or structures are not used in the business of
retail trade, as set forth in RC 3781.06 and 3781.061.
      (6)   Agricultural labor camps as defined in RC 3733.41; and
      (7)   Buildings or structures which are designed, constructed and
maintained in accordance with Federal standards and regulations and are used
for Federal and State military purposes as provided in OBBC.
(OAC 4101:2-1-09)
   (b)   Notwithstanding subsection (a) hereof, the Ohio Basic Building Code
shall apply to all nonindustrialized single-family, two (2) family and three
(3) family dwelling houses except as specifically excluded or modified by
provisions of this Building Code and except those provisions which by their
nature are inapplicable.
§ 3111.03 Approvals and Appeals
   (a)   Approvals. Any material, product, assembly or method of construction
not specifically provided for in OBBC involving work or buildings regulated by
OBBC shall be submitted to the Ohio Board of Building Standards for evaluation
and authorization as provided by OAC 4101:2-1-66 to 4101:2-1-70. Matters
involving work or buildings not regulated by OBBC shall be submitted to the
Cleveland Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals for evaluation and
authorization.
   (b)   Appeals. Appeals involving enforcement of matters relative to work or
buildings regulated by OBBC shall be submitted to the Ohio Board of Building
Appeals for an adjudication hearing as provided by RC 3781.19. Appeals
including enforcement of matters relating to work or buildings not regulated by
OBBC and such further and additional regulations to OBBC as are enacted or
supplemented by City ordinances, shall be submitted to the Cleveland Board of
Building Standards and Building Appeals for hearing and decision. The Cleveland
Board may approve, reverse or modify the order appealed from or may grant a
variance which will not be contrary to the public interest where a literal
enforcement of such provisions will result in unnecessary hardship.
§ 3111.04 Amendments to Code – Repealed
(Ord. No. 2370-01. Passed 5-13-02, eff. 5-20-02)
CHAPTER 3113 – OUTDOOR SIGNS AND DISPLAYS
3113.01   Scope
3113.02   Zoning Code Controlling
3113.03   Permits; Conditions and Exemptions
3113.04   Action on Illegal Signs
3113.05   Bill Posting Restricted
3113.06   Reserved
3113.07   Obstructing Signs Prohibited
3113.08   Wind Loads and Allowable Stresses
3113.09   Connections, General Construction Requirements and Marking
3113.10   Ground Signs
3113.11   Roof Signs
3113.12   Wall Signs
3113.13   Projecting Signs
3113.14   Marquee Signs
3113.15   Fixed Awning Signs
3113.16   Temporary Signs
3113.17   Reserved
   Note: The legislative history of this chapter, except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 1116-A-85, passed
February 10, 1986.
Cross-Reference:
   Sign measurement standards, CO
3105.21
   Sign permit fees, CO
3105.25
   Sign wind loads, CO
3129.07
§ 3113.01 Scope
   The provisions of OAC Chapter 4101:2-29 and this chapter shall govern
outdoor signs and display structures with respect to safety, construction,
erection, attachment, support, anchorage and maintenance. Sign wind pressure
requirements shall be as provided in Section
3129.07.
(Ord. No. 2933-90. Passed 2-4-91, eff. 2-11-91)
§ 3113.02 Zoning Code Controlling
   No provision of this chapter shall be interpreted to authorize or permit the
erection or maintenance of any sign or display structure in violation of any
provision of the Zoning Code (Chapters
325 to
359).
§ 3113.03 Permits; Conditions and Exemptions
   (a)   Excepting only outdoor signs and display structures specifically
exempted by division (c) of this section, no outdoor sign or display structure
shall hereafter be erected and no outdoor sign or display structure shall be
affixed, attached to, suspended from or supported on a building or other
structure until a permit has been issued by the Commissioner.
   (b)   Permits shall be obtained for all electrical wiring and electrical
installations in connection with signs or outdoor display structures. All such
electrical wiring and electrical installations shall be done in conformity with
the provisions of Chapter
3137.
   (c)   Exemptions. No permit shall be required for the affixation or erection
of the following signs. Such exemption shall, however, apply to the requirement
for a permit only and shall not be construed as relieving the owner of such
sign from responsibility for its erection and maintenance in a safe condition,
or from conformity with applicable provisions of this chapter governing
material, construction and erection.
      (1)   Signs erected in compliance with Zoning Code division (a) of
Section
350.04, Section
350.11, division (c) of Section
350.13 and division (d) of Section
350.13;
      (2)   Noncombustible tablets built into the wall of a building or other
structure and used for inscriptions or as memorial tablets or for similar
purposes;
      (3)   Posting of bills, signs or posters on billboards or display
structures legally erected and maintained for such purpose;
      (4)   Municipal street, traffic or emergency signs, and railroad sign;
      (5)   Legal notices and house numbers;
      (6)   Temporary signs on buildings under construction.
   (d)   Issuance of required permits shall be by the Commissioner. No permit
for a sign over public property shall be issued until the application for the
permit has been approved by the Director of Capital Projects.
   (e)   The application for a permit shall be submitted in such form as the
Commissioner may prescribe and, when deemed necessary by him or her, shall be
accompanied by such drawings and descriptive data as are required to verify
compliance with the provisions of this Building Code and OBBC. Whenever the
conditions of installation are such as to require unusual structural
provisions, and for all roof signs, the Commissioner may require that the
structural design drawings be prepared by and bear the seal of a registered
architect or registered professional engineer competent to design such
structure, and that the work be supervised and inspected either by the person
who prepared the approved structural design, or by other competent persons
acceptable to the Commissioner.
   (f)   No permit to erect, alter, enlarge or maintain a sign or sign
structure beyond a street or alley line shall constitute a permanent easement.
Every such permit shall be revocable at any time by action of Council, and the
City shall not be liable for any damages to the owner by reason of such
revocation.
   (g)   Any permit issued for an outdoor sign or display structure shall be
valid only while such sign or display structure is maintained in a safe, sound
and non-hazardous condition. The Commissioner shall revoke any permit when
unsafe conditions are not promptly corrected by the owner of the sign, display
structure or premises.
(Ord. No. 1233-15. Passed 11-9-15, eff. 11-11-15)
§ 3113.04 Action on Illegal Signs
   (a)   Whenever any outdoor sign or display structure is erected or put in
place in violation of this Building Code and OBBC or without a required permit,
or with a permit but not in accordance with this Building Code and OBBC, the
Commissioner shall act in accordance with the provisions of Sections
3103.07 and
3103.11.
   (b)   Whenever any outdoor sign or display structure is deemed to be in an
unsafe condition the Commissioner shall act in accordance with Section
3103.09.
   (c)   Whenever the removal of any outdoor sign or display structure has been
ordered by the Commissioner and the person, firm or corporation for, or by
whom, or on whose premises, such outdoor sign or display structure has been
erected, affixed, attached, or maintained fails to remove such outdoor sign or
display structure within forty-eight (48) hours after receiving notice to do so
from the Commissioner, the Commissioner may remove or cause to be removed such
outdoor sign or display structure at the expense of the person, firm, or
corporation for whom, or on whose premises, it was erected, affixed, attached,
or maintained, and each such person, firm or corporation shall be individually
and separately liable for the expense incurred in the removal of such outdoor
sign or display structure.
§ 3113.05 Bill Posting Restricted
   (a)   No bills, signs or posters shall be posted in violation of Section
623.12 of the Codified Ordinances.
   (b)   No bills, signs, or posters shall be posted, nor shall any signs be
affixed, of such size or in such location as to be in violation of any
provision of this Building Code and OBBC.
§ 3113.06 Reserved
§ 3113.07 Obstructing Signs Prohibited
   (a)   No outdoor sign or display structure shall be erected, constructed or
maintained so as to obstruct any means of egress, or any opening necessary for
required light or ventilation or fire fighting or for escape from the premises,
or so as to prevent free passage from one (1) part of a roof to any other part
thereof.
   (b)   No outdoor sign or display structure shall be attached to any exterior
stairway, firescape, fire tower balcony, or balcony serving as a horizontal
exit.
   (c)   No outdoor sign or display structure shall be erected, constructed, or
maintained so as to interfere with the free operation of a counterbalanced
section of a fire escape, and no projecting sign shall be erected or
constructed within three (3) feet from any such counterbalanced section.
   (d)   No outdoor sign or display structure shall be erected, constructed or
maintained so as to create a traffic hazard by obstructing the view of traffic
at an intersection, curve, or bend, or by obstructing or confusing the view of
traffic lights, railroad crossing lights or warning signs.
   (e)   No outdoor sign or display structure shall be of such character or
with such inscription or marking that it might be mistaken for a highway sign
or mark.
   (f)   At railroad crossings where crossing gates or crossing signals are not
provided and operated, no outdoor sign or display structure shall be erected,
constructed or maintained so as to obstruct an adequate view of the railroad
right-of-way. The critical area within which an outdoor sign or display
structure may be prohibited shall be the area required to view three hundred
(300) feet of the railroad right-of-way on each side of the crossing from any
point on the public right- of-way within two hundred (200) feet of the railroad
right-of-way.
§ 3113.08 Wind Loads and Allowable Stresses
   (a)   All outdoor signs and display structures shall be designed and
constructed to withstand the wind pressures specified in this Building Code and
OBBC.
   (b)   The exposed area assumed to be subject to wind pressure shall be the
total area of all parts of the sign, including the structural framing,
projected on a plane perpendicular to the direction of the wind. In determining
the stress in any member, the wind shall be assumed to blow from that
horizontal direction and from that inclination from the vertical (but not to
exceed twenty (20) degrees above or below the horizontal) which produces the
maximum stress in that member. No shielding effect of one (1) element by
another shall be considered where the distance between them exceeds four (4)
times the smaller projected dimension of the windward element.
   (c)   All materials used in structural elements of outdoor signs or display
structures, and the allowable stresses for such materials, shall be in
conformity with the applicable provisions of OBBC and this Building Code.
(Ord. No. 2933-90. Passed 2-4-91, eff. 2-11-91)
§ 3113.09 Connections, General Construction Requirements and Marking
   (a)   All connections between wirerope guys and eyebolts or shackles shall
be made by the guy bent around a standard thimble of proper size. Guys shall
not be bent over the sharp edge of structural shapes or masonry.
   (b)   All structural supports for outdoor signs or display structures shall
be built, designed, and arranged so that the stresses within individual members
can be determined by established principles of mechanics and by generally
accepted formulas.
   (c)   All ferrous chains and wire ropes, and their attachments, shall be
protected against corrosion by zinc or other corrosion-resistant metal coating.
All other ferrous parts subject to corrosion shall be protected against
corrosion by zinc or other corrosion- resistant metal coating, or by not less
than three (3) coats of corrosion-inhibitive paint, or by other equivalent
protection approved by the Commissioner.
   (d)   Fastenings to masonry construction shall be by bolting, anchors,
expansion bolts, or by other approved method which will insure stability and
safety.
   (e)   When signs are fastened to masonry the allowable stresses prescribed
by OBBC for such masonry shall not be exceeded.
   (f)   When signs are fastened to unbraced parapet walls the ability of such
walls to resist the resulting stresses shall be thoroughly investigated and no
connection shall be made which might produce excessive shear, tension, or other
stress in the masonry as it exists or is constructed.
   (g)   All signs erected by a registered sign erector shall bear his or her
registration number, and all billboards and signs not pertaining to a business
conducted on the premises on which such billboard or sign is maintained shall
bear the name of the person owning same or who is in charge, possession or
control thereof.
(Ord. No. 2933-90. Passed 2-4-91, eff. 2-11-91)
§ 3113.10 Ground Signs
   (a)   Restrictions on Material.
      (1)   No combustible ground sign exceeding one hundred (100) square feet
in area shall be erected in the fire limits except that combustible material
shall be permitted in noncombustible signs to the extent specified in OAC
Chapter 4101:2-29, and except that temporary signs may be combustible material
as specified in Section
3113.16.
      (2)   In the Urban District, no combustible ground sign shall exceed
thirty-five (35) feet in height above ground level or fifty (50) feet in
length.
      (3)   No combustible ground sign shall be erected so as to extend within
two (2) feet of a common property line and there shall be not less than four
(4) feet between adjoining combustible signs.
   (b)   Maintaining Ground Surface Free from Debris. Any person or persons,
firm or corporation occupying any vacant lot or premises by means of a ground
sign shall be subject to the same duties and responsibilities as the owner of
the lot or premises with respect to keeping the same clean, sanitary,
inoffensive and free and clear of debris, obnoxious substances and unsightly
conditions.
(Ord. No. 2933-90. Passed 2-4-91, eff. 2-11-91)
§ 3113.11 Roof Signs
   (a)   No roof sign shall exceed in height above grade level the height
permitted by the Zoning Code (Chapters
325 to
359) for a building or part thereof erected in the location of the sign.
   (b)   Anchorage and Support.
      (1)   Roof signs shall be thoroughly secured and anchored to buildings
over which they are constructed or erected. The dead and wind loads of the
signs shall be distributed to the structural elements of the building in such
manner that no element shall be overstressed.
      (2)   Roof signs shall not be attached or anchored to roof planks or roof
sheathing, nor shall large signs on concrete roofs be anchored to the concrete
slabs alone. Unless otherwise specifically approved by the Commissioner, all
roof signs shall be attached and anchored to the structural elements of the
building on which they are constructed or erected.
      (3)   Uplift due to overturning shall be adequately resisted by proper
anchorage to the building. When necessary, proper anchorage to the building
walls or other structure shall include such alterations to the building or
other structure as are needed to integrate and adequately interconnect
sufficient dead load to equal not less than ten percent (10%) in excess of the
computed uplift applied to the building or other structure by the sign.
(Ord. No. 2933-90. Passed 2-4-91, eff. 2-11-91)
§ 3113.12 Wall Signs
   (a)   No combustible wall sign shall exceed one hundred (100) square feet in
area except that temporary wall signs may be of combustible material as
specified in Section
3113.16.
   (b)   Noncombustible wall signs may include combustible parts to the extent
specified in OBBC.
   (c)   Parts of wall signs which are less than seven (7) feet six (6) inches
above a sidewalk, alley, walk or other public thoroughfare, shall project not
more than six (6) inches beyond the street or alley line or setback or specific
building line; above that level, a wall sign shall project not more than twelve
(12) inches over public property or over a required front yard or side street
yard.
(Ord. No. 2933-90. Passed 2-4-91, eff. 2-11-91)
§ 3113.13 Projecting Signs
   (a)   Material.
      (1)   All projecting signs and their supports shall be of noncombustible
material except that combustible material shall be permitted to the extent
specified in OBBC and except that temporary signs may be of combustible
material as specified in Section
3113.16.
      (2)   When any part of a pole sign projects beyond a street or alley line
such sign shall be deemed to be a projecting sign and shall conform to the
provisions of this section.
   (b)   Glass. Glass in projecting signs shall be used only to such extent and
in such manner that no hazard will be created thereby, and then only if
specifically approved by the Commissioner.
   (c)   Drawings Required. Every application for a permit to erect a
projecting sign shall be accompanied with such drawings and data as the
Commissioner may require to verify the safety of the proposed construction and
compliance with OBBC and this Building Code.
(Ord. No. 2933-90. Passed 2-4-91, eff. 2-11-91)
§ 3113.14 Marquee Signs
   (a)   Material. Signs attached to or hung from a marquee shall be
noncombustible, except that temporary signs may be of combustible material as
specified in Section
3113.16. On noncombustible signs, combustible material shall be permitted to
the extent specified in OBBC.
   (b)   Minimum Clearance. The minimum clearance from any sidewalk or walk
level to the underside of a marquee sign shall be eight (8) feet.
(Ord. No. 2933-90. Passed 2-4-91, eff. 2-11-91)
§ 3113.15 Fixed Awning Signs
   (a)   Loads. No sign shall be attached to a fixed awning unless the
structure of such awning is capable of resisting all stresses resulting from
dead and wind loads.
   (b)   Material. Signs attached to fixed awnings shall be noncombustible,
except that combustible material shall be permitted to the extent specified in
OBBC and except that temporary signs may be of combustible material as
specified in Section
3113.16.
(Ord. No. 2933-90. Passed 2-4-91, eff. 2-11-91)
§ 3113.16 Temporary Signs
   (a)   Temporary signs shall conform to the provisions of this chapter,
except that cloth and banner signs or other signs of similarly impermanent
combustible construction may be erected and maintained under special permits
issued by the Commissioner and valid for periods not exceeding six (6) months
each, to announce special events unless otherwise specified in the Codified
Ordinances, sales or other related business activities, provided such signs
conform to the following requirements:
      (1)   No such temporary signs shall be erected as a roof sign.
      (2)   No more than four (4) permits for such temporary signs on the same
premises shall be issued during any calendar year.
      (3)   The structure of each temporary sign shall be constructed and
erected to resist safely all stresses to which it may be subjected. Each such
temporary sign shall be repaired or removed whenever it is torn or damaged.
      (4)   No such temporary sign shall be erected or maintained in place
without a valid permit therefor.
      (5)   No such temporary sign shall be erected or maintained in violation
of any provision of the Zoning Code (Chapters
325 to
359).
   (b)   The Commissioner may refuse to issue a permit for a temporary sign of
impermanent combustible construction when in his or her opinion such sign would
constitute a fire or other hazard to public safety.
(Ord. No. 2933-90. Passed 2-4-91, eff. 2-11-91)
§ 3113.17 Reserved
CHAPTER 3114 – FIRE LIMITS
3114.01 to
3114.06   Reserved
   Note: This chapter was repealed by Ord. No. 786-91, passed 5-13-91, eff. 5-
22-91.
§§ 3114.01 to 3114.06 Reserved
CHAPTER 3115 – DEMOLITION AND MOVING
3115.01   Scope and Application; Compliance Standard
3115.02   Relation to Statutes
3115.03   Use of Public Property
3115.04   Demolition Permit; Registration and Identification
3115.05   Bulkheading Abandoned Sewer Facilities
3115.06   Moving of Buildings
3115.07   Driving Over Sidewalk or Curb
3115.08   Storage and Handling of Material and Equipment
3115.09   Maintenance of Walkways
3115.10   Protection for Pedestrians and Wheelchair Riders on Sidewalks and
Walkways in Connection with Building Operations
3115.11   Required Materials for High Exterior Scaffolds, Hoists, and Similar
Equipment
3115.12   Stairways and Ladders
3115.13   Required Illumination and Obstruction Marking
3115.14   Protection of Floor and Wall Openings
3115.15   Protection of Party Walls and Adjoining Buildings
3115.16   Steam Cleaning and Fireproofing
3115.17   Water and Toilet Facilities
3115.18   Cleaning Debris; Permit, Deposit and Fee
   Note: The legislative history of this chapter, except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 1116-A-85, passed
February 10, 1986.
Cross-reference:
   Demolition and moving fees, CO
3105.25
Statutory reference:
   Demolition construction documents, OAC 4101:1-1-06
§ 3115.01 Scope and Application; Compliance Standard
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply whenever buildings or other
structures are demolished, moved or removed in whole or in part, and whenever
buildings or other structures are erected, altered, or repaired. All work of
demolition or moving or removing of buildings or other structures or
partsthereof, and all precautions during erection, alteration, or repair of
buildings or other structures shall be in conformity with the provisions of
this chapter and in conformity with accepted safe practice. When deemed
necessary, the Director of Public Works may promulgate rules or regulations
limiting or restricting the use of public property and the Board of Building
Standards and Building Appeals may promulgate rules or regulations defining
accepted safe practice. In the absence of such rules or regulations the
provisions of NFiPA Standard 241, "Safeguarding Building Construction and
Demolition Standards", shall be deemed to establish and define accepted safe
practice, and the Commissioner may require conformity with any provision of
such Standard where deemed necessary by him or her for safety to life or
property. The Directors of Capital Projects and Public Works shall promulgate
rules and regulations establishing the criteria for traffic and pedestrian
maintenance plans, according to Ohio Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices
(OMUTCD) standards, required for a street obstruction permit under Section
411.011 for construction and rehabilitation projects in the public right-of-
way, but not for a demolition permit under Section
3115.04.
(Ord. No. 979-2020. Passed 7-14-21, eff. 7-16-21)
§ 3115.02 Relation to Statutes
   The provisions of this chapter are supplementary to and in addition to the
applicable provisions of statutes and rules and regulations promulgated by
authority thereof. In cases of conflict, the more restrictive provisions shall
govern.
§ 3115.03 Use of Public Property
   (a)   Approval of Director of Public Works Required. Public property shall
not be used for the storage of materials or equipment or for the operation of
equipment, nor shall any fence, railing, barricade, walkway, canopy, shed,
scaffold or other construction or protection be erected on public property
without the approval of the Director of Public Works. Any permit issued for
such use of public property shall be valid only while such use is maintained
safe and non- hazardous. The City authority issuing such permit shall revoke
any such permit when unsafe conditions are not promptly corrected.
   (b)   Limitations and Restrictions. The use of public property for storage
of material or for other uses incidental to demolition, house moving,
alterations or building operations shall conform to the limitations and
restrictions imposed by the Director of Public Works, as deemed necessary by
him or her for safety to life and property and the maintenance of traffic on
sidewalks and roadways.
   (c)   Any permit issued for the use of public property shall terminate with
the completion of the operations for the performance of which it was procured.
(Ord. No. 979-2020. Passed 7-14-21, eff. 7-16-21)
§ 3115.04 Demolition Permit; Registration and Identification
   (a)   Permit Required. No person, firm or corporation shall raze or demolish
or remove a building or other structure, or part thereof, without obtaining a
permit from the Director of Building and Housing.
   (b)   Registration. No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the
business of house wrecking, demolition of structure or parts thereof or removal
of a building or other structure unless the person, firm or corporation holds a
valid certificate of registration issued by the Director in conformity with the
applicable provisions of
Chapter 3107.
   (c)   Requirements. All demolition work shall be performed in conformity
with NFiPA Standard 241, "Standard for Safeguarding Construction, Alteration,
and Demolition Operations" and Section
509.14 of the Codified Ordinances.
   (d)   Identification. All equipment and vehicles used in demolition or
removal of debris from demolition shall be clearly identified. This
identification shall be the name of the person, firm, or corporation owning or
renting such vehicles and equipment, in letters having a minimum dimension of
four (4) inches. Symbols or logos shall not be deemed to meet the
identification requirements unless they comply with the minimum letter
dimension and identify the person, firm or corporation.
   Such identification shall be identical to the registration of the person,
firm or corporation as set forth in the Department of Building and Housing.
   (e)   A condition of a demolition permit shall include the requirement that
the contractor or permit holder conduct a rodent survey and, when necessary,
baiting operation.
   The survey and baiting program shall be conducted by an applicator or
operator duly licensed pursuant to RC Chapter 921.
(Ord. No. 1121-18. Passed 12-3-18, eff. 12-5-18)
§ 3115.05 Bulkheading Abandoned Sewer Facilities
   No permit authorizing the razing, demolition or removal of any building or
other structure which contains sewer facilities connecting into any sewer
operated or controlled by the City shall be issued to any person, firm or
corporation until there is first posted with the Director of Public Utilities a
bond or deposit adequate to reimburse the City for any costs which may be
incurred because of the failure of the permittee to properly bulkhead all such
abandoned sewer facilities, as herein provided, at a point within the sidewalk
or tree lawn area approximately one (1) foot from the curb line. Such bulkhead
shall consist of concrete or a vitrified stopper sealed into the bell of the
sewer pipe with cement mortar.
   The bond or deposit provided for in this section shall not be released or
returned until an inspector authorized by the Director of Public Utilities
shall approve the bulkheading of any such abandoned sewer facilities which
connect into any sewer operated or controlled by the City.
   The provisions of this section shall not apply when the sewer operated and
controlled by the City and into which the private sewer is connected, is
abandoned.
§ 3115.06 Moving of Buildings
   (a)   Permits Required.
      (1)   No building shall be moved to any site within the City without a
permit from the Commissioner. A permit to move any building shall not be issued
until the Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals finds, after public
hearing, that the building is structurally sound and that the condition of the
building does not constitute a hazard to life or limb, that the building shall
be made to comply with the requirements and limitations of the ordinances
relating to zoning and the provisions contained in OBBC and this Building Code.
Plans shall be submitted which disclose such alterations, modifications or
repairs as are necessary to secure compliance with the ordinances relating to
zoning and the provisions comprising this OBBC and Building Code. Variations
and exceptions to the ordinances relating to zoning and the provisions
comprising OBBC and this Building Code shall not be granted if the buildings
and land uses within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the new site conform to
the requirements or limitations from which a variation is sought. Notice of the
public hearing shall be mailed to the owner of the building, to the owner of
the site to which the building is to be moved, and to the owners of property
within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the new site who are directly affected
by the movement of the building, not less than five (5) days prior to the date
of the hearing.
      (2)   No building or other similar large structure shall be moved through
the streets of the City or over public property, unless the application for a
permit made to the Commissioner has been approved and countersigned by the
Director of Public Service, Director of Public Safety, Commissioner of Water,
and the Commissioner of Shade Trees.
      (3)   The officials issuing or countersigning such permits may prescribe
conditions, requirements, routes and precautions, and the day, days, and hour
of the day during which such moving operations shall be conducted, as deemed
necessary in the public interest; and all moving shall be performed in
conformity therewith.
   (b)   Registration.
      (1)   No person, firm, or corporation shall engage in the business of
house moving unless such person, firm or corporation holds a valid certificate
of registration issued by the Commissioner in conformity with the applicable
provisions of Chapter
3107.
      (2)   No permit for moving any building or other similar large structure
through any street or over any other public property shall be given any person
not holding a valid certificate of registration.
   (c)   Inspector of House Moving. Whenever deemed necessary in the public
interest, the Director of Public Service may require that such moving
operations be conducted in the presence of and under the supervision of an
inspector of house moving designated by him or her, who shall perform such
required service at the cost of the person doing such moving or the owner of
the property being moved.
   (d)   Time Limit. No person shall permit any building or other structure, or
part thereof, to stand on any street or other public property for a period
longer than that specified in the permit therefor.
   (e)   Exception. The provisions of subsections (a)(2), (a)(3), (b) and (c)
hereof shall not apply to the vehicular transportation of material, buildings,
or other structures contained within a legally operated vehicle which does not
exceed the maximum width, length and height specified in Section
439.07 of the Codified Ordinances.
§ 3115.07 Driving Over Sidewalk or Curb
   No person shall drive over any sidewalk or curb for any purpose in
connection with demolition, house moving or building operations, or the
delivery of material therefor or removal of material therefrom, or for any
other purpose in connection therewith, without first having obtained a permit
to do so from the Director of Public Service and posting a deposit or bond,
adequate to reimburse the City for any costs which may be incurred by the City
because of damage or destruction caused thereby, and in the form and amount
directed or approved by the Director of Public Service and the Director of Law.
Such deposit shall not be returned, nor shall the surety under a bond be
released, until operations have been completed and an inspection of the
premises and adjoining premises, made by an authorized representative of the
Director of Public Safety, reveals no uncorrected damage or destruction. Any
costs incurred by the City in correcting damage or destruction shall be
deductible from the deposit or, when operations are performed under a bond,
paid by the person, firm or corporation acting as surety.
§ 3115.08 Storage and Handling of Material and Equipment
   (a)   No material or equipment shall be stored or placed so as to be a
hazard to the public, workmen, adjoining property, or to the structure on which
it is placed.
   (b)   No fire hydrant, police or fire alarm box, public utility box, catch
basin, or manhole shall be obstructed or rendered inaccessible, and every tree,
lightpole, and utility pole shall be protected and maintained free from damage;
and no material shall be piled, or equipment or structure placed, so as to
interfere with proper drainage of street, or other public property.
   (c)   No material shall be handled, worked upon, or prepared so that public
property may be damaged thereby.
   (d)   No sidewalk or walkway shall be severed and/or moved for activities
such as storage of equipment or parking of vehicles related to construction
unless deemed necessary by the Director of Capital Projects.
(Ord. No. 979-2020. Passed 7-14-21, eff. 7-16-21)
§ 3115.09 Maintenance of Walkways
   (a)   A safe walkway, not less than four (4) feet wide and of greater width
where deemed necessary by the Director of Capital Projects, shall be maintained
as a continuation of abutting sidewalks at all demolition and building
operations, as directed or approved by such Director. Existing sidewalks should
be preserved. If passage on the existing sidewalk is not possible, a convenient
and accessible pedestrian walkway shall be provided that replicates as nearly
as practicable the existing sidewalk. Sidewalk closure with an alternative re-
route or detour shall be a last resort. Signs shall be provided to direct
pedestrians in accordance with the approved plan under division (c) of Section
411.011.
   (b)   Whenever a sidewalk vault is being constructed, or whenever the
Director approves the temporary obstruction of a sidewalk, such walkway may be
constructed outside of the curb line and abutting thereto, and shall be a
durable walking surface of plank or other suitable approved material with a
substantial guardrail along the outer edge. No walkway shall be maintained
outside the curb line for a period longer than absolutely necessary for the
operations being performed, and such walkway shall be re-located inside the
curb line as soon as practicable.
   (c)   Sidewalks, walkways, and alternative pedestrian re-routes or detours
shall be accessible in accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act and
Ohio Building Code Section 11.
(Ord. No. 979-2020. Passed 7-14-21, eff. 7-16-21)
§ 3115.10 Protection for Pedestrians and Wheelchair Riders on Sidewalks and
Walkways in Connection with Building Operations
   (a)   Protection for pedestrians and wheelchair riders on sidewalks or
walkways from travel lanes and construction hazards shall be provided and
maintained in conformity with this section during all times when they might be
endangered by building operations. Such protection shall consist of barricades,
fences, construction railings, barriers, covered walkways as set forth in the
following Table, in accordance with Ohio Building Code Section 3306, Protection
of Pedestrians, except that an approved covered walkway shall be provided and
maintained whenever material is being moved over the sidewalk or walkway by
derrick, hoist or chute.
Table of Required Sidewalk or Walkway Protection
 
Height of Construction  Distance from Construction  Protection Required
(Feet)                  to Nearest Lot Line
8 or less               Less than 5 feet            Construction railings
                        5 feet or more              None
                        Less than 5 feet            Barrier and covered walkway
                        5 feet or more, but not
                        more than one-fourth the    Barrier and covered walkway
                        height of construction
More than 8             5 feet or more, but between
                        one-fourth and one-half the Barrier
                        height of construction
                        5 feet of more, but
                        exceeding one-half the      None
                        height of construction
 
   (b)   Barricades. Pedestrian traffic shall be protected by a directional
barricade where the walkway extends into the street. Barricades shall be
substantially built and shall be not less than three (3) feet in height.
   (c)   Fences. Fences shall be substantially built with tight boards,
plywood, or other suitable similar material applied on the outer face, and
shall be not less than six (6) feet in height. When openings are required for
access to the premises, they shall be equipped with sliding or inswinging doors
or gates.
   (d)   Construction Railings. Construction railings shall be not less than
forty-two (42) inches in height and shall be sufficient to direct pedestrians
around construction areas.
   (e)   Barriers. Barriers shall be not less than eight (8) feet in height and
shall be placed on the side of the walkway nearest the construction. Barriers
shall extend the entire length of the construction site. Openings in such
barriers shall be protected by doors that are normally kept closed.
   (f)   Covered Walkways.
      (1)   Protection covered walkways shall provide a clear height of not
less than eight (8) feet above the sidewalk or walkway as measured from the
floor surface to the canopy overhead.
      (2)   The roofs of such covered walkways shall be constructed of planks
not less than two (2) inches thick or of approved equivalent material, and
every covered walkway shall be designed to support all imposed loads, and
capable of safely sustaining a load of two hundred (200) pounds per square
foot; except that when material is stored thereon, covered walkways shall be
capable of sustaining a load of at least three hundred (300) pounds per square
foot.
      (3)   Every required covered walkway shall be of adequate width and
length to protect pedestrians and unless otherwise approved by the Commissioner
shall extend for the full length of the street or alley line of the building or
other structure being erected.
      (4)   When materials are prepared or work performed on the roof of any
such covered walkway, the covered walkway roof shall be enclosed on exposed
sides and ends with a tight barricade not less than three (3) feet in height,
or with a substantial railing not less than three (3) feet high with solid toe
boards not less than six (6) inches high.
      (5)   Unless the top deck of the covered walkway is built solidly against
the face of the building or other structure in such manner that no material can
fall on the sidewalk or walkway, the side of the covered walkway toward the
building or other structure shall have a tight wood fence or other suitable
tight fence extending to the underside of the covered walkway, which may be
equipped with sliding or inward-swinging doors or gates.
(Ord. No. 979-2020. Passed 7-14-21, eff. 7-16-21)
§ 3115.11 Required Materials for High Exterior Scaffolds, Hoists, and Similar
Equipment
   Whenever exterior scaffolding, exterior hoists or similar equipment extends
more than one hundred (100) feet above grade level, or is used at a level more
than one hundred (100) feet above grade level, the Commissioner may require the
use of noncombustible material or lumber treated to make it fire resistive,
except that those requirements shall not apply to thrustout or catch platforms
or other similar temporary assemblies of a minor nature, and provided further,
that scaffolding planks, hoist platforms and swinging scaffolds may be of wood.
§ 3115.12 Stairways and Ladders
   (a)   Whenever buildings are being erected to a height in excess of sixty
(60) feet above grade level, and whenever buildings exceeding sixty (60) feet
in height above grade level are being altered, at least one (1) stairway, shall
be provided and maintained for access to all floors. In new construction, such
stairways shall be installed as soon as practicable.
   (b)   Until either permanent or temporary stairways are installed, suitable
substantial ladders, securely fastened at top and bottom, shall be provided and
maintained to provide means of reaching the various levels.
   (c)   When buildings are occupied during alterations all required means of
egress shall be maintained unobstructed except that temporary arrangements for
egress may be substituted when approved by the Commissioner.
§ 3115.13 Required Illumination and Obstruction Marking
   (a)   All sidewalks, walkways, covered walkways, and alternative pedestrian
access re-routes, or in other locations where customary street illumination is
temporarily obstructed, shall be illuminated so that there will be not less
than three (3) foot candles at the sidewalk or walkway level at all times.
Artificial illumination shall be provided whenever and wherever natural
illumination or street lighting does not provide the intensity specified in
this section.
   (b)   All barricades, fences, construction railings, barriers, covered
walkways, alternative pedestrian access re-routes, or equipment erected outside
of the street or alley line; all material or debris piled outside of such
lines; and all pits, excavations and obstructions outside of such lines shall
be marked, after dark, with flares, red lanterns or red electric light bulbs,
to warn pedestrians and operators of vehicles of the presence of such
obstructions, pits or excavations.
   (c)   At least one (1) obstruction light shall be provided at each end of
every obstruction or hazard Where the obstruction or hazard is irregular in
shape or where the obstruction or hazard is more than fifty (50) feet in
length, additional lights shall be provided to adequately indicate the
perimeter and extent thereof.
(Ord. No. 979-2020. Passed 7-14-21, eff. 7-16-21)
§ 3115.14 Protection of Floor and Wall Openings
   (a)   In buildings of Type 1 or Type 2 construction, the floor slabs, decks
or other floor construction assemblies shall be placed as rapidly as
practicable as the building construction progresses. Permanent floor assemblies
shall be in place not more than eight (8) stories below the tier being erected.
Temporary planking shall be provided as necessary for a safe working surface,
or as necessary to provide protection for the floor areas below the level at
which construction is in progress.
   (b)   In buildings of Type 3 or Type 4 construction, the floor construction
shall be planked over not more than two (2) stories below the level where work
is in progress unless underflooring or other flooring has been installed at
that level. Where double wood flooring is used, the underfloor shall be laid
immediately after the floor framing is in place.
§ 3115.15 Protection of Party Walls and Adjoining Buildings
   (a)   Whenever a building or other structure on one (1) side of a party wall
is removed, existing party walls shall be maintained in a safe, weatherproof
condition by and at the expense of the person causing the building or other
structure to be removed. Temporary or permanent bracing shall be provided, as
necessary for maintaining the stability of such party wall or adjoining
building, whenever such stability is endangered by the removal of a building or
other structure, or part thereof. Open beam holes in party walls exposed by
removal of a building or other structure, or part thereof, shall be closed with
approved masonry by and at the expense of the person causing them to be
exposed.
   (b)   Whenever any building or other structure is to be carried above the
roof of an adjoining building, protection for skylights, roofs, and roof
outlets of such adjoining building shall be provided by and at the expense of
the person constructing or causing such building or other structure to be
carried above the roof of the adjoining building, provided he or she is granted
permission to enter the adjoining premises for that purpose.
   (c)   No accumulation of water which may undermine foundations or enter the
basement or cellar of adjoining property, or result in other injury to
adjoining property, shall be permitted in any excavation.
§ 3115.16 Steam Cleaning and Fireproofing
   (a)   Whenever high pressure boilers are used for steam cleaning or for
other purposes, they shall conform to applicable provisions of OBBC and OAC
Chapters 4101:4-1 to 4101:4-17, and shall be operated in a safe and approved
manner. So far as practicable, steam cleaning and sand-blast cleaning
operations shall be so shielded by tarpaulins or other protections and shall be
so conducted as to prevent vapor, water, dust and debris from falling upon
pedestrians, vehicles, public thoroughfares and adjoining property; and no such
operations shall be performed so as to create a nuisance.
   (b)   Any required fireproofing of basement or cellar columns, and of main
girders or main supports above basements or cellars, shall be done as soon as
practicable.
   (c)   Required standpipes shall be installed as a building is erected, and
an elevator shall be available for use by the Division of Fire in all buildings
more than 150 feet above grade level. Access to Fire Division hose connections
shall not be obstructed.
§ 3115.17 Water and Toilet Facilities
   (a)   An adequate supply of pure drinking water dispensed in an approved
sanitary manner shall be provided for the workmen during hours of employment.
   (b)   Toilet facilities shall be provided at the rate of not less than one
(1) toilet for each thirty (30) workmen and shall be located within easy access
to their place of work.
§ 3115.18 Cleaning Debris; Permit, Deposit and Fee
   Prior to the commencement of any demolition of any structure or of any
grading, excavating or constructing on any private property by any person, firm
or corporation other than the owner of the property himself or herself, the
owner or lessee of the property or the contractor engaged in such work shall
obtain a permit from, and make a deposit of two hundred dollars ($200.00) cash
or certified check with the Division of Assessments and Licenses. Such permit
and deposit shall be in addition to any other requirement. During the period of
demolition, excavation, grading or construction the street pavement, tree
lawns, sidewalks, walkways, and alternative pedestrian access re-routes shall
be kept clean of all dirt and other debris caused by or arising from such work.
The permittee shall also remove snow from sidewalks, walkways, and alternative
pedestrian access re-routes. In default thereof, and after reasonable notice to
the permittee, the City shall perform such cleaning and charge the cost thereof
to the deposit hereinbefore provided. After completion of such work and upon a
determination by the Division of Streets that such areas are free of dirt and
other debris, such deposit, less the cost of cleaning work performed by the
City and less a ten dollar ($10.00) permit fee, shall be returned to the
depositor thereof. If such costs and fee exceed the deposit, the Director of
Public Works, or his or her designee, shall bill the permittee for the
remaining balance.
(Ord. No. 979-2020. Passed 7-14-21, eff. 7-16-21)
CHAPTER 3116 – CONSTRUCTION AND POST-CONSTRUCTION SITE STORM WATER RUNOFF
CONTROL
3116.01   Definitions
3116.02   General Provisions
3116.03   Permit Required
3116.04   Plan Review, Inspections and Record Keeping; Contract Authority
3116.05   Permit Application; Fee
3116.06   Approval or Disapproval of Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan
3116.07   Issuance of Permit; Appeal
3116.08   Periodic Inspections of Construction Activities
3116.09   Amendment of Approved Plan
3116.10   Final Inspection, Certificate of Completion of Construction
Activities and Post Construction Management
3116.11   Periodic and Final Inspection Fees
3116.12   Waivers – Repealed
3116.13   Severability
Statutory reference:
   Construction and demolition debris, RC Ch. 3714
§ 3116.01 Definitions
   The definitions contained in Ohio Environmental Protection Agency (“Ohio
EPA”) General Permit Number “OHC000005”, entitled “Authorization for Storm
Water Discharges Associated With Construction Activity under the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System” in effect at the time a permit is
applied for under this chapter shall apply to this chapter, except the
following definitions shall apply:
   (a)   “Construction activity” for purposes of this chapter, means any
clearing, grading, excavating, grubbing, trench dewatering, and/or filling
activities that disturb one (1) or more acres of land. The threshold acreage
includes the entire area disturbed in the larger common plan of development or
sale.
   (b)   “Director” means the Director of Building and Housing or his or her
designee.
   (c)   "Long-term inspection and maintenance covenant" means a legally
recorded document that acts as a property deed restriction, and that requires
the owner to inspect and maintain the post-construction storm water best
management practices ("BMPs") and measures in accordance with the post-
construction operation plan, which is required as part of the Storm Water
Pollution Prevention Plan (SWP3) and OHC000005.
   (d)   "Ohio EPA Permit No. OHC000005" means the Ohio EPA's National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System construction general permit number
OHC000005, effective April 23, 2018 and any subsequent versions of that permit
issued by the Ohio EPA.
   (e)   "Person" means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint
venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board,
public or private institution, utility, cooperative, or any other legal entity.
   (f)   "Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan" (SWP3) means a document
prepared in accordance with sound engineering and/or conservation practices by
a professional experienced in the design and implementation of standard erosion
and sediment controls and storm water management practices addressing all
phases of construction and post-construction that meets all the requirements
and contains all the information described in Ohio EPA Permit No. OHC000005,
Part III, effective April 23, 2018 and any subsequent versions of that permit
issued by the Ohio EPA.
(Ord. No. 861-2022. Passed 10-24-22, eff. 10-31-22)
§ 3116.02 General Provisions
   (a)   Lands to Which This Chapter Applies. This chapter shall apply to all
areas of the City of Cleveland.
   (b)   Discharges to Which This Chapter Applies. This chapter shall apply to
all new and existing discharges composed of storm water associated with
construction activity that enters surface waters of the State, or a storm drain
leading to surface waters of the State, or to a public sewer drain. Discharges
of materials not composed entirely of storm water, including but not limited to
materials containing discarded building materials, concrete truck washout,
chemicals, litter, or sanitary waste, must comply with all other applicable
laws and regulations.
   (c)   Conflict with Other Regulations. This chapter is intended to be
supplemental to any city regulation, or policy governing the development of
land, the removal of soil, other land-disturbing activity. The most restrictive
standards imposed by any city ordinance, regulation, or policy shall apply.
(Ord. No. 807-09. Passed 7-1-09, eff. 7-8-09)
§ 3116.03 Permit Required
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to undertake any construction
activity without first obtaining a permit from the Director.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any permittee to fail to comply with their
permit.
(Ord. No. 807-09. Passed 7-1-09, eff. 7-8-09)
§ 3116.04 Plan Review, Inspections and Record Keeping; Contract Authority
   The Director of Building and Housing is authorized to enter into contracts
for professional services necessary to provide training, and to assist with
plan review, inspections, and record-keeping, as needed to administer this
chapter.
   The compensation to be paid for such services shall be fixed by the Board of
Control. Professional services contracts authorized by this section shall be
prepared by the Director of Law, approved by the Director of Building and
Housing, certified by the Director of Finance, and paid from the annual
appropriations made for such purpose.
(Ord. No. 807-09. Passed 7-1-09, eff. 7-8-09)
§ 3116.05 Permit Application; Fee
   (a)   The Director may charge a permit application fee as established from
time to time by the Board of Control.
   (b)   Any person desiring a permit required by this chapter shall file an
application with the Director. The application shall consist of:
      (1)   The permit application fee;
      (2)   Two (2) or more copies of a SWP3; and
      (3)   A long-term inspection and maintenance covenant that provides the
City with a right of inspection and appropriate indemnification, and meets the
inspection requirements described in Section 3116.08 and runs with the land, is
binding upon the owner, the owner's successors and assigns, and all subsequent
owners of the property, and is recorded by the applicant with the Cuyahoga
County Recorder's Office. The applicant must provide the City with a recorded
copy prior to the final inspection and approval.
(Ord. No. 861-2022. Passed 10-24-22, eff. 10-31-22)
§ 3116.06 Approval or Disapproval of Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan
   (a)   The Director shall review storm water pollution prevention plans
submitted to him or her and grant written approval if he or she determines that
the plan meets the requirements prescribed in Ohio EPA Permit No. OHC000005
effective April 23, 2018 and any subsequent versions of that permit issued by
the Ohio EPA and this chapter.
   (b)   When a plan is determined to be inadequate, written notice of
disapproval stating the specific reasons for disapproval shall be communicated
to the applicant. The notice shall specify the modifications, terms and
conditions that are necessary for approval of the plan.
(Ord. No. 861-2022. Passed 10-24-22, eff. 10-31-22)
§ 3116.07 Issuance of Permit; Appeal
   (a)   The Director shall issue a permit approving construction activity
under this chapter on approval of the SWP3, the post-construction and operation
maintenance plan, and a recorded long-term inspection and maintenance covenant.
   (b)   Any denial of a permit under the provisions of this chapter may be
appealed to the Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals as provided in
the Charter and in Section
3103.20.
(Ord. No. 861-2022. Passed 10-24-22, eff. 10-31-22)
§ 3116.08 Periodic Inspections of Construction Activities
   (a)   The Director may make periodic inspections of construction activities
or land-disturbing activities to ensure compliance with this chapter. The right
of inspection shall be inherent in the issuance of the permit under this
chapter.
   (b)   All applicable permits and approved SWP3s under this chapter shall be
made immediately available on site upon request of the Director or his or her
authorized representative during working hours.
   (c)   The owner shall inspect all the storm water control BMPs and measures,
at a minimum under the frequency required under Ohio EPA Permit No. OHC000005
effective April 23, 2018 and any subsequent versions of that permit issued by
the Ohio EPA, and every six months and after major storm events for the first
year of operation, and at least once every year thereafter to ensure the storm
water measures are functioning properly.
(Ord. No. 861-2022. Passed 10-24-22, eff. 10-31-22)
§ 3116.09 Amendment of Approved Plan
   A SWP3 approved under this chapter may be amended by the Director in the
following cases:
   (a)   Where inspection reveals that the plan is inadequate to satisfy
applicable regulatory provisions; or
   (b)   Where the person responsible for carrying out the approved plan finds
that because of changed circumstances or for other reasons the approved plan
cannot be effectively carried out, and the person proposes amendments to the
plan consistent with the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 807-09. Passed 7-1-09, eff. 7-8-09)
§ 3116.10 Final Inspection, Certificate of Completion of Construction
Activities and Post Construction Management
   (a)   Persons obtaining a permit under this chapter must continue to meet
the applicable requirements of Ohio EPA Permit No. OHC000005 effective April
23, 2018 and any subsequent versions of that permit issued by the Ohio EPA and
this chapter until they receive, upon written request, a certificate of
completion issued by the Director. A certificate of completion may be issued on
finding satisfactory evidence of compliance with the approved SWP3, and
submission of a long-term inspection and maintenance covenant showing proof of
recording on the document, and the achievement of adequate stabilization.
"Adequate stabilization" of the site shall be determined by the Director.
   (b)   The permittee, or any person identified in an approved SWP3 as
responsible for the inspection and maintenance of construction storm water best
management practices shall be responsible for inspecting and maintaining them
until the receipt of a certificate of completion.
   (c)   The owner, the owner's successors and assigns, and all subsequent
owners of the property identified in an approved SWP3 and long-term inspection
and maintenance covenant, who are responsible for the continuing obligations
for the inspection and maintenance of post-construction best management
practices, shall be responsible for the inspection and maintenance of post-
construction best management practices and shall not be relieved of those
continuing obligations once coverage under a permit is terminated or by the
issuance of a certificate of completion.
   (d)   The permittee must provide copies of all post-construction operation
and management plans as a stand-alone document, the approved SWP3, and the
long-term inspection and maintenance covenant, to the post-construction
operator of the site (including homeowner associations) and land owners, upon
completion of construction activities prior to termination of permit coverage.
   (e)   The post-construction operator of the site and the owner of the
premises subject to the provisions of this Building Code shall continue to be
responsible for maintenance and compliance with the post-construction storm
water best management practices ("BMPs") described in the approved SWP3 and as
required by the long-term inspection and maintenance covenant.
   (f)   A violation of a provision in this section requiring compliance with a
storm water BMPs is a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 861-2022. Passed 10-24-22, eff. 10-31-22)
§ 3116.11 Periodic and Final Inspection Fees
   The Director is authorized to charge fees for periodic or final inspections
according to an inspection fee schedule fixed from time to time by the Board of
Control.
(Ord. No. 807-09. Passed 7-1-09, eff. 7-8-09)
§ 3116.12 Waivers – Repealed
(Ord. No. 861-2022. Passed 10-24-22, eff. 10-31-22)
§ 3116.13 Severability
   If any portion of this chapter, or any section or part of a section shall be
declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the declaration
shall be limited solely to that portion, section, or part of a section that was
directly involved in the controversy before the court on which judgment was
rendered and shall not affect or impair the validity of the remainder of the
chapter.
(Ord. No. 807-09. Passed 7-1-09, eff. 7-8-09)
CHAPTER 3117 – PRIVATE SWIMMING POOLS
3117.01   Definition
3117.02   Application Data and Plans
3117.03   Design, Construction and Maintenance Requirements
   Note: The legislative history of this chapter, except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 1116-A-85, passed
February 10, 1986.
Cross-reference:
   Swimming pool fees, CO
3105.25
§ 3117.01 Definition
   “Private swimming pool” as used in this Building Code means any body of
water containing more than one thousand five hundred (1,500) gallons of water
or having a depth of more than twenty-four (24) inches, to the top of the side
wall, used or intended to be used for swimming or bathing, and constructed,
installed or maintained in or above the ground on any property or premises and
used solely by the owner, purchaser under contract, lessee, tenant or licensee
thereof, and his or her family and by friends invited to use it without payment
of any fee.
§ 3117.02 Application Data and Plans
   (a)   Application for the construction, installation or alteration and
maintenance of a private swimming pool shall be made to the Commissioner by the
owner, person in control of the property or by the contractor who will
construct or install such swimming pool.
   (b)   The application shall be accompanied by duplicate sets of plans,
specifications and pertinent explanatory data which shall include the following
plans and information, as well as such other data which may be reasonably
requested by the Commissioner.
      (1)   Plans shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one-eighth (1/8)
inch per foot, indicating all materials and methods of construction and
indicating all dimensions, including the length, width and depth of the pool
and width of the pool deck or walk ways;
      (2)   A plot plan showing position of pool in relation to buildings and
lot lines. If the pool is not permanently fixed, the plot plan shall show the
approximate location or locations in which the pool is to be placed;
      (3)   Pipe diagrams showing size of all permanent pipes, inlets, outlets,
waste and discharge lines, circulation and other piping. Where temporary piping
or hose lines are used for filling or draining, explanatory data shall be
supplied giving the equipment, methods and procedures to be used;
      (4)   The liquid capacity of the pool;
      (5)   The kind, number and size of filters;
      (6)   Top capacity of filters in gallons per minute;
      (7)   The method of disinfection and bactericidal treatment to be used;
      (8)   The type and range of water testing equipment;
      (9)   The type, design and location of enclosing fence and gate;
      (10)   Description and plan of lighting facilities;
      (11)   Description and plan of heating, exhaust and ventilation for
interior pools.
   (c)   No permit shall be issued by the Commissioner of Building and Housing
until the application has been submitted to and approved by the Commissioner of
Health in regard to subsections (b)(7) and (8) hereof.
§ 3117.03 Design, Construction and Maintenance Requirements
   The Commissioner shall not issue a permit to construct, install, alter or
remodel any private swimming pool, unless the following design and construction
requirements are observed. Private swimming pools shall be constructed or
installed or maintained in conformity with the following requirements. For
private swimming pools already in existence, the Commissioner shall furnish the
owner with a program of improvements and additions which shall be carried out
over a period of one (1) year after notice, in order to comply with the
requirements of this Building Code. However, permanent pools heretofore
constructed shall be exempt from the requirement of subsection (g) hereof and
may be exempted from the other requirements of this section when approved by
the Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals as being substantially in
compliance with such other requirements of this section.
   (a)   There shall be an air gap or syphon breaker on the water supply line
to the pool.
   (b)   There shall be an overflow from the pool to the sewer.
   (c)   A proper drain to the sewer shall be installed at the lowest part of
the pool. This drain may operate either by gravity or by the use of a pump.
   (d)   The requirements of subsections (b) and (c) hereof shall be waived for
a semipermanent pool located entirely above ground level whenever there is
provided a means of completely draining such pool to a public sewer by the use
of suitable gravity, syphon or pumping equipment.
   (e)   All plumbing shall meet Plumbing Code requirements.
   (f)   The construction or design of the walls shall be in accord with
accepted engineering practice.
   (g)   The outdoor pool area shall be fenced in by an approved type of fence
at least four (4) feet high, and if the fence or barricade is around the pool,
it shall be located at least ten (10) feet from the edge of the pool. Such
fence or barricade shall have a self-closing gate or door with facilities for
locking the gate or door at all times when the pool is unguarded, unattended or
not in actual use. In lieu of maintaining a fence or barricade, a semi-
permanent pool located entirely above ground level may be protected, when not
in use, with a secure pool cover or other protective device approved by the
Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals as providing protection
equivalent to a fence. Where such cover or other protective device is used in
lieu of a fence, a competent person shall be on hand at all times while the
pool is in use.
   (h)   The pool shall not be located less than ten (10) feet from any
property line.
   (i)   The pool shall be equipped with a filtration system capable of
providing at least two (2) turn-overs in twenty-four (24) hours.
   (j)   No artificial lighting shall be maintained or operated in connection
with private swimming pools which illuminates in such manner that a bulb or
tube is visible from outside the premises.
   (k)   The owner or person in control of every private swimming pool shall be
responsible to maintain such pool in such condition as to prevent breaks in the
pool construction causing water from pool overflowing into adjacent public or
private property.
   (l)   All interior pools shall have adequate heating, exhaust and
ventilation and in all cases the quantity of the exhaust shall be greater than
that of supply or other adequate means of moisture control to preclude
condensation damage.
CHAPTER 3121 – RESIDENTIAL BUILDING CODE OF OHIO FOR ONE, TWO, OR THREE-FAMILY
DWELLINGS
3121.01   Adoption and Purpose
3121.02   Amendments to Code – Repealed
   Note: Ordinance No. 617-06, § 5, passed 5-8-06, eff. 5-12-06, renamed
Chapter
3121 of the Codified Ordinances to the “Residential Building Code of Ohio for
One, Two, or Three-Family Dwellings.”
Cross-reference:
   Residential garages, CO
3123.08
Statutory reference:
   Industrialized units, OAC 4101:1-1-17
   State referenced codes, OAC 4101:1-35-01.2
§ 3121.01 Adoption and Purpose
   The Residential Building Code of Ohio for One, Two, and Three-Family
Dwellings (“Residential Code of Ohio” or “RCO”) as promulgated by the Ohio
Board of Building standards, and as amended by the Ohio Board of Building
Standards, is adopted and incorporated by the City of Cleveland as if fully
restated. The Residential Code of Ohio is contained in OAC Chapter 4101:8.
(Ord. No. 617-06, § 4. Passed 5-8-06, eff. 5-12-06)
   Note: Former Section
3121.01 was repealed by Ord. No. 617-06, § 3, passed 5-8-06, effective 5-12-06.
§ 3121.02 Amendments to Code – Repealed
(Ord. No. 617-06, § 3. Passed 5-8-06, eff. 5-12-06)
CHAPTER 3123 – MISCELLANEOUS OCCUPANCY
3123.01   Miscellaneous Occupancy Defined
3123.02   Zoning
3123.03   Yard Regulations
3123.04   Height and Area Restrictions
3123.05   Location on Property
3123.06   Protection of Vertical Openings
3123.07   Protection of Openings in Exterior Walls
3123.08   Garages
3123.09   Erection of Tents; Permits
3123.10   Pedestrian Barriers
   Note: The legislative history of this chapter, except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 1116-A-85, passed
February 10, 1986.
Statutory reference:
   Special use and occupancy, OAC Ch. 4101:2-6
§ 3123.01 Miscellaneous Occupancy Defined
   (a)   For the purposes of this Building Code, “miscellaneous occupancy
classification” includes miscellaneous minor buildings and other structures of
a nonhazardous use or occupancy, not exceeding six hundred fifty (650) square
feet in area for private garages or one thousand (1,000) square feet in area
for other buildings or structures, used as an accessory use to a main use of
the premises, including:
   Private stables or barns;
   Private garages (not over six hundred fifty (650) square feet in area);
   Shelters;
   Sheds;
   Garden houses;
   Tool sheds.
   (b)   Miscellaneous occupancy classification also includes buildings and
other structures not over one thousand (1,000) square feet in ground area used
for the following or similar purposes:
   Band stands;
   Water tanks;
Structures supporting water tanks, and similar structures for utilitarian or
decorative purposes and not intended for human occupancy, and not classified as
high hazard occupancy or a hazardous use.
§ 3123.02 Zoning
   No building or other structure or part of a building or other structure
shall be erected or altered, and no premises shall be used or altered, in
violation of the provisions of the Zoning Code (Chapters
325 to
359).
   The use and area of accessory buildings shall be in conformity with this
chapter and with the Zoning Code. For accessory uses permitted in residence
districts consult Section
337.23 of the Zoning Code.
§ 3123.03 Yard Regulations
   Accessory buildings may encroach upon required yard spaces only as permitted
by the Zoning Code (Chapters
325 to
359).
§ 3123.04 Height and Area Restrictions
   (a)   Buildings of miscellaneous occupancy classification shall neither
exceed one (1) story in height above grade level, nor fifteen (15) feet. When
any building exceeds such height, or one thousand (1,000) square feet in area,
it shall be classified in that occupancy classification of this Building Code
which includes buildings of similar use or occupancy.
   (b)   Buildings, shelters, sheds, band stands, and similar structures
included under miscellaneous occupancy classifications may be constructed of
any type of construction permitted in the fire limits in which they are
located.
§ 3123.05 Location on Property
   Where permitted by the Zoning Code (Chapters
325 to
359), accessory buildings of miscellaneous occupancy classification may be
located at the distance from common property lines permitted for buildings of
Type 5 construction by OBBC.
§ 3123.06 Protection of Vertical Openings
   No protection of vertical openings shall be required.
§ 3123.07 Protection of Openings in Exterior Walls
   (a)   In buildings of miscellaneous occupancy classification there shall be
no exterior opening in any wall facing a common property line which is less
than three (3) feet from such property line.
   (b)   No protection of openings in exterior walls shall be required.
§ 3123.08 Garages
   (a)   “Type A garage” means any building or part thereof used or occupied as
a private garage for the storage of not more than three (3) passenger
automobiles or of trucks not exceeding one and one-half (1-1/2) ton capacity,
with gasoline or other volatile flammable fuel in their storage tanks.
   (b)   Type A garages shall conform to the provisions governing buildings of
storage occupancy classification, except that a detached Type A garage which
does not exceed six hundred fifty (650) square feet in floor area may be
classified as miscellaneous occupancy classification by the Commissioner.
§ 3123.09 Erection of Tents; Permits
   Tents, air supported structures and other temporary structures may be
erected for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days for religion, educational,
recreation, or similar purposes. A special temporary permit shall be secured
for all such installations.
(Ord. No. 2842-86. Passed 6-8-87, eff. 6-12-87)
§ 3123.10 Pedestrian Barriers
   (a)   No later than sixty (60) days from the effective date of this
ordinance, every owner or occupant of property abutting the Cuyahoga River or
Old River and containing a commercial establishment with alcohol-selling
boundaries that include an area outside of a building, which area extends to
the river’s edge and is accessible to the public and/or patrons of the
commercial establishment, shall install a continuous Pedestrian Barrier between
the river and any open area accessible to the public. Thereafter the barrier
must be maintained per the requirements of this Building Code.
   (b)   The requirements for the Pedestrian Barrier shall be determined by the
location of the barrier in relation to the water’s edge. The Pedestrian Barrier
must be installed from zero (0) inches to forty-two (42) inches from the
water’s edge.
   (c)   From zero (0) inches to thirty (30) inches from the water’s edge, the
Pedestrian Barrier shall conform to the requirements for Guards as dictated in
the latest edition of the Ohio Basic Building Code.
   (d)   From greater than thirty (30) inches to forty- two (42) inches from
the water’s edge, the Pedestrian Barrier shall conform to the following
criteria:
      (1)   Six (6) inch diameter painted steel vertical posts spaced no
greater than twelve (12) feet apart and securely affixed to withstand a two
hundred (200) pound lateral live load;
      (2)   Seven (7) horizontal strands of one- eighth (1/8) inch galvanized
steel cable, evenly spaced between the posts and attached securely at the ends
with the top cable to be installed not less than forty-two (42) inches above
the surface of the deck.
   (e)   Where mooring is allowed, there shall be at least one (1) gated
opening per establishment to provide safe ingress and egress from the river for
the type of vessel being served. The width of the gated opening shall not
exceed five (5) feet. The operator of the establishment shall submit, with the
building permit application, a written policy outlining how the gated opening
will be managed to provide the greatest safety for boaters and pedestrians.
   (f)   The installation of the Pedestrian Barrier shall require a permit
issued by the Commissioner of Building and Housing and the City Planning
Commission shall approve the design.
   (g)   The City Planning Commission, in consultation with its designated
design review committee, may approve a Pedestrian Barrier design which varies
from the standards established in this division if the commission determines
that the alternate design is more appropriate to the design of the property and
its environs, while meeting all of the safety requirements of this section.
   (h)   Whoever violates this section shall be guilty of a first degree
misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 812-01. Passed 6-19-01, eff. 6-27-01)
CHAPTER 3125 – EXCAVATIONS, SOILS AND FOUNDATIONS
3125.01   Protection of Excavations
3125.02   Access to Adjoining Premises
3125.03   Action in the Event of Failure to Protect
3125.04   Backfilling
3125.05   Modification of Allowable Bearing Values Due to Loosened Bearing
Material
3125.06   Depth of Footings
3125.07   Provisions Against Detrimental Vibrations
3125.08   Concrete Footings
3125.09   Combined and Cantilever Footings
   Note: The legislative history of this chapter, except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 1116-A-85, passed
February 10, 1986.
Cross-reference:
   Foundation permit fees, CO
3105.25
   Special foundation permit, CO
3105.08
Statutory reference:
   Foundation systems and soils, OAC Ch. 4101:1-18
§ 3125.01 Protection of Excavations
   (a)   General.
      (1)   The person causing any excavation to be made shall prevent the
movement of the earth of adjoining properties and the trees and natural objects
thereon or therein, and shall be responsible for maintaining or restoring
public sidewalks, curbs, pavements and the properties of public utilities which
may be affected by the excavation.
      (2)   The maintenance or restoration of public sidewalks, curbs and
pavements shall be performed in accordance with the rules and regulations of
the Department of Public Service, and the maintenance or restoration of the
property of public utilities shall be in accordance with procedure established
by the owners thereof.
   (b)   Permanent Excavations.
      (1)   Permanent excavations shall be protected by permanent means where
necessary to prevent the movement of the earth of adjoining properties. Such
protection shall be provided by the person causing the excavation to be made
and shall be on the property and at the expense of the person causing the
excavation to be made.
      (2)   When deemed necessary for public safety by the Commissioner for
permanent excavations not otherwise protected, such protection shall include
the construction of a substantial barricade or fence not less than six (6) feet
in height enclosing the excavated area.
   (c)   Grading or Filling. When a lot or plot is graded to a higher or lower
finished grade level than the natural grade on an adjacent property, the owner
of such lot or plot shall provide suitable retaining wall or walls or other
approved protection on his or her own property to protect the adjacent property
from caving of earth and as required to maintain the existing natural grade of
such adjacent property.
   (d)   Drainage.
      (1)   Whenever the surface of a lot or plot is excavated, filled or
graded, positive drainage shall be provided so that a nuisance will not be
created. Catch basins or property connected underdrains shall be installed, or
other approved provisions made, where water may pocket, to preclude the
accumulation of surface water. Surface water shall not be drained onto adjacent
properties not in the same ownership without written permission from the owner
of the adjacent property, and existing natural ground drainage of the ground
area surrounding the lot or plot excavated, filled or graded shall not be
impeded.
      (2)   No condition shall be created, nor any existing condition
maintained, whereby there will be upon any lot or plot excavations,
depressions, pits, holes, gullies, or similar depressions which may accumulate
and retain surface water and which may become a public hazard or nuisance. Any
such condition shall be promptly abated and protected by filling or by
providing positive drainage and, where necessary, by the erection of a
barricade or fence.
§ 3125.02 Access to Adjoining Premises
   (a)   If the person causing an excavation to be made is granted requested
permission to enter adjoining premises for the purpose of supporting the
adjoining property, or for the purpose of supporting or protecting adjoining
buildings or other structures, he or she shall provide adequate protection for
such adjoining premises, buildings, or other structures against damage
resulting from his or her operations. If such permission is not granted, the
owner of such adjoining premises, building, or other structure shall be
responsible for its maintenance, support, or protection at his or her own
expense and, for that purpose, he or she shall be granted permission to enter
the premises where the excavation is to be, or is, made.
   (b)   In every case, the person or persons granted the right of entry upon
adjacent property shall perform the necessary work as expeditiously as possible
and with the least reasonable inconvenience and without injury to the person or
persons permitting such entry.
§ 3125.03 Action in the Event of Failure to Protect
   If the person whose duty it is under the provisions of this chapter and OBBC
to make safe an excavation, to prevent movement of adjoining earth, or to
maintain, support, or protect adjoining buildings or other structures shall
neglect or fail to do so, the Commissioner shall notify such person, in
writing, of his or her duties under the provisions of OBBC and this Building
Code. If such person fails to perform the duty required by OBBC and this
Building Code within such reasonable time after receipt of such notice as may
be allowed by the Commissioner, the Commissioner may cause or order such work
to be done as he or she may deem necessary to make safe such excavation,
property, building or other structure, as provided under Section
3103.09.
§ 3125.04 Backfilling
   Backfilling and related work shall be so done, and the quality of the
materials used shall be such, as to prevent the movement of the earth of
adjoining properties or the subsequent caving-in of backfilled areas.
Backfilling shall not be done until retaining walls, foundation walls, or other
construction against which backfill is placed are in suitable condition to
resist lateral pressure; and no backfilling shall be done by methods which may
cause dislodgement of any retaining wall or other permanent structure.
§ 3125.05 Modification of Allowable Bearing Values Due to Loosened Bearing
Material
   Wherever bearing material is loosened or disturbed by an inward and upward
flow of water, the bearing values shall be reduced to the allowable bearing
value of the loosened material, unless the loosened material is removed. Where
the inward and upward flow of water is controlled by well points or by other
method so that the bearing material is not disturbed or loosened, the full
bearing value of the unloosened material may be assumed.
§ 3125.06 Depth of Footings
   (a)   Protection Against Action.
      (1)   When subject to frost action, the bottom of footings shall be not
less than three (3) feet, six (6) inches below the adjoining ground surface
except that footings for one (1) and two (2) family dwelling houses and
similarly lightly loaded buildings shall be not less than three (3) feet below
the adjoining ground surface, and except that footings for one (1) story framed
structures which, in the opinion of the Commissioner will not be adversely
affected by frost action, may be at such depths as will provide adequate
support and anchorage.
      (2)   The bottoms of footings and foundations shall be protected against
freezing until backfill or other permanent protective cover is in place.
   (b)   Footings on Sloping Ground. On sloping ground all footings shall be at
sufficient depth so that erosion of the surrounding ground surface will not
remove required lateral support or permit sliding or slippage.
   (c)   Footings at Different Levels.
      (1)   Where footings not supported on piles are adjacent to sloping
ground or where the bottoms of such footings of a structure are at different
levels or at levels different from those of the footings of an adjoining
structure, the difference in footing elevations shall be subject to the
following limitations:
         A.   When the ground surface slopes downward adjacent to the footing
the sloping surface shall not encroach upon a prism of bearing material under
the footing having sides that make an angle with the horizontal of sixty (60)
degrees for rock and thirty (30) degrees for soil, and the horizontal distance
from the lower edge of the footing to the sloping surface shall be at least two
(2) feet for rock and three (3) feet for soil.
         B.   In the case of footings in soil the angle of stepping of
contiguous footings, or a line drawn between the lower adjacent edges of
adjacent separate footings, shall not be steeper than one-half (1/2) the angle
of repose of the supporting soil but in no case steeper than one (1) vertical
to two (2) horizontal.
      (2)   Exceptions. The requirements of this subsection may be modified by
the Commissioner where adequate permanent provision is made for lateral support
of the material supporting the higher footing or where the average stress in
the soil due to a higher footing is not more than twenty-five percent (25%) of
the resistance of the soil to sliding as determined by soil tests and stress
analyses made in an approved manner by a qualified person or laboratory
acceptable to the Commissioner.
   (d)   Level Beds Mandatory. All footings shall be constructed on level beds.
§ 3125.07 Provisions Against Detrimental Vibrations
   Where the bearing materials under a foundation are subject to vibration due
to machinery or other causes, provisions shall be made so that such vibration
will not have a detrimental effect on the foundations or the building.
§ 3125.08 Concrete Footings
   (a)   General. Except as otherwise provided in this section, the design and
construction of concrete footings shall conform to the provisions included in
BOCA Section 1009.0.
   (b)   Material. Concrete in footings and foundations shall have a
compressive strength at twenty-eight (28) days of not less than two thousand
five hundred (2,500) pounds per square inch.
   (c)   Protection of Reinforcement. When concrete of reinforced concrete
footings is deposited directly against the ground, the reinforcement shall be
protected with a minimum of three (3) inches of concrete.
   (d)   Pouring Requirements. Concrete footings shall be poured in the dry
except by special permission of the Commissioner of Building. If permission is
obtained to pour concrete footings under or in the presence of water, the
concrete shall be poured by tremie, bottom-dump bucket, or other means approved
by the Commissioner, in such manner as to insure minimum segregation of the
ingredients and negligible turbulence of the water. The water-cement ratio in
concrete so placed shall not exceed five (5) gallons per sack of ninety-four
(94) pounds of cement. In no case shall water be allowed to flow through placed
concrete.
   (e)   Protection Against Freezing. Concrete in footings shall be protected
from freezing while being placed and after placing; when normal Portland cement
is used such protection shall be maintained for at least four (4) days after
placing. When approved high early strength Portland cement is used, such
protection shall be maintained in place for at least two (2) days after
placing.
§ 3125.09 Combined and Cantilever Footings
   Combined and cantilever footings shall be designed to properly distribute
the loads upon the bearing areas without material differential settlements. The
basis of design shall be clearly indicated on the drawings.
CHAPTER 3126 – FILLS, EXCAVATIONS, SOILS, AND GRADING
3126.01   Purpose
3126.02   Definitions
3126.03   Grade and Fill Permits
3126.04   Application Preparation
3126.05   Acceptable Fill Material
3126.06   Permit Application Review
3126.07   Denial or Revocation of Excavation and Fill Permits; Appeal
3126.08   Final Grade Slope
3126.09   Final Setbacks of Tops and Toes of Slopes
3126.10   Final Protection Against Erosion
3126.11   Relocation of Sewers and Drainage Courses
3126.12   Performance Bond
3126.13   Permits and Prior Approvals Required
3126.14   Special Inspections
§ 3126.01 Purpose
   The purpose of this chapter is to safeguard life, limb, property and the
public welfare, and the preservation of the natural environment and the
stability of hillsides by regulating the filling and grading of land.
(Ord. No. 721-16. Passed 7-13-16, eff. 7-17-16)
§ 3126.02 Definitions
   General. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for
the purpose of this Code, have the following meanings.
   (a)   "Architect or architect, registered" means a person holding a
certificate under RC 4703.06, and registered pursuant to RC 4703.01 to 4703.19.
   (b)   "Borrow" means earth material acquired from an off-site location for
use in grading on a site.
   (c)   "Building and Housing Department" means the Department of Building and
Housing of the City of Cleveland.
   (d)   "Construction documents" means plans, specifications and other
written, graphic and pictorial documents prepared or assembled for describing
the design, location and physical characteristics of the elements of a project
necessary for obtaining a permit.
   (e)   "Director of Building and Housing" means the Director or his or her
designee.
   (f)   "Director of Public Works" means the Director or his or her designee.
   (g)   "Earth material." Any rock, fill or natural soil and/or combination
thereof.
   (h)   "Engineer, geotechnical." A civil engineer experienced and
knowledgeable in the practice of geotechnical engineering.
   (i)   "Engineer, professional." A person holding a certificate of
registration under RC 4733.14 or RC 4733.19 and registered pursuant to RC
4733.01 to 4733.23.
   (j)   "Engineering geologist." A geologist who is certified or registered to
practice engineering geology in any of the fifty (50) states or is a member of
the Association of Engineering Geologists, with a minimum of three (3) years
professional experience under the supervision of a certified engineering
geologist or geotechnical engineer, and is competent in the field of geology
and knowledgeable in the fundamentals of soil mechanics.
   (k)   "Erosion." The wearing away of the land surface by the action of the
wind, water, gravity, or other natural processes.
   (l)   "Excavation." Any artificial or mechanical act by which earth, sand,
gravel, rock or any other similar material is dug into, cut, quarried, stripped
of vegetative cover and root systems, uncovered, removed, displaced, relocated
or bulldozed and shall include the conditions resulting from the excavation
operations.
   (m)   "Fill."
      (1)   An artificial or mechanical act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock
or any other material is placed, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved
to a new location above the natural surface of the ground or on top of the
stripped surface resulting in a difference in elevation between a point on the
original ground and a designated point of higher elevation and any conditions
resulting from the fill operations.
      (2)   Clean hard fill means construction and demolition debris which
consists only of reinforced or no reinforced concrete, asphalt concrete, brick,
block, tile, and/or stone which can be re-utilized as construction material.
Brick in clean hard fill includes but is not limited to refractory brick and
mortar. Clean hard fill does not include materials contaminated with hazardous
wastes, solid wastes, or infectious wastes.
   (n)   "General – Slope."
      (1)   Slope. The inclination of the land surface from the horizontal.
Percentage of slope is the vertical distance divided by horizontal distance,
then multiplied by one hundred (100). Thus, a slope of twenty (20) percent is a
rise of twenty (20) feet in one hundred (100) feet of horizontal distance.
   (o)   "Grading." Any excavating or filling operations or combination
thereof.
   (p)   "Natural terrain." Existing ground as shown on the most recent
Cuyahoga County metropolitan topographic survey.
   (q)   "Qualified laboratory." A soils analysis laboratory that participates
in the United States Environmental Protection Administration contract
laboratory program.
   (r)   "Sediment." Solid material both mineral and organic in suspension, is
being transported, or has been moved from its original site or origin by air,
water, or gravity as a product of erosion.
   (s)   "Site." Any lot or parcel of land or contiguous combination thereof,
upon which excavation or filling is, has been, or will be performed.
   (t)   "Site inspection checklist." A questionnaire adopted by the Department
of Building and Housing completed in accordance with the American Society for
Testing Materials standard method E1527-93 or other method as may be approved
by the Director of Building and Housing.
   (u)   "Soil scientist." A full member in good standing of the Soil Science
Society of America and who has special knowledge and training in the physical,
chemical, and biological sciences applicable to soils.
(Ord. No. 721-16. Passed 7-13-16, eff. 7-17-16)
§ 3126.03 Grade and Fill Permits
   (a)   Permits Required. No person, being the owner of any property or in
possession or control of any property, shall allow any grading or filling of
land for the purpose of permanently changing the elevation or contour of the
property without first filing an application and obtaining a proper permit from
the Director of Building and Housing.
   (b)   A permit shall be required for an excavation or fill comprising the
movement of less than five hundred (500) cubic yards of material if the work
area borders one or more work areas under separate excavation and fill permit
and the total amount of material being moved in all contiguous areas is more
than five hundred (500) cubic yards and the areas have some common ownership or
the work in all areas is under common control.
   (c)   Exceptions. A permit for excavation or filling of land shall not be
required for:
      (1)   Normal cemetery operations of opening or closing graves.
      (2)   Public work performed by or under regulations of the Director of
Public Works relative to the right of way other than elevated pedestrian
walkways, buildings and structures regulated under OBC and Cleveland Ordinance.
      (3)   Exploratory excavations under the direction of a registered
professional engineer, geotechnical engineer, engineering geologist, soil
scientist, or architect where incident to the practice of architecture, and
exploratory excavations by a contractor or builder provided they are not made
in a slope steeper than five (5) horizontal to one (1) vertical. All such
excavations shall be promptly and properly filled, and the terrain shall be
properly restored to original condition.
      (4)   Temporary trenches for sewers, water lines, gas lines, electric
lines, and other underground utilities.
      (5)   Any excavation that does not exceed five (5) feet in vertical depth
at its deepest point or one hundred (100) cubic yards per each five thousand
(5,000) square feet of site area, whichever is the more restrictive, and is
made on natural terrain with a slope flatter than five (5) horizontal to one
(1) vertical and does not result in a finished slope steeper than three (3)
horizontal to one (1) vertical or adverse drainage conditions to the site or
neighboring sites. This does not exempt phased installations that fall above
the listed thresholds over a period of twelve (12) months.
      (6)   Any fill that does not exceed three (3) inches in vertical height
at its highest point above the natural ground elevation, contain more than one
hundred (100) cubic yards per each five thousand (5,000) square feet of site
area, and is made on natural terrain with a slope flatter than five (5)
horizontal to one (1) vertical and does not result in a finished slope steeper
than three (3) horizontal to one (1) vertical. This does not exempt phased
installations that fall above the listed thresholds over a period of twelve
(12) months.
      (7)   Excavation or filling of land necessary for the permanent removal
of existing underground storage tanks provided excavated soil is not removed
from the site and demolition prior to replacement of existing single story,
detached garage structures, is less than one thousand (1,000) square feet in
area.
(Ord. No. 721-16. Passed 7-13-16, eff. 7-17-16)
§ 3126.04 Application Preparation
   (a)   General. Application shall be prepared by the property owner or the
authorized agent, architect, engineer or contractor employed by the owner in
connection with the proposed work. Application shall be signed by the property
owner and notarized by an authorized agent.
   (b)   Form of Application. Application shall be prepared in writing on forms
prescribed by the Director of Building and Housing and shall contain the full
names and addresses of the owner, applicant and contractor, the street and plat
number of the parcel(s), a detailed description of the proposed work with
relevant ASMT and/or AASHTO standards to be utilized, the use and occupancy
(ies) for which the proposed work is intended, the estimated cost thereof a
statement in behalf of the owner that the proposed work and occupancy will be
in accordance with all laws and ordinances applying to the premises and such
other information as may be required by the Director. Applications shall be
signed and notarized by the property owner and electronically filed
applications shall bear a facsimile signature and indicate the authority of the
person affixing the facsimile to the application.
   (c)   Construction Documents. A minimum of three (3) sets of construction
documents are required to be submitted with the application for a permit to
excavate or fill land and shall be prepared by a registered professional
engineer or an architect where the work contemplated is incident to the
practice of architecture and in addition to the ordinance requirements. Plans
shall be drawn on paper or other medium acceptable to the Director of Building
and Housing, drawn to scale and shall be sufficiently detailed and legible so
that, together with the accompanying specifications and other data, any person
who is technically competent can determine whether or not the proposed grading
operation will conform to the standards outlined in this chapter.
   The plans and documents shall include the following:
      (1)   A contour map of the affected area showing the existing and
proposed contours at five (5) foot intervals.
      (2)   The estimated amount of excavation or fill in cubic yards.
      (3)   The location of any existing and proposed buildings or structures
on the site and within fifteen (15) feet of the site.
      (4)   The proposed method for the protection of soils from erosion.
      (5)   A signed and stamped report from a licensed design professional
showing the results of surface and sub-surface exploration, conditions of the
land, and procedures for performing the operation. A structural loading
analysis, signed and stamped by a structural engineer, for underground sewer
and culvert pipes under the proposed fill will also be necessary for review.
      (6)   All drainage provisions which shall be of such design to adequately
handle the surface runoff, together with a map showing the drainage area of all
land tributary to the site, the proposed disposition of surface drainage, and
the estimated cubic foot per second runoff of the area served by any drain
computed in accordance with current acceptable standards.
      (7)   The method to be used for and the degree of its proposed
compaction. If vibratory or dynamic compaction methods are utilized, the
provisions for minimizing such effects to adjacent and neighboring properties
and buildings within fifteen (15) feet of the site will also be detailed.
      (8)   Proposed preparation of existing ground surface to receive fill.
      (9)   Proposed sub-surface drainage if necessary for stability.
      (10)   Plans for all retaining walls, cribbing, vegetative provisions,
erosions and sediment control measures, together with location of temporary
and/or permanent fencing and other protective devices to be constructed in
connection, or as part of the proposed work.
      (11)   Clearly defined and technical requirements of the material to be
used for the fill, including notation relative to the moisture content, soil
type and plasticity pursuant to current AASHTO and/or ASTM guidelines.
      (12)   Verification that all materials come from approvable processing,
borrow or manufacturing sites and an assertion that all other state, federal
and local requirements are met for the removal, transportation and processing
of said materials.
      (13)   Excavation or Fill Barricades. When deemed necessary for public
safety by the Director of Building and Housing, for temporary or permanent
excavation and fill operations not otherwise protected, the construction of a
substantial barricade or fence not less than six (6) feet in height enclosing
the excavated or filled construction area will be required.
(Ord. No. 721-16. Passed 7-13-16, eff. 7-17-16)
§ 3126.05 Acceptable Fill Material
   (a)   Material is acceptable as fill for a site intended to be used for
residential development if the material contains equal to or fewer parts per
million of any contaminant than the quantity allowed under the Ohio
Environmental Protection Agency's Voluntary Action Program generic direct-
contact soil standards for carcinogenic and non-carcinogenic chemicals of
concern for residential soils as found in OAC 3745-300-08.
   (b)   Material is acceptable as fill for a site intended to be used for
commercial or industrial development if the soil contains equal to or fewer
parts per million of any contaminant than the quantity allowed under the Ohio
Environmental Protection Agency's Voluntary Action Program generic direct-
contact soil standards for carcinogenic and non-carcinogenic chemicals of
concern for commercial or industrial soils as found in OAC 3745-300-08.
   (c)   Material is acceptable as fill for either residential, commercial or
industrial sites if the soil is sand, gravel or other suitable aggregate,
solely or in conjunction with clean hard fill.
   (d)   All other material is unacceptable as fill and will be considered as
litter and/or waste and will be in violation and fined under
Chapters 551 and
613 of the City Ordinances as well as any other relevant state and federal
laws.
(Ord. No. 721-16. Passed 7-13-16, eff. 7-17-16)
§ 3126.06 Permit Application Review
   The Director of Building and Housing shall examine or cause to be examined
each application for a permit and the plans, specifications and computations
filed therewith, and when permits are required from other administrative
officers or agencies, shall promptly transmit or cause to be transmitted all
pertinent data for action by such administrative officer or agencies, and shall
be the coordinating officer in the handling of such permit application.
(Ord. No. 721-16. Passed 7-13-16, eff. 7-17-16)
§ 3126.07 Denial or Revocation of Excavation and Fill Permits; Appeal
   All work shall be performed in accordance with this Building Code, the Ohio
Basic Building Code, all other applicable ordinances of the City, and state and
federal laws.
   The Director of Building and Housing may revoke an excavation and fill
permit if the holder of the permit has failed to comply with the approved
construction plans and documents, any provisions of this chapter, or if the
Director determines that the construction has become offensive or objectionable
due to erosion, siltation or dust.
(Ord. No. 721-16. Passed 7-13-16, eff. 7-17-16)
§ 3126.08 Final Grade Slope
   (a)   General. An excavation and fill permit may not be issued for an
excavation or fill to be made with a face steeper in slope than three (3)
horizontal to one (1) vertical.
   (b)   Grading Protection – Adjacent Properties. If an excavation or fill is
to be graded to a higher or lower finished grade level steeper than in slope
than three (3) horizontal to one (1) vertical or steeper than the natural grade
on an adjacent property, the permit applicant shall provide suitable retaining
wall or walls or other approved slope protection as necessary to maintain the
existing natural grade of such adjacent property to prevent soil caving.
   (c)   Exception. The Director of Building and Housing may permit an
excavation or fill to be made with steeper face if an applicant demonstrates
satisfactorily by means of appropriate soil exploration and analysis and the
written and stamped opinion of the geotechnical engineer that the materials are
capable of standing on a steeper slope without creating the hazards described
herein.
   (d)   No excavation or fill to be made shall have a slope steeper than three
(3) horizontal to one (1) vertical without construction of a suitable retaining
wall or other approved slope protection as necessary to safely maintain the
existing natural grade of the adjacent property.
(Ord. No. 721-16. Passed 7-13-16, eff. 7-17-16)
§ 3126.09 Final Setbacks of Tops and Toes of Slopes
   (a)   The tops and toes of excavation and fill slopes shall be set back from
property boundaries and structures as far as necessary for the safety of
adjacent properties and adequacy of foundation support and to prevent damage as
a result of water runoff.
   (b)   No Tops and toes of excavation and fill slopes to be made shall be set
back from property boundaries and structures a distance of less than twenty
(20) feet for the safety of adjacent properties, adequacy of foundation
support, and to prevent damage as a result of ancillary water runoff.
(Ord. No. 721-16. Passed 7-13-16, eff. 7-17-16)
§ 3126.10 Final Protection Against Erosion
   (a)   All permanent excavations and fill construction shall be performed so
as to minimize soil erosion and sedimentation pursuant to the established best
management practices and standards regarding seeding and mulching, sodding,
plantings, and erosion protection. The excavation and fill permit, and the bond
for same, shall not be released until final erosion protection measures have
been established.
   (b)   No proposed grading work shall cause detrimental erosion or
sedimentation to adjacent properties or the public right-of-way.
(Ord. No. 721-16. Passed 7-13-16, eff. 7-17-16)
§ 3126.11 Relocation of Sewers and Drainage Courses
   (a)   If the Commissioner of Water Pollution Control deems it necessary to
adjust, relocate, add to, or otherwise modify the existing sewer system or
drainage course serving the area affected by an excavation or fill operation
area or protecting the existing sewer system or drainage course from damage, a
permit shall be issued in accordance with this chapter only if the applicant
for the permit obtains a permit to provide, relocate, or modify the sewer
system or drainage course for the affected area pursuant to the requirements of
the Division of Water Pollution Control and the Northeast Ohio Regional Sewer
District. Permit, easements, and construction shall be at the expense of the
applicant.
   (b)   No grading work drainage provisions shall fail to adequately contain
the surface runoff to the site area, cause a stagnant pond to form, or
interfere with existing drainage conditions.
(Ord. No. 721-16. Passed 7-13-16, eff. 7-17-16)
§ 3126.12 Performance Bond
   (a)   When Required. If, in the opinion of the Director of Building and
Housing, or his or her designee, the termination before completion of a
proposed filling or grading for the purpose of changing the elevation and
contour of the site would create an actual or potential hazard to the public or
risk of nuisance to nearby private or public property then prior to issuing the
permit, the applicant shall submit a performance or surety bond.
   (b)   Amount. The bond shall be in an amount adequate to cover the estimated
cost by the City to restore the site or to perform the operations under the
permit, whichever is greater.
   (c)   The financial assurances shall comply with the following conditions:
      (1)   The financial assurance shall be submitted by the applicant prior
to making any changes to the grade or contour of the site;
      (2)   The instrument shall contain an itemized written estimate, in
current dollars, of the cost of safe and proper restoration of the site to a
nuisance-free condition or completing the project, whichever is greater, and
shall be based on a third party conducting the activities;
      (3)   The City may review, approve, or require revisions to the cost
estimate or the financial assurance instrument to assure resources are
available to it to abate any nuisance left at the site;
      (4)   It shall be approved as to form and sufficiency by the Director of
Law and shall be in effect until all requirements of this chapter have been
fulfilled;
      (5)   It shall guarantee full and faithful performance of the
requirements of City law and satisfactory to the Commissioner of Building and
Housing and Director of Law.
(Ord. No. 721-16. Passed 7-13-16, eff. 7-17-16)
§ 3126.13 Permits and Prior Approvals Required
   (a)   Flood Insurance Program. No permit for the excavation or fill of land
shall be issued by the Director of Building and Housing until the applicant has
obtained, in writing, the review and approval from the Director that the
proposed new grading operations will be in accordance with FEMA requirements
and flood plain management under
Chapter 3167.
   (b)   No grading work shall be proposed for land delineated in the Flood
Boundary and Floodway Map or the Flood Insurance Rate Map of the Flood
Insurance Study unless compliance with the full provisions under
Chapter 3167 has been achieved.
   (c)   Approval from the Commissioner of Environment is required for
compliance with dust control and air quality requirements.
(Ord. No. 721-16. Passed 7-13-16, eff. 7-17-16)
§ 3126.14 Special Inspections
   (a)   General. Excavation or fill field observation and testing of
excavation or fill in the field shall be performed by a design professional or
an approved special inspector. The design professional shall provide to the
Director of Building and Housing a statement of special inspections defining
all special inspections, testing and evaluations needed for the purposed work.
Periodic Inspections shall be performed for the requirements established by the
design professional.
   (b)   Summary Report. The special inspector shall be required to submit
Inspection reports to the Director of Building and Housing at required
increments and of sufficient content to document progress and conditions. Upon
completion of the permitted work a final statement of compliance with the
design documents shall be submitted prior to the finalization of the permit.
(Ord. No. 721-16. Passed 7-13-16, eff. 7-17-16)
CHAPTER 3127 – WOOD CONSTRUCTION
3127.01   Scope
3127.02   Species and Grade to be Marked on Drawings
3127.03   Supervision
3127.04   Approval of Fabricator of Glued Structural Members
3127.05   Minimum Requirements for Quality of Lumber
3127.06   Wood Posts
3127.07   Splicing of Structural Framing Members
3127.08   Exterior Stud Walls and Bearing Partitions
3127.09   Wall Sheathing
3127.10   Sheathing Paper
3127.11   Floors and Roofs
   Note: The legislative history of this chapter, except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 1116-A-85, passed
February 10, 1986.
§ 3127.01 Scope
   The provisions of this chapter shall govern the quality and design of wood
members used to support loads or withstand forces in buildings of one (1), two
(2) and three (3) family dwelling units.
§ 3127.02 Species and Grade to be Marked on Drawings
   The species and grade or stress-grade, or lumber proposed for use to support
loads or withstand forces shall be stated on all drawings submitted for the
approval of the Commissioner.
§ 3127.03 Supervision
   Whenever lumber is used structurally in trusses or is assembled with timber
connectors, or bolts, or as glued laminated structural members; or whenever the
design or assembly is of unusual complexity or requires unusual care in
erection, the Commissioner may require that the work be supervised by a
competent representative of the owner, satisfactory to the Commissioner.
§ 3127.04 Approval of Fabricator of Glued Structural Members
   Glued laminated structural members and other glued wood structural members
or panels which rely for strength upon the efficacy of glued joints and the
proper selection and assembly shall be fabricated only by fabricators approved
by the Ohio Board of Building Standards or the Cleveland Board of Building
Standards and Building Appeals.
§ 3127.05 Minimum Requirements for Quality of Lumber
   (a)   All lumber used to support loads or withstand forces shall be sound
and free from rot, decay, shakes, and other defects which affect its durability
or impair its strength for the purpose for which it is intended.
   (b)   All lumber four (4) inches or less in nominal thickness used to
support loads or withstand forces in permanent structures shall have been air
dried or kiln dried to a moisture content approximately equal to that to which
it will eventually come in service.
   (c)   All lumber used in trussed, or in glued laminated members of
laminations two (2) inches or more in nominal thickness, or for other major
structural members where deemed necessary for structural safety by the
Commissioner shall be stress grade lumber.
   (d)   Where “heartwood of a durable species” is specified by OBBC and this
Building Code, it shall be interpreted to mean the heartwood of tidewater red
cypress, cedar, or redwood or other approved decay resistant wood.
§ 3127.06 Wood Posts
   (a)   When used as columns, wood posts in basements or cellars shall bear on
concrete, masonry, or other suitable approved bases extending not less than
three (3) inches above the finished floor.
   (b)   Exterior wood posts in permanent construction which do not have an
approved preservative treatment or are not the heartwood of a durable species
shall be supported at least six (6) inches above ground level on concrete,
masonry, or other suitable approved bases or piers.
   (c)   Wood posts or columns shall not be used in crawl spaces or air spaces
which are not paved with solid impervious material.
   (d)   Wood posts and columns shall be securely anchored top and bottom.
   (e)   Untreated wood columns or posts in basements or cellars built into
masonry walls or partitions shall be exposed on at least two (2) sides.
   (f)   Column or post ends liable to be wet or damp shall be protected with a
suitable preservative.
§ 3127.07 Splicing of Structural Framing Members
   Structural framing members shall not be spliced between bearing points
unless suitably reinforced to transmit all calculated loads.
§ 3127.08 Exterior Stud Walls and Bearing Partitions
   (a)   Exterior stud walls and bearing partitions shall be designed to carry
safely all loads including loads on exterior stud walls due to wind or other
lateral forces.
   (b)   Stud framing shall be of studs not less than two (2) inches by four
(4) inches, spaced not more than sixteen (16) inches on centers for two (2)
story and two and one-half (2-1/2) story construction; for construction less
than two (2) stories in height, properly braced and assembled so that the
assembly provides adequate rigidity, spacing may be increased up to twenty-four
(24) inches on centers when specifically approved by the Commissioner. Studs
shall be set with the larger cross-sectional dimension at right angles to the
wall or bearing partition unless designed as individual columns.
   (c)   Stud framing having an unsupported height of more than ten (10) feet
shall have studs bridged or otherwise braced in an approved manner at intervals
not exceeding eight (8) feet. For bridging required to secure required fire
resistance ratings, consult list of approved fire resistance ratings issued by
the Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals.
   (d)   The maximum unsupported height, without intermediate lateral bracing
from floors or structural members, shall be fourteen (14) feet for four (4)
inch studs, and twenty (20) feet for six (6) inch studs.
   (e)   Sills shall be anchored to foundations by bolts not less than one-half
(1/2) inch in diameter embedded not less than fifteen (15) inches in masonry
unit walls and piers and not less than six (6) inches in cast-in-place
concrete, and spaced not more than eight (8) feet on centers. Not less than two
(2) bolts shall be used for each sill member, and, in all cases, bolts shall be
provided within twelve (12) inches from the ends of each sill member. Bolts
shall be firmly anchored in the foundation masonry or concrete.
   (f)   Corner or diagonal braces shall be installed at all external corners
of exterior stud framed walls and securely nailed to all members over which
they are applied, except that corner braces may be omitted when:
      (1)   Wood sheathing boards are used and applied diagonally;
      (2)   Forty-eight (48) inch wide or wider plywood sheathing is used; or
      (3)   On one (1) story dwellings, and at the second story of two (2)
story dwellings, sheathed with approved three-fourths (3/4) inch fiberboards,
one-half (1/2) inch gypsum board, or five-sixteenths (5/16) inch plywood, or
with other material providing equal or greater resistance to racking loads,
when fifty percent (50%) or more of the wall surfaces are without openings.
   (g)   Corner braces shall be one (1) inch by four (4) inch boards, or
approved equivalent, let into the outside faces of the studs and set at an
angle of approximately forty-five (45) degrees. Corner braces shall be
installed at or adjacent to the corners, and wherever possible, shall extend
from bottom of sills to tops of plates.
   (h)   When exterior openings are located adjacent to the corner and one (1)
piece corner braces from sill to plate cannot be installed, corner braces shall
be provided which extend over at least three (3) stud spaces and connect the
corner post to the sill and the corner post to the top plate.
   (i)   Sills and girders supported on top of foundation walls or piers shall
be leveled and grouted with Portland cement mortar; wood shall not be used for
permanent shims.
   (j)   Studs shall be doubled at the sides of openings in exterior stud walls
and bearing partitions; the inner stud shall extend in one (1) piece from
bearing to header and shall be nailed to the outer stud: except that in lieu of
doubled studs equivalent solid members may be used, or, where allowable
stresses in single studs are not exceeded and approved formed metal or other
supports and fastenings are provided at lintels, openings may be framed with
single studs.
   (k)   All lintels shall be designed to support the superimposed load and
shall have bearing of at least one and one-half (1-1/2) inches.
   (l)   Plates of exterior stud walls and of stud bearing partitions shall be
not less than two (2) two (2) inch members of the same width as the studs,
lapped at corners and intersecting partitions; except that when joists or studs
are placed directly above studs below, a single top plate may be used. When
plates are out for piping or duct work, an approved tie shall be provided on
each side of the plate.
   (m)   Sill members of bearing partitions shall be not less than two (2)
inches in thickness. If properly fire-stopped, studs may run through floors and
rest on girders or on partition plates.
   (n)   In frame construction of two (2) or two and one-half (2-1/2) stories,
where the exterior studs are not continuous from sill to roof and diagonal
sheathing is not provided, other sheathing or connections, so designed and
arranged as to supply adequate structural continuity between the first and
second stories, shall be provided.
   (o)   Stud bearing partitions shall not be used in cellars, crawl spaces or
air spaces. Stud bearing walls or partitions shall not be used to support more
than two (2) floors and a roof.
   (p)   When two (2) inch by four (4) inch stud bearing partitions extend
through more than two (2) stories and attic, the studs of such bearing
partitions in stories below the upper two (2) stories shall be spaced not more
than twelve (12) inches on centers for two (2) inch by four (4) inch studs, or
shall be three (3) inch by four (4) inch or two (2) inch by four (4) inch studs
spaced sixteen (16) inches on centers; in all such cases the partitions shall
be subjected to engineering analysis to verify adequacy under the imposed
loads.
   (q)   Ribbon Boards. Ribbon boards used to support joists shall be not less
than one (1) inch by four (4) inch, shall be cut into the studs, and securely
nailed with not less than two (2) tenpenny nails to each stud. The ends of
joists adjoining studs shall be securely spiked to the studs. Wood blocking
shall be inserted at the ends of joists not adjoining studs.
   (r)   Notching of Studs. In bearing walls or partitions no stud shall be cut
more than one-third (1/3) its depth to receive piping or duct work, or for
other purposes, unless approved supplementary framing or supports are provided.
§ 3127.09 Wall Sheathing
   (a)   General.
      (1)   All exterior stud framed walls which are not finished with back-
plastered stucco extending back between the studs at least one-fourth (1/4)
inch, or with other approved exterior finish which will provide adequate
bracing and weather protection, shall have wall sheathing back of the exterior
finish.
      (2)   Exterior wall sheathing shall consist of either wood boards,
plywood, fibre board, gypsum board, or particle board, conforming to the
requirements of OBBC or other material approved by the Ohio Board of Building
Standards or the Cleveland Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals.
      (3)   All wall sheathing shall be fastened to each stud, to top and
bottom plates and to sills.
   (b)   Wood Sheathing.
      (1)   Wood sheathing shall not be less than five-eighths (5/8) inch in
net thickness.
      (2)   Joints shall be broken over studs unless end-matched boards are
used. If end-matched boards are used, no two (2) adjoining boards shall break
joints over the same stud space, and each board shall bear on not less than two
(2) studs.
      (3)   When applied diagonally, boards shall extend at approximately
forty-five (45) degrees in opposite directions from each corner.
      (4)   When applied horizontally, the stud frame shall have diagonal
corner bracing.
      (5)   Wood sheathing shall be applied horizontally under stucco finish.
   (c)   Plywood Sheathing.
      (1)   Plywood for exterior sheathing shall be not less than “sheathing”
grade, “interior type.”
      (2)   Shingles applied over plywood sheathing less than five-eighths (5/
8) inch thick shall be fastened to wood or other approved nailing strips.
   (d)   Fibreboard Sheathing.
      (1)   Fibreboard sheathing shall not be less than the following:
 
Minimum Thickness (Inches) Maximum Stud Spacing
                           (Inches)
1/2                        16
3/4                        24
 
      (2)   So far as possible, each fibre-board sheathing board shall bear on
at least four (4) studs.
      (3)   Fibreboard sheathing shall be erected with tightly fitted vertical
joints staggered.
      (4)   Fibreboard shall not be used as a nailing base for the attachment
of exterior finish. Exterior finish shall be nailed either to the studding
through the fiberboard, or shall be attached to wood or other approved nailing
strips.
   (e)   Gypsum Board Sheathing.
      (1)   Gypsum sheathing boards shall have an approved water repellent
treatment adequate to prevent moisture or water from entering into the gypsum
core, shall have a minimum thickness of one-half (1/2) inch.
      (2)   Sheathing shall fit tightly around all door and window frames, with
all ends over supports and with vertical joints staggered. At openings, water-
resistant paper shall be applied to provide a seal between the opening frame
and the gypsum sheathing.
      (3)   Wood or slate shingles applied over gypsum sheathing shall be
fastened to wood or other approved nailing strips.
   (f)   Particle Board Sheathing.
      (1)   Particle board sheathing shall have a minimum thickness of three-
eighths (3/8) inch.
      (2)   Sheathing shall fit tightly around all door and window frames, with
all ends over supports and with vertical joints staggered. At openings, water-
resistant paper shall be applied to provide a seal between the opening frame
and the sheathing.
      (3)   Wood or slate shingles applied over sheathing shall be fastened to
wood or other approved nailing strips.
§ 3127.10 Sheathing Paper
   (a)   Except as provided in subsection (b) hereof, water-resistant building
paper or asphalt saturated felt or other suitable approved water-resistant
paper or barrier shall be applied over all exterior wall sheathing. Whenever
conditions are such that moisture due to condensation may accumulate within the
wall assembly, the water-resistant sheathing paper or barrier shall be vapor-
permeable.
   (b)   Exceptions.
      (1)   The Commissioner may approve the omission of sheathing paper where
the building is not intended for human occupancy, or where the exterior finish
is metal, and in other instances where it is not deemed necessary by him or her
for the protection of the sheathing or structure.
      (2)   Sheathing paper shall not be required over sheathing that has been
covered or treated in an approved manner to render it water-repellent, provided
that the sheathing material is closely fitted and cut ends which expose an
absorbent core to moisture are sealed by caulking or covered with water-
resistant building paper or asphalt saturated felt.
§ 3127.11 Floors and Roofs
   (a)   Floor and Roof Framing.
      (1)   All girders, beams, and rafters shall be adequate to support the
loads prescribed by Chapter
3129, without exceeding the allowable stresses specified in OBBC and this
Building Code.
      (2)   Members supporting plaster shall be designed so that the deflection
under the assumed live loading prescribed by OBBC and this Building Code shall
not exceed one-three hundred sixtieth (1/360) of the span.
      (3)   When wood members which are not the heartwood of a durable species
are to be embedded or rest within exterior masonry which is below the adjoining
grade, the parts to be within the masonry shall first be treated with an
approved preservative.
      (4)   When supported by masonry, joists shall have ample bearing but not
less than three (3) inches. When there is not masonry above the bearing, the
joists shall have a two (2) inch minimum fire cut or bevel.
      (5)   Masonry walls shall be securely anchored to each tier of wood
joists or wood beams bearing on them at maximum intervals of four (4) feet by
metal anchors having a minimum cross section of one-fourth (1/4) inch by one
and one-fourth (1-1/4) inch, and at least sixteen (16) inches long, securely
fastened to the joists or beams and provided with split and upset ends or other
approved means for anchoring into masonry. Girders shall be similarly anchored
at their bearings. Anchors shall be attached near the bottom of the framing
members so as to be self- releasing.
      (6)   Masonry walls parallel to wood joists or to wood beams shall be
provided with similar anchors at maximum intervals of six (6) feet engaging not
less than three (3) joists or beams.
      (7)   Upset or “T” ends on anchors shall develop the full strength of the
anchor strap and shall be solidly embedded in the masonry.
      (8)   Anchors may be omitted at the first tier of joists when the
supporting walls are laterally braced by earth, or in other approved manner,
and are bonded to masonry above.
      (9)   When enclosing walls are of wood, each joist, beam, and girder
supported by the wall shall be securely spiked or anchored to the wall
construction, so as to stay in place and to resist safely all lists and lateral
pressures required to be assumed by OBBC and this Building Code.
      (10)   Girders shall be fastened to each other where they intersect or
abut.
      (11)   Floor joists framing into the side of wood girders or headers
shall be supported on metal joist hangers or on a bearing strip or ledger board
of adequate size fastened to the side of the girders or headers. Such strip or
board shall measure at least two (2) by three (3) inches in section. The notch
in the end of the joist shall be not more than one-quarter (1/4) of the joist
depth, and the shearing stress shall not exceed the allowable stress when
calculated in the manner prescribed by OBBC and this Building Code. Joists
shall be spiked to metal joist hangers. When supported on a bearing strip or
ledger board, joists shall be spiked thereto and shall be further supported by
spikes driven through the supporting member into the joists.
      (12)   The ends of joists, whether resting upon girders or bearing
partitions or abutted against girders, shall be either securely tied to the
girders or to each other, or lapped and spiked together, on not more than four
(4) foot centers, so as to resist safely an outward thrust on the walls equal
to the assumed wind pressure, or the spreading action of the roof, whichever is
the greater.
      (13)   When joists are butted, ties shall be of metal not less than one-
eighth (1/8) inch by one (1) inch by eighteen (18) inches, or of wood not less
than one (1) inch thick and two (2) feet long. When joists are lapped to
provide a tie they shall lap one another not less than four (4) inches and
shall be securely spiked together. When joists abut a girder, metal dog anchors
driven into the tops of the joists and not less than one-eighth (1/8) inch by
one (1) inch in section, or metal straps not less than one-eighth (1/8) inch by
one (1) inch by eighteen (18) inches, may be used. Ties shall be spaced not
more than four (4) feet on centers and, for masonry enclosed buildings, shall
be provided on each line of joists tied to enclosing masonry walls.
      (14)   All joists shall be spiked to the bearing when bearing is of wood.
      (15)   All joints of solid or build-up girders forming simple spans,
except joints in approved glued laminated girders, shall be made over column or
pier supports. When girders made up of joists nailed together side by side are
continuous over three (3) or more supports, joints in joists shall be located
between one-sixth (1/6) and one-fourth (1/4) the span length from an
intermediate support. No two (2) adjoining joists, nor more than one-third (1/
3) the total number, shall be joined on the same side of the support.
      (16)   Joists supporting one (1) story nonbearing partitions which are
parallel to the joists shall be doubled. Members supporting nonbearing
partitions more than one (1) story in height, or bearing partitions, shall be
designed to support safely the superimposed load. Joists supporting a partition
parallel to the joists and spaced apart to permit the passage of piping or
ductwork shall be blocked on not more than four (4) foot intervals to provide
support for the partition.
      (17)   Unless otherwise specifically approved by the Commissioner joists
shall not be notched within the middle one-half (1/2) of the span, nor shall
notches in the top or bottom edges of the joists in the outer one- quarter (1/
4) of the span length exceed one-sixth (1/6) of the joist depth.
      (18)   Holes bored through joists shall not, because of location or by
proximity to other holes or cuts, impair the bearing capacities of the joists
so as to render them incapable of safely supporting the design load. Unless
otherwise specifically approved by the Commissioner holes bored through joists
shall not exceed two and one-half (2-1/2) inches in diameter and no hole shall
be closer than two (2) inches to the top or bottom of a joist.
      (19)   All framing around openings shall be designed for the loads
supported. In general all headers and trimmers shall be doubled unless single
members are adequate for the load.
      (20)   A trimmer supported header carrying four (4) or more tail beams
shall be rested on metal joist hangers spiked to the trimmer and the header.
Headers carrying less than four (4) tail beams shall be supported on metal
joist hangers or on bearing strips or ledger boards not less than two (2)
inches by three (3) inches by twenty-four (24) inches well spiked to the side
of the trimmer. When supported on a bearing strip or ledger board, headers
shall be spiked thereto and shall be further supported by spikes driven through
the trimmer into the headers.
      (21)   Joist Hangers. Metal hangers for joists, headers, and other
framed-in wood members shall be of approved type, shall provide adequate and
firm support, and shall be punched to permit spiking to the supporting and
supported members.
      (22)   Support of Rafters.
         A.   Rafters shall be vertically supported near the ridge when the
slope is less than four (4) inches per foot. Rafters, regardless of slope,
shall be thus supported unless they are held from spreading. Where rafters are
not otherwise held against spreading, collar ties shall be provided on every
pair of rafters. If the spread of the rafters is prevented by ties not at the
plate line, the size of the rafters shall be increased to take care of the
additional bending moments induced by the ties when the roof is loaded with the
maximum vertical load.
         B.   When ceiling joists do not serve as a tie at the plate line,
ceiling joists or other ties on each pair of rafters shall be provided below
the upper third and they shall be well spiked to each rafter.
         C.   Wood rafters shall be so spiked or otherwise fastened to the
plate or other members, as to resist safely all thrusts under full load, and
the upward lift; the minimum fastening shall be two (2) sixteen (16) penny
nails at each rafter end, or the approved equivalent thereof.
         D.   Framing around roof openings, and hip and valley rafters, shall
be designed for the loads supported. In general, double rafters and headers
shall be used around roof openings unless single members are adequate for the
load.
         E.   At ridges, rafters shall be framed against ridge boards not less
than one (1) inch by eight (8) inches in size.
         F.   Plates supported by masonry shall be anchored to the masonry as
required by OBBC and this Building Code for the anchoring of wood sills to
foundation walls.
         G.   The tops of all walls shall be securely tied or anchored so as to
resist safely all lateral forces including the horizontal components of loads
on sloping roofs, the spreading action of rafters not tied at the plate line,
and wind loads.
      (23)   Bridging.
         A.   Floor and flat-roof joists and beams shall be securely bridged at
intervals not exceeding eight (8) feet between bridging or between bridging and
bearing, either with diagonal wood bridging not less than two (2) inch by three
(3) inches fitted and double nailed at each end, or with approved rigid metal
bridging, or with solid wood bridging, or with other approved bridging
providing adequate stiffening; except that when the required joist depth is
more than six (6) times the breadth, joists shall be bridged at intervals not
exceeding six (6) times the joist depth. Solid blocking shall be placed between
joists at all joist supports whenever the joists are not otherwise laterally
braced or fastened.
         B.   Where the required depth of rafters is more than six (6) times
the breadth, the rafters shall be bridged as required for floor joists.
      (24)   Floor Sleepers. Unless heartwood of a durable species is used,
wood floor sleepers or other wood embedded in or laid on masonry or concrete
that is in direct contact with the ground shall first be treated with an
approved pressure preservative treatment. Pieces shall be machined and cut
before treatment whenever possible; when cutting after treatment is
unavoidable, the cut surfaces shall be given two (2) brush coats of a suitable
preservative.
      (25)   Roof Sheathing.
         A.   *All roofing materials, including wood shingles, shall be applied
over closed solid sheathing or approved equivalent.
         *Closed solid sheathing is required to limit, to some degree, the
conflagration hazard from roof fires, and is deemed necessary in the City
because of the closely built up nature of the residential areas and the
proximity of industrial uses thereto.
         B.   Roof sheathing shall be of wood, or of other approved material
providing secure attachment for the roofing and moisture-resistance and fire-
resistance at least equal to that of wood sheathing.
         C.   Wood Roof Sheathing. Wood roof sheathing shall have a minimum
nominal thickness of one (1) inch and shall be applied over maximum rafter
spacings of twenty-four (24) inches on centers. Joints shall be over rafters
unless end-matched boards are used; if end-matched boards are used, no two (2)
adjoining boards shall break joints over the same rafter space and each board
shall bear on at least two (2) rafters.
         D.   Plywood Roof Sheathing.
            1.   Plywood roof sheathing shall be applied with the grain of the
outer plies at right angles to the rafters.
            2.   Plywood sheathing shall be not less than “sheathing” grade,
“interior type,” conforming to OBBC.
            3.   Wood, slate, shingles, or tile roofing, applied over roof
sheathing less than five- eighths (5/8) inch thick shall be fastened to wood or
other approved nailing strips.
            4.   Plywood roof sheathing not of the exterior type shall have no
surface or edge exposed to the weather.
      (26)   Flooring.
         A.   In all buildings with wood-framed floor construction where
finished wood floors of wood less than three-fourths (3/4) inch in thickness
are installed, and under all finished wood floors in such buildings more than
two and one-half (2-1/2) stories in height, sub-flooring of wood not less than
one (1) inch nominal thickness or plywood not less than five-eighths (5/8) inch
thick shall be provided under all finished wood floors.
         B.   In buildings with wood-framed floor construction over two and
one-half (2-1/2) stories in height double wood flooring or other equivalent
diaphragm shall be provided and securely fastened to the floor framing for
stiffening and to resist lateral forces.
         C.   For double wood floors or approved equivalent required for fire
protection see relevant provisions of OBBC and this Building Code.
         D.   When double wood floors are required for fire protection, plywood
subflooring conforming to OBBC, may be substituted for the one (1) inch nominal
thickness wood sub-flooring.
         E.   When the sub-flooring serves as a structural diaphragm to resist
lateral forces it shall be securely fastened to the floor framing system.
         F.   Wood flooring shall be of such thickness that it will safely
support all design loads without a deflection exceeding one-three hundred
sixtieth (1/360) of the span. The center-to-center spacing of supporting
members under one (1) inch nominal thickness wood flooring shall not exceed
sixteen (16) inches, and for double wood flooring shall not exceed twenty (20)
inches.
      (27)   Plank and Beam Floor and Roof Construction, and Laminated Floors.
         A.   Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to prevent or
preclude the use of floor or roof constructions consisting of plank floors or
roof decking on supporting beams spaced more than twenty (20) inches on
centers, provided that such construction is designed in accordance with good
engineering practice and is approved by the Commissioner and all structural
members are fastened together so as to provide a well integrated structure
capable of supporting all superimposed loads and withstanding all lateral and
other forces.
         B.   Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to prevent or
preclude the use of laminated floors, consisting of wood members placed on edge
and securely nailed together, in locations where wood flooring is permitted by
OBBC and this Building Code, provided that such laminated floors are installed
so as to perform all functions required by OBBC and this Building Code for wood
flooring in such locations.
CHAPTER 3129 – LOADS
3129.01   Nominal Uniformly Distributed Live Floor Loads
3129.02   Snow Load
3129.03   Wind Load
3129.04   Special Wind Conditions
3129.05   Overturning and Sliding
3129.06   Stresses During Erection
3129.07   Wind Loads on Signs, Tank Towers and Chimneys
   Note: The legislative history of this chapter, except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 1116-A-85, passed
February 10, 1986.
Statutory reference:
   Structural design, OAC Ch. 4101:1-16
§ 3129.01 Nominal Uniformly Distributed Live Floor Loads
   The live floor loads assumed for purposes of design shall be the greatest
loads that probably will be produced by the intended occupancies or uses,
provided that the live floor loads to be considered as uniformly distributed
shall be not less than the values given in the following
Table A, and except that such live floor loads shall be subject to reduction
where and as provided in OBBC.
   Table A
 
Occupancy or Use Live Loads for Ground or First Floors Only (Lb. per square
                 foot)
Stores:
   Retail     100
   Wholesale  100
For all other floors see OBBC
 
§ 3129.02 Snow Load
   BOCA Section 911.0 entitled “Snow Load” is hereby amended to read as
follows:
   Section 911.0 Snow Load.
   (a)   In addition to the dead load, and in addition to the wind load, roofs
shall be designed for the loads per square foot of horizontal projection given
in the following Table:
 
Slope of Roof                          Roof Load per Square Foot of Horizontal
                                       Projection
Less than 4 vertical to 12 horizontal  30 pounds
4, or more, vertical to 12 horizontal, 20 pounds
up to 12 vertical to 12 horizontal
Over 12 vertical to 12 horizontal      0 pounds
 
   Ordinary roofs, either flat, or pitched shall be designed for the live loads
specified in the Table above or the Snow Load specified in OBBC, whichever is
greater.
§ 3129.03 Wind Load
   BOCA Table 912.1 of Section 912.0 entitled “Wind Load” is hereby amended to
reflect the following:
   Except as provided in OBBC and this Building Code buildings and other
structures shall be designed and constructed to withstand the horizontal
pressure in each height zone in the following Table, allowing for wind from any
direction; the height to be measured from the average level of the ground
adjacent to the building or other structure.
Table WP
Design Wind Pressures for Various Height
Zones of Buildings or Other Structures
 
Height Zone   Wind Pressure
(Ft.)         (Lbs. per Sq. Ft.)
Less than 50* 20
50 to 99      24
100 to 325    28
 
§ 3129.04 Special Wind Conditions
   The Commissioner may require evidence to support the values for wind
pressure used in the design of structures not specifically covered in OBBC or
this chapter.
§ 3129.05 Overturning and Sliding
   (a)   The overturning moment due to wind load shall not exceed sixty-six and
two-thirds percent (66- 2/3%) of the moment of stability of the building or
other structure due to the dead load only, unless the building or other
structure is anchored so as to resist the excess overturning moment without
exceeding the allowable stresses for the materials used. The axis of rotation
for computing the overturning moment and the moment of stability shall be taken
as the intersection of the outside wall line on the leeward side and the plane
representing the average elevation of the bottoms of the footings. The weight
of earth superimposed over footings may be used in computing the moment of
stability due to dead load.
   (b)   When the total resisting force due to friction is insufficient to
prevent sliding, the building or other structure shall be anchored to withstand
the excess sliding force without exceeding the allowable stresses for the
materials used. Anchors provided to resist overturning moment may also be
considered as providing resistance to sliding.
§ 3129.06 Stresses During Erection
   Provisions shall be made for wind stress during erection of the building or
other structure. When the building or other structure is constructed with high
walls or other structural parts dependent upon bracing from roofs or other
parts not immediately superimposed or provided, such temporarily unbraced walls
or parts of the structure shall be designed to be self-supporting against wind
pressure or shall be provided with temporary bracing.
§ 3129.07 Wind Loads on Signs, Tank Towers and Chimneys
   BOCA Section 915.0 entitled “Wind Loads on Signs, Tank Towers and Chimneys”
is hereby amended to read as follows:
   Section 915.0 Wind Loads on Signs, Tank Towers and Chimneys.
   (a)   Signs in which the projected area exposed to wind consists of seventy
percent (70%) or more of the gross area as determined by the over-all
dimensions shall be classed as solid signs; those in which the projected
exposed area is derived from open letters, figures, strips, and structural
framing members, the aggregate total area of which is less than seventy percent
(70%) of the gross area determined by the over-all dimensions, shall be classed
as open signs.
   (b)   Signs, other than ground signs fifty (50) feet or less in height,
shall be designed and constructed to withstand the horizontal pressures given
in the following table applied to the net projected exposed area of all parts
of the signs including structural framing, allowing for wind from any
direction:
Table WS
Design Wind Pressures for Signs Other than Ground Signs 50 Feet or less in
Height
                                        Wind Pressure
Height from Ground to Top of Sign (Ft.) (Lbs. per Sq. Ft.)
                                        Solid Signs Open Signs
                                        (All Types) (All Types)
                                        Wind Pressure
Height from Ground to Top of Sign (Ft.) (Lbs. per Sq. Ft.)
                                        Solid Signs Open Signs
                                        (All Types) (All Types)
Less than 50                            25          35
50 to 99                                30          42
100 to 199                              35          49
200 to 299                              38          53
300 to 399                              40          56
400 to 499                              42          58
500 to 599                              43          60
600 to 799                              44          61
800 to 999                              45          63
1000 to 1199                            46          65
1200 to 1399                            48          67
1400 to 1599                            49          68
1600 and over                           50          70
 
   (c)   Solid Ground Signs. Solid ground signs less than fifty (50) feet in
height shall be designed and constructed to withstand a wind pressure of not
less than twenty (20) pounds per square foot.
   (d)   Open Ground Signs. Open ground signs less than fifty (50) feet in
height shall be designed and constructed to withstand a wind pressure of not
less than thirty (30) pounds per square foot.
CHAPTER 3131 – HEATING, VENTILATING AND AIR CONDITIONING
3131.01   Permit Required
3131.02   Approval of Commissioner of Air Pollution Control
3131.03   Use and Maintenance of Existing Flues and Gas Vents
3131.04   Required Temperatures for Heating Systems
3131.05   Approval of Devices and Installations
3131.06   Repairs after Fire Damage
3131.07   Narrow Throat Register Boxes on Gravity Warm Air Heating Systems
3131.08   Firestopping
3131.09   Inspection and Approval
3131.10   Name and Address of Installer to be Affixed
3131.11   Approved Standards for Installations
3131.12   Refrigerating and Heating Equipment
3131.13   Incinerators
3131.14   Ash Pits
3131.15   Underground Duct Systems Standard
   Note: The legislative history of this chapter, except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 1116-A-85, passed
February 10, 1986.
Cross-reference:
   HVAC fees, CO
3105.25
§ 3131.01 Permit Required
   No person shall construct, install, reinstall, repair, replace, reset,
alter, convert or move in any building, structure or appurtenance thereto,
without first obtaining a permit therefor from the Commissioner as follows:
   (a)   Refrigeration producing systems, cooling systems or air conditioning
units or systems where such units are integral parts of such cooling systems;
or
   (b)   Heat producing systems, combustion plants, heating systems and air
conditioning units in dwelling houses where such units are integral parts of
such heating systems.
§ 3131.02 Approval of Commissioner of Air Pollution Control
   Every flue erected after June 27, 1949, and every existing flue to be used
with a heat generating device or combustion equipment dissimilar to that
previously installed or dissimilar to that for which the flue was previously
approved, shall be erected or used only if the design and use thereof has been
approved by the Commissioner of Air Pollution Control and the Commissioner
except that the approval of the Commissioner of Air Pollution Control shall not
be required for dwelling house flues or when gas burning equipment is
installed.
§ 3131.03 Use and Maintenance of Existing Flues and Gas Vents
   (a)   No existing flue or gas vent shall be used for any appliance or device
not similar in size, character, and type of fuel burned to that previously
connected to such flue or gas vent, and no existing flue shall be connected to
a newly-constructed fireplace, without the approval of the flue or gas vent for
such use or installation by the Commissioner.
   (b)   All chimneys, smokestacks, flues, smoke pipes, and gas vents shall be
maintained in a safe and gas tight condition and the Commissioner may prohibit
the use of any appliance or device connected to any chimney, smokestack, flue,
smoke pipe or gas vent not so maintained.
   (c)   Any chimney, smokestack, flue or gas vent which becomes unsafe or
dangerous shall be made safe or taken down.
§ 3131.04 Required Temperatures for Heating Systems
   (a)   Heating systems shall be designed, installed and operated to maintain
inside air temperatures not less than those listed in Table A for the specified
areas and rooms in buildings when the outside air temperature is zero degrees
Fahrenheit (0°F) and there is a wind velocity of fifteen (15) mph. The
tabulated minimum inside air temperatures shall be determined by dry-bulb
thermometers not less than three (3) feet from outside walls and at a height
above the floor at the breathing line of the typical occupants, i.e. three (3)
feet above the floor, where the occupants are normally seated and five (5) feet
above the floor where the occupants are not seated. Compliance with the
requirements of this chapter and with the recommendations of the ASHRAE
“Heating Ventilating Air Conditioning Guide” is prima facie evidence of
conformity with accepted engineering practice.
Table A
Minimum Inside Winter Temperatures
 
Degrees F Location
          Indoor swimming pools, operating rooms, bathrooms in hospitals, and
75        other typical areas where occupants are lightly clothed or require
          special warmth.
70        Living areas, hotel rooms, classrooms, and other typical areas where
          occupants will be seated.
65        Sales rooms, kitchens, laundries, gymnasiums, playrooms, and other
          typical areas where occupants are performing mildly active duties.
60        Repair shops, foundries, service garages, and other typical areas
          where occupants are engaged in heavy tasks.
 
   (b)   Whenever a building is heated by means of a furnace, boiler or other
apparatus under the control of the owner, agent or lessee of such building,
such owner, agent or lessee, in the absence of a written or verbal contract or
agreement to the contrary, shall be deemed to have contracted, undertaken or
bound himself or herself to furnish heat in accordance with the provisions of
this section. However, nothing herein contained shall apply to buildings or
portions thereof used and occupied by trades, businesses or occupations where
high or low temperatures are essential or unavoidable.
§ 3131.05 Approval of Devices and Installations
   (a)   All heating devices, appliances, accessories, and controls shall be of
a type approved by the Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals.
Devices, appliances, accessories, or controls approved by the Underwriters
Laboratories, Inc., or the American Gas Association, or tested and approved by
other nationally recognized testing laboratory which possesses adequate
equipment, experience, and competency in this field, may be approved by the
Board without additional tests.
   (b)   No heating equipment or other equipment which produces or may produce
smoke, or toxic, noxious or obnoxious gases, or fly ash or dust, shall be
installed except in conformity with the Air Pollution Code and the rules and
regulations governing such installations promulgated by the Commissioner of Air
Pollution Control. Installations of such equipment, except heating equipment in
dwelling houses or serving only one (1) dwelling unit, shall be made only if
approved by the Commissioner of Air Pollution Control and shall be subject to
his or her approval of the completed installation.
   (c)   All such installations shall also be subject to the approval of the
Commissioner.
§ 3131.06 Repairs after Fire Damage
   Whenever the operation of a system has been the cause of a fire, such system
shall not be used or operated until it has been inspected by the Commissioner
and such alterations and changes made as are deemed necessary by him or her to
permit safe operation of the system, and no alterations or repairs shall be
made without a permit issued by the Commissioner.
§ 3131.07 Narrow Throat Register Boxes on Gravity Warm Air Heating Systems
   (a)   Whenever a new furnace is installed or an existing furnace is replaced
in gravity warm air heating systems, any existing narrow throat register boxes
located less than one (1) full story height above the top of the furnace shall
be removed and replaced with wide throat register boxes.
   (b)   In new gravity warm air heating installations narrow throat register
boxes shall not be used less than one (1) full story height above the level of
the top of the furnace.
§ 3131.08 Firestopping
   (a)   Where the installation of pipes or ducts in walls or partitions
requires the removal of any firestopping, the space around the pipes or ducts
at the points where firestopping was removed shall be tightly filled with
mineral wool or other noncombustible insulating material.
   (b)   Where pipes, ducts, stacks, or fittings pass through a floor
construction, all open spaces around them shall be filled with mineral wood, or
other incombustible insulating material.
   (c)   Whenever baseboard or wall registers located at the top of supply or
return air ducts are installed in stud framed walls or partitions or in
construction having concealed interior spaces, an approved firestop shall be
installed approximately three (3) inches above such register or grille. In stud
framed construction such firestops shall extend the full width and depth of the
stud space.
§ 3131.09 Inspection and Approval
   (a)   All heating, ventilating or air conditioning systems installed or
altered shall be inspected and subject to approval by the Commissioner while in
the process of installation and upon completion of the following stages:
      (1)   When system has been roughed in and connected;
      (2)   When the system is completely installed and ready to operate;
      (3)   In alteration work, all new work shall be inspected.
   (b)   No work shall be covered up or otherwise concealed before it has been
inspected and approved. The Commissioner may require the removal of any
covering which has been placed over the work which has not been inspected and
approved.
   (c)   No heating, ventilating or air conditioning system, and no altered
system, including systems where furnaces have been replaced, shall be used for
heating any building until such use has been authorized by the Commissioner.
   (d)   The Commissioner may seal, or order the sealing, of any furnace
installed in violation of OBBC or this Building Code or found to be a hazard to
life or property, and such seal shall not be removed without written authority
for such removal given by the Commissioner.
§ 3131.10 Name and Address of Installer to be Affixed
   Whenever a heating, ventilating or air conditioning system is installed or
an existing system is replaced, by other than an owner exempted from
registration and certification under the provisions of Chapter
3107, a plate or other permanent device shall be attached to the casing or the
system which shall state the name, address and phone number of the installer.
(Ord. No. 377-03. Passed 5-19-03, eff. 5-27-03)
§ 3131.11 Approved Standards for Installations
   (a)   All installations coming under this chapter and OBBC shall be
installed in conformity with the provisions of OBBC and this Building Code and
accepted safe practice.
   (b)   Ventilating and exhaust systems installed for the purpose of removing
toxic or noxious fumes, vapors or gases, or other fumes, vapors or gases which
may be detrimental to health, or which may create a nuisance, shall also
conform to the applicable rules and regulations of the Division of Air
Pollution Control.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in OBBC and this Building Code, or in
statutes, or in rules or regulations promulgated by authority of statute, or in
other ordinances, conformity with NFiPA standard 90A entitled “Installation of
Air Conditioning and Ventilation Systems” and NFiPA standard 90B entitled “Warm
Air Heating and Air Conditioning Systems, Residence Type” as listed in Section
3101.07 shall be accepted as conformity with accepted safe practice; provided
that for one (1), two (2) and three (3) family dwellings the Board of Building
Standards and Building Appeals may change, modify or supplement any of the
requirements of such standards when deemed necessary in the interest of public
safety or to further define accepted safe practice.
   (d)   When deemed necessary for safety to life or property, the Commissioner
may require compliance with NFiPA standards 90A and 90B.
§ 3131.12 Refrigerating and Heating Equipment
   Mechanical refrigeration shall be installed in conformity with the
provisions of Chapter
3139.
§ 3131.13 Incinerators
   (a)   Incinerators shall be installed in conformity with the provisions of
OBBC and this Building Code and accepted safe practice.
   (b)   All incinerators, except incinerators of the domestic type installed
in dwelling houses and not exceeding two and one-half (2-1/2) cubic feet
combustion chamber volume, shall also be subject to the applicable rules and
regulations, permits, inspections and approval of the Division of Air Pollution
Control.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in OBBC and this Building Code, or in
statutes, or in rules or regulations promulgated by authority of statute, or in
other ordinances, conformity with NFiPA Standard 82 entitled “Incinerators,
Waste and Linen Handling Systems and Equipment” as listed in OAC 4101:2-46,
shall be accepted as conformity with accepted safe practice; provided that for
one (1), two (2) and three (3) family dwellings the Board of Building Standards
and Building Appeals may change, modify or supplement any of the requirements
of NFiPA Standard 82 when deemed necessary in the interest of public safety or
to further define accepted safe practice.
   (d)   When deemed necessary for safety to life or property, the Commissioner
may require compliance with NFiPA Standard 82.
   (e)   Flue-fed incinerators shall be equipped with approved self-closing
hoppers so constructed that the opening is closed off while the hopper is being
charged, and so that no part of such hopper will project into the flue. The
area of the hopper opening shall not exceed one-third (1/3) of the area of the
flue.
   (f)   Incinerators and their waste material bins or containers shall be
located in rooms or compartments enclosed with fire resistive walls or
partitions, floor, and ceiling construction, or within fire resistive
enclosures of heating equipment. The provisions of this subsection shall not,
however, be interpreted to require that incinerators installed in dwelling
houses or row houses, or domestic type incinerators not exceeding six (6) cubic
feet combustion chamber volume installed in any building, be enclosed with fire
resistive enclosures.
   (g)   Rooms containing Class C incinerators and their waste material bins or
containers shall be constructed of Type 1A, 1B or 2A construction.
   (h)   Every incinerator installed after June 27, 1949 shall be of a type
approved by the Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals.
   (i)   No incinerator shall be installed after June 27, 1949, which is not
equipped and constructed so it can operate without producing objectionable
quantities of smoke, and so that no objectionable material or obnoxious odors
will be emitted from the chimney.
   (j)   No incinerator shall be approved which does not have approved
provision for over-fire air to permit reasonably smokeless incineration of the
contents irrespective of the depth of the charge, provided the charge is within
the range of the rated capacity of the incinerator.
   (k)   No incinerator shall be approved which is not equipped or constructed
so that incineration will proceed at a rate so that flue gas temperatures of
not less than one thousand three hundred degrees Fahrenheit (1,300°F) are
rapidly achieved and maintained, and so that carbon monoxide and hydrocarbons
that cause obnoxious odors are consumed and not emitted from the chimney.
   (l)   No flue-fed incinerator shall be approved for installation unless it
is deemed to have adequate capacity for the purpose intended. No flue-fed
incinerator shall be installed in a Class A multiple dwelling unless such
incinerator has a grate area of not less than one (1) square foot for each ten
(10) persons served by such incinerator.
   (m)   Incinerators which are not flue-fed shall be constructed with internal
baffles or turns so that fly ash and dust will settle out and not be emitted
from the chimney.
   (n)   Exception.
      (1)   Domestic type incinerators which do not exceed six (6) cubic feet
combustion chamber volume shall be required to conform to the provisions of
this section only to the extent deemed necessary for safe and proper operation
by the Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals.
      (2)   Any domestic type incinerator which has been approved by the Board
may be installed, irrespective of the provisions and requirements of this
section, provided the installation conforms to the prescribed conditions of
approval.
   (o)   Incinerators constructed outside and independent of buildings or other
structures shall be deemed to be separate structures and shall conform to the
requirements of OBBC and this Building Code for medium temperature devices. No
such incinerators shall be constructed or operated without the approval of the
Commissioner of Building and Housing and the Commissioner of Air Pollution
Control.
   (p)   Masonry incinerator chimneys shall conform to the applicable
provisions of OBBC.
§ 3131.14 Ash Pits
   (a)   Ash pits and ash receptacles shall be of masonry, metal or other
approved noncombustible material.
   (b)   Ash pits or rooms constructed for the storage or handling of large
quantities of ashes within buildings or other structures shall be of Type 1A,
1B or 2A construction. Any doors provided shall be of metal in metal frames.
§ 3131.15 Underground Duct Systems Standard
   Except as otherwise provided in OBBC or this Building Code, statutes or
rules or regulations promulgated by authorities, all underground duct systems
shall be installed in accordance with Air Conditioning Contractors Association
(ACCA) Standard Manual 4 “Perimeter Heating and Cooling”, as listed in Section
3101.07.
CHAPTER 3133 – PLUMBING
3133.01   Scope and Application
3133.02   Permit Required; Exception for Minor Repairs
3133.03   Drawings Required
3133.04   Ohio Plumbing Code
3133.05   Required Sanitary Drainage, Storm Drainage and Water Supply Systems
3133.06   Responsibility for and Correction of Violations
3133.07   Classifications of Sanitary Drainage Systems
   Note: The legislative history of this chapter, except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 1116-A-85, passed
February 10, 1986.
Cross-reference:
   Plumbing fees, CO
3105.25
   Plumbing licenses, CO
Ch. 3107
Statutory reference:
   Plumbing systems, OAC Ch. 4101:1-29
§ 3133.01 Scope and Application
   (a)   Except as provided in subsection (b) hereof, the provisions of OAC
Chapter 4101:2-51 and this chapter shall govern the installation, alteration,
removal, replacement, and repair of all drainage systems, plumbing systems,
water supply systems, and gas piping, and of all parts thereof in all buildings
including non-industrialized single-family, two (2) family and three (3) family
dwelling houses.
   (b)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to gas service mains
from the street main to the meter, nor to the installation of gas meters by the
utility organization supplying gas; nor to gas piping installations of the
utility organization made on their own or public premises and part of the
general gas supply and distribution system for the City of Cleveland and
surrounding communities; nor to the installation of sewers or water mains by
City authorities having jurisdiction over public sewers and public water
distribution systems.
§ 3133.02 Permit Required; Exception for Minor Repairs
   (a)   Except as provided in division (b) of Section
3133.01, no drainage system, plumbing system, water supply system, or part of
one, shall be installed, altered, removed, replaced, or repaired without a
permit from the Commissioner, except that “minor repairs”, shall not require a
permit.
   “Minor repairs” means the repairing of an existing fixture; the replacement
of faucets or valves or parts thereof with like material or material serving
the same purpose; the clearance of stoppages; the stopping of leaks; the
relieving of frozen pipes; and other minor replacement or repairs classified as
“minor repairs” by the Commissioner, provided no changes other than those
specifically permitted are made in the piping to the fixtures or in the
drainage, vent or water supply system, and provided further that the permitted
clearance of stoppages can be done without the use of power driven equipment or
cutting into piping or fittings, and the permitted stopping of leaks can be
effected without replacement of drainage or vent piping.
   Except as otherwise provided in these Codified Ordinances, all plumbing for
which a permit is required shall be done by installers licensed or authorized
to do such work under the applicable provisions of Chapter
3107.
   (b)   Except as provided for “minor repairs” in division (a) of this
section, no fixture, device, appliance or equipment shall be connected to a
plumbing system or water supply system without a permit from the Commissioner.
No water-connected air conditioning equipment, water treatment equipment, water
operated devices, or other water connected equipment or devices shall be
installed or connected without a permit from the Commissioner.
(Ord. No. 377-03. Passed 5-19-03, eff. 5-27-03)
§ 3133.03 Drawings Required
   (a)   Whenever necessary to adequately indicate or explain the scope or
manner of a proposed installation, replacement or repair, or its relation to
existing installations or equipment; and whenever a new soil stack, vent stack,
house drain or any part thereof is to be installed, drawings showing the
proposed work shall be submitted with the application for a permit.
   (b)   Application for permit to install sanitary or storm drainage,
regulated under provisions of Section
3133.05(b) shall be accompanied by plans prepared by and which bear the seal of
a registered architect, registered landscape architect, or a registered
professional engineer.
§ 3133.04 Ohio Plumbing Code
   All plumbing shall be in accordance with the Ohio Plumbing Code, being OAC
Chapter 4101:2-51 as adopted in Chapter
3111, unless other regulations are specified in this chapter or in other
ordinances of the City.
§ 3133.05 Required Sanitary Drainage, Storm Drainage and Water Supply Systems
   (a)   Sanitary Drainage.
      (1)   Every building or other structure or premises in or on which
plumbing fixtures are installed or in or on which liquid or water-borne wastes
accumulate shall be equipped with an approved drainage and plumbing system to
convey all liquid or water-borne wastes to a public sewer; provided that where
a public sewer is not available, other approved provisions shall be made for
disposing of such wastes in conformity with the provisions of this chapter and
other applicable laws, ordinances, rules or regulations.
      (2)   Every cellar, basement and other space wholly or partly below grade
level within a building shall be kept free from ground or surface water. Where
necessary for the removal of ground or surface water, floor drains shall be
installed with drainage therefrom conducted to the public sewer or, where a
public sewer is not available, to an approved place of disposal.
      (3)   The drainage and plumbing system for each building or other
structure shall be entirely separate and independent of every building drainage
or plumbing system serving another building or other structure, except that
buildings or other structures on the same premises and under the same ownership
may be connected to the same building sewer, and except that where one (1)
building stands in the rear of another building on an interior lot and a
separate building sewer cannot be provided for the rear building through an
alley, yard, or other open public space, the building drain of the front
building may be connected to serve the rear building when such building drain
of the front building is of adequate size and in suitable condition to serve
both front and rear buildings and such dual use is approved by the Director of
Building and Housing.
      (4)   Existing building drains and building sewers shall not be used to
serve new buildings or new plumbing until examined and tested under the
direction of the Commissioner and approved for such use.
   (b)   Storm Water Drainage. Roofs and paved areas, yards, courts, and open
shafts and every open excavation or part of a lot or premises where water
stands or accumulates shall be drained into a storm- sewer system or a combined
sewer system or, they shall be drained to an approved receptacle or conducted
to a point of disposal approved by the Director of Building and Housing; except
that roof gutters or drains and downspouts shall not be mandatory on buildings
or structures of miscellaneous occupancy classification.
   (c)   Water Supply Systems. All buildings or other structures or premises
equipped with plumbing fixtures shall have provisions for supplying fixtures
with an adequate supply of water.
(Ord. No. 1767-07. Passed 4-21-08, eff. 4-28-08)
§ 3133.06 Responsibility for and Correction of Violations
   (a)   As provided by Section
3101.09, the owner of a building or other structure or premises in or on which
drainage, plumbing, water supply, or gas piping is installed, altered,
replaced, repaired or maintained shall be responsible for every violation of
any provisions of this chapter.
   (b)   Any person, firm, or corporation who performs work for which a permit
is required by OBBC or this Building Code, without first having obtained a
permit therefor, and every person, firm, or corporation who violates or assists
in the violation of any provision of this chapter, shall also be responsible
and liable for such violation and subject to the penalty provided in Section
3103.99.
   (c)   Whenever deemed necessary in the public interest the Commissioner may
order the immediate removal or disconnection of any device, appliance, or
installation forming part of a drainage, plumbing, water supply, or gas piping
installation found to be in an unsafe or insanitary condition or hazardous to
the health of the occupants, or to the public health.
   (d)   Whenever any installation of drainage, plumbing or water supply is
found to be in an unsafe or insanitary condition, and whenever any installation
of gas piping is found to be in an unsafe condition, the owner of such
installation shall, when ordered to do so by the Commissioner, promptly correct
such unsafe or insanitary condition within the time limit specified in such
order. Whenever an unsafe or insanitary condition is not corrected within the
time limit specified by the Commissioner and such condition is deemed hazardous
to the occupants, the Commissioner shall post a placard on the premises stating
“DANGEROUS AND INSANITARY PLUMBING”, or “DANGEROUS: GAS PIPING IN UNSAFE
CONDITION”, whichever shall apply. Such placard shall not be removed without
the authorization of the Commissioner. Whenever such placard is posted the
Commissioner shall have the authority to order that the building or part of the
building or the premises on which such unsafe or insanitary condition exists be
vacated and not occupied or re-occupied until the condition has been corrected
and authority for the removal of the placard has been given in writing by the
Commissioner.
§ 3133.07 Classifications of Sanitary Drainage Systems
   (a)   For the purposes of OBBC and this Building Code, sanitary drainage
systems and parts thereof and the fixtures connected thereto shall be
classified according to the assumed frequency of use as determined by location
and occupancy as either private installations, public installations, or dual
occupancy installations.
   (b)   Private Installations. Private installations are installations where
the plumbing fixtures are installed within a dwelling unit or habitable room or
within a private bathroom, water closet compartment or wash room and are
accessible to and intended for use only by a family or a limited number of
individuals, and include installations where the plumbing fixtures are
installed in dwelling houses, apartments, private bathrooms in hotels, private
toilet rooms accessible to not more than five (5) persons, or are similarly
located and subject to correspondingly limited use only.
   (c)   Public Installations. Public installations are installations where the
plumbing fixtures are not located and intended for use as described for private
installations, and include all installations, except in dwelling houses, where
the fixtures are located in general toilet rooms.
   (d)   Dual Occupancy Installations. Dual occupancy installations are
plumbing installations which are in part private installations and in part
public installations where the plumbing fixtures are served by drainage or vent
systems common to both installations.
CHAPTER 3135 – GAS PIPING AND APPLIANCES
3135.01   Scope and Application
3135.02   Definitions
3135.03   Permits Required
3135.04   Approved Standards for Equipment and Installation
3135.05   Approval of Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals or Ohio
Board of Building Standards
3135.06   Curb Cock and Main Shut-Off
3135.07   Authorization for Turning on Gas
   Note: The legislative history of this chapter, except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 1116-A-85, passed
February 10, 1986.
Cross-reference:
   Gas piping fees, CO
3105.25
§ 3135.01 Scope and Application
   (a)   The provisions of this chapter shall govern the installation,
alteration, and replacement of gas piping; and the installation, except
venting, of gas-fired appliances (other than space heating appliances and
incinerators) such as ranges, hot plates, countertop-type cooking equipment,
ovens, broilers and other cooking and baking appliances; water heaters, clothes
driers, ironers and refrigerators.
   (b)   Provisions governing gas-fired space heating appliances, incinerators,
chimneys, flues, and gas vents are included in OBBC and Chapter
3131 of this Building Code, provided, however, that gas piping to such space
heating appliances and incinerators shall be installed in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter.
   (c)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to tubing, appliances,
appurtenances, or devices used for strictly experimental or scientific
purposes.
§ 3135.02 Definitions
   (a)   “Appurtenance” means an accessory or adjunct to a gas appliance
intended to be used in connection with it.
   (b)   “Gas appliance” means a fixture or apparatus manufactured and designed
to use natural, manufactured, or mixed gas as a fuel medium for developing
light, heat, or power.
   (c)   “Appliance accessory” means a unit designed to be attached to a gas
appliance, such as pilot lights, regulators, safety devices, control valves and
relief valves.
   (d)   “House gas pipes” means gas pipes and fittings installed on any
premises or in any building or other structure on the outlet side of the gas
meter, or extending from gas pipes anywhere beyond that location, and ending at
capped or plugged outlets ready to connect with gas fixtures or gas appliances;
but shall not include the connection of the gas fixtures, gas appliances, or
gas meters, or any portion of the gas service piping from street mains.
   (e)   “Rated input” means that maximum amount of gas expressed in BTU per
hour which a gas appliance is designed to burn completely, and which is marked
on any appliance meeting the requirements and specifications of the American
Gas Association or other similar recognized agency.
   (f)   “Tubing, flexible” means a conduit to convey gas which depends for gas
tightness on joint packing or on wall structure other than solid metal.
   (g)   “Tubing, semi-rigid” is a metallic conduit sufficiently flexible to
permit bending so as to eliminate the use of elbows, generally connected to the
appliance and house gas piping by means of flare or compression couplings.
§ 3135.03 Permits Required
   A permit shall be required for the installation, alteration, or replacement,
of house gas piping for the installation of gas-fired appliances required by
OBBC and this Building Code to have a flue or vent connection; and for the
installation of gas conversion burners in existing heating devices.
§ 3135.04 Approved Standards for Equipment and Installation
   (a)   All house gas piping and all gas-fired appliances shall be installed
in conformity with the requirements of OBBC and this Building Code and in
conformity with accepted safe practice.
   (b)   Except as provided in OBBC and this Building Code, or in statutes, or
in regulations promulgated by authority of statute, or in other ordinances,
conformity with the requirements of the following standards shall be accepted
as conformity with accepted safe practice; provided that the Board of Building
Standards and Building Appeals may change, modify, or supplement any of the
requirements of such standards when deemed necessary in the interests of public
safety or to further define accepted safe practice.
   (c)   When deemed necessary for safety to life or property, the Commissioner
may require compliance with any recommendation or requirement of the standards
listed in Section
3101.07.
§ 3135.05 Approval of Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals or Ohio
Board of Building Standards
   (a)   All gas piping, tubing, fittings, accessories, appurtenances, and gas
appliances shall be of a type approved by the Board of Building Standards and
Building Appeals or Ohio Board of Building Standards. Piping, tubing, fittings,
accessories, appurtenances and gas appliances which conform to the standards
hereinbefore specified and which have been approved by the Underwriters’
Laboratories, Inc. or the American Gas Association, or which have been approved
by other nationally recognized testing laboratory which possesses adequate
equipment, experience, and competency in this field, may be approved by the
Board without additional test.
   (b)   No person, firm, association or corporation shall display, sell,
barter, replace, offer for sale, deal in, supply, rent, donate, connect, or
install within the City any piping, tubing, fitting, accessory, appurtenance,
or gas appliance which has not been approved by the Cleveland Board or the Ohio
Board of Building Standards and which does not bear the seal of approval or
listing symbol prescribed or accepted by such Boards.
§ 3135.06 Curb Cock and Main Shut-Off
   (a)   All gas services shall be equipped with an approved curb cock placed
in an accessible location outside of the building.
   (b)   Every system of gas service piping shall have an accessible main shut-
off cock located on the house gas piping immediately adjacent and on the
service pipe side of the meter.
§ 3135.07 Authorization for Turning on Gas
   (a)   Whenever any concealed house gas piping, irrespective of length, or
exposed house gas piping in excess of fifty (50) feet in length, is installed,
altered or replaced; and whenever any gas-fired appliance required by OBBC or
this Building Code to have a flue or vent connection, or any gas conversion
burner, is installed, replaced, or relocated, the gas supply to such piping,
appliance, or burner shall not be turned on by the installer of such piping,
appliance, or burner, or by the owner or his or her agent, or by any person
acting directly or indirectly for the owner, until the installation has been
approved and written authorization to turn on the gas has been given by the
Commissioner. In interpreting this subsection, the public utility organization
supplying gas to the premises shall be not deemed to be the agent of the owner
or to be acting for the owner.
   (b)   Whenever there is a change in a meter manifold which will provide for
an increased number of meters, the gas supply to such manifold shall not be
turned on until the installation has been approved and written authorization to
turn on the gas has been given by the Commissioner.
   (c)   The term “altered” as used in this section means a change in the house
gas piping involving disassembly of the piping.
CHAPTER 3137 – ELECTRICAL WIRING
3137.01   Scope and Application
3137.02   Alterations
3137.03   Hazardous Installations
3137.04   Work Installed Not in Conformity with Code
3137.05   Permit Required
3137.06   Drawings Required
3137.07   Inspections, Tests and Approvals
3137.08   Energizing the System
3137.09   Switching and Metering
3137.10   Accident Notice
3137.11   Conformity With National Electrical Code
3137.12   Residential Electrical Rehabilitation
   Note: The legislative history of this chapter, except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 1116-A-85, passed
February 10, 1986.
Cross-reference:
   Electrical licenses, CO
Ch. 3107
   Electrical wiring fees, CO
3105.25
§ 3137.01 Scope and Application
   (a)   Except as provided in subsection (b) hereof, the provisions of this
chapter shall govern the installation, alteration, replacement, maintenance and
repair of all electrical wiring and equipment and of all parts thereof; the
sale or offering for sale of electrical materials, supplies, devices,
appliances, and/or equipment; and the operation and use of electrical systems,
devices, and equipment in the City.
   (b)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
      (1)   Electric public service organizations, insofar as electrical wiring
and equipment is utilized for the generation and transmission of electrical
energy, and for the distribution of electrical energy up to the service
equipment located near the point of entrance of the supply conductors for the
building or other structure; provided, however, that where the public service
organization installs transformers or converters within a building or other
structure to convert the current in the distribution lines to current having
characteristics suitable for use in the wiring system of the premises served,
such transformers or converters, and the supply conductors to such transformers
or converters and from the transformers or converters to the service equipment,
or part thereof, when installed by the public service organization, shall be
deemed to be part of the distribution system of the public service organization
and not subject to the provisions of this chapter, except that all such
electrical wiring and installations within buildings or structures shall be
made in conformity with the applicable provisions of NFiPA 70 entitled
“National Electrical Code,” as listed in OAC Chapter 4101:2-46.
      (2)   Electric and steam railroads, insofar as electrical wiring and
equipment is utilized for furnishing transportation.
      (3)   Signal or intelligence transmission public service organizations,
insofar as electrical wiring and equipment is utilized for signal and
intelligence transmission.
§ 3137.02 Alterations
   (a)   Whenever alterations, repairs, or additions are made to existing
electrical installations the provisions of this chapter and the OBBC, where
applicable, shall apply to all new work; provided, however, that where the
provisions of OBBC and this chapter require the use of materials or methods of
installation which differ from that in an existing building or other structure,
and where the existing installation is in a safe condition, the Board of
Building Standards and Building Appeals or the Ohio Board of Building Standards
may approve the use of materials and installations corresponding to that
existing within the building when it determines that the use of materials and
methods of installation conforming to the provisions of OBBC or this chapter
will not add materially to the safety of the installation, and that the
installation as proposed will be adequately safe for the use and occupancy.
   (b)   The provisions of OBBC or this chapter shall not be interpreted to
require alterations, replacements, or additions to electrical work or equipment
installed prior to July 1, 1979 except where inspection and investigation by
the Commissioner reveal the presence of a definite and serious hazard.
   (c)   The Commissioner shall determine that a definite and serious hazard
exists only where the continued use of the electrical installation or equipment
in question is, under customary or intended conditions of operation,
demonstrably fire-hazardous, or demonstrably likely to cause injury or death
from electrical shock.
§ 3137.03 Hazardous Installations
   (a)   Whenever it is determined that an existing electrical installation or
equipment is a definite and serious hazard, the Commissioner shall require the
correction of conditions creating such hazard within a reasonable period of
time, but not less than thirty (30) days, except when an immediate hazard
exists. However, any alterations, replacements, or additions to existing wiring
and equipment required for the correction of such serious hazard shall be
limited to the minimum necessary for the reasonable reduction of the hazard.
When an immediate hazard exists, the Commissioner shall require immediate
action, or action within a lesser time period prescribed by him or her. Should
conditions creating such serious hazard not be corrected within the prescribed
time period, the Commissioner may disconnect, or order the disconnection, of
electrical service to such electrical wiring and/or equipment.
   (b)   Whenever it is established by inspection that a definite and serious
hazard may exist, the Commissioner may order the removal, or may remove, lath
and plaster, boarding, or other obstructions which prevent adequate inspection
of the existing installation, but only to the extent necessary for such
inspection.
   (c)   Any person using, or causing another person to use electrical wiring
or equipment which has been disconnected, or ordered disconnected, by the
Commissioner, without the written authority to do so from the Commissioner,
shall be deemed to be in violation of the provisions of OBBC or this Building
Code and subject to the penalty provided therefor in Section
3103.99.
§ 3137.04 Work Installed Not in Conformity with Code
   Whenever the Commissioner finds that electrical wiring or equipment does not
conform to the provisions of this chapter he or she shall require the person,
firm, or corporation that installed such electrical wiring or equipment, and
the person, firm or corporation owing, using, or operating such electrical
wiring or equipment to place same in conformity with the applicable provisions
of this chapter defining approved materials, equipment, and approved methods of
installation and construction, within a reasonable time. If such electrical
wiring or equipment is not made to conform to the provisions of this chapter
within the prescribed time, and whenever any electrical equipment is installed
without a required permit or not in conformity with OBBC and this Building
Code, the Commissioner may disconnect, or order the disconnection, of
electrical service to such electrical wiring or equipment.
§ 3137.05 Permit Required
   (a)   Except as provided in Section
3137.01 (b) and subsection (b) hereof, and except for minor repairs and
maintenance as herein defined, no electrical wiring or equipment shall be
installed, altered, or repaired without a permit from the Commissioner. All
work for which a permit is required shall be done by installers licensed or
authorized to do such work under the applicable provisions of Chapter
3107.
   (b)   No permit shall be required for the installation of temporary exposed
electrical wiring for use in conducting experiments or tests in research or
testing laboratories, but such temporary wiring shall be installed in a safe
manner.
   (c)   Whenever changes in electrical wiring are constantly being made the
Commissioner may issue a “blanket permit” which shall apply only to the
premises specified on the permit.
   (d)   The holder of a “blanket permit” shall make a written record of all
electrical work performed in and about the premises covered by such permit, and
specific permits shall be obtained and fees paid for all extensions,
alterations, and additions to electrical wiring and equipment when such work is
inspected by the authorized inspector of the Commissioner. However, when
electrical wiring is to be concealed, it shall be inspected and approved before
being concealed, as hereinafter required.
   (e)   Minor Repair. “Minor repair” means the installation or replacement of
light bulbs or fuses, and repairs to portable utilization equipment such as
lamps, irons, toasters, fans, sweepers, and the like; but does not include
changes in or repairs to permanent electrical wiring.
   (f)   Maintenance. “Maintenance” means the servicing of existing electrical
equipment; the replacement of electrical equipment with equipment of like type
and capacity, connected to existing electrical terminal connections; and
similar work; for the purpose of maintenance of an existing electrical
installation installed and maintained in conformity with OBBC and this Building
Code; but it does not include the installation of any permanent wiring, or
major changes to, or extensions of, electrical terminal connections.
§ 3137.06 Drawings Required
   Whenever necessary to adequately indicate or explain the scope or manner of
a proposed installation, alteration, replacement, or repair of electrical
wiring or equipment, the Commissioner of Building may require the submission of
drawings and/or specifications with the application for a permit. Such drawings
and/or specifications shall be in sufficient detail to enable the Commissioner
to determine whether the proposed work will be in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 3137.07 Inspections, Tests and Approvals
   (a)   Inspection Required. All electrical wiring and equipment for which a
permit is required by OBBC and this Building Code shall be subject to the
inspection and approval of the Commissioner.
   (b)   Inspection of Work to Be Concealed.
      (1)   No electrical wiring or parts thereof shall be covered or concealed
without authorization to do so from the Commissioner. It shall be the duty of
the person doing such electrical wiring to give twenty-four (24) hours’ advance
notice to the Commissioner when work which is to be concealed is ready for
inspection. Work shall be inspected as soon as practicable after receipt of
such notice, and when found to conform to the provisions of OBBC and this
Building Code, an official notice of approval shall be affixed in a conspicuous
place by the authorized inspector of the Commissioner.
      (2)   If the authorized inspector of the Commissioner finds that the work
which is to be concealed does not conform to the provisions of OBBC and this
Building Code, the person or persons doing such work shall be required to make
the necessary corrections, and the work shall then be resubmitted for
inspection.
   (c)   Inspection of Work Installed Under Blanket Permit. The premises where
work is installed under a blanket permit shall be inspected at regular periodic
intervals to verify that the work is in conformity with the provisions of OBBC
and this Building Code. Premises where changes in the electrical wiring are
constantly being made shall be inspected at least once every three (3) months,
and other premises shall be inspected at longer periodic intervals as necessary
to verify that work is being installed in conformity with the provisions of
OBBC and this Building Code. However, all premises where work is installed
under blanket permits shall be inspected at least once every six (6) months.
   (d)   Roughing-In. Except where work is installed under blanket permits all
roughing-in for electrical wiring shall be inspected and approved before
devices, appliances, or equipment are installed or connected.
   (e)   Final Inspection and Approval.
      (1)   Except where work is done under blanket permits, all work shall be
submitted for final inspection and approval by the Commissioner before being
placed in service. If upon final inspection the electrical wiring and equipment
is found to be complete and in conformity with the provisions of OBBC and this
Building Code, a notice indicating approval shall be posted on the meter board
or in other conspicuous place by the authorized inspector making the
inspection. If the work is found to be incomplete or not in conformity with the
provisions of this Building Code, the necessary corrections shall be made and
the work then re-submitted for final inspection.
      (2)   Upon satisfactory completion and after final inspection and
approval of electrical wiring and equipment, a certificate of approval shall be
issued to the person to whom the permit was issued, for delivery to the owner,
by the Commissioner.
   (f)   Material and Labor for Tests. Tests necessary to verify that the work
has been installed in conformity with OBBC and this Building Code shall be made
in the presence of the authorized inspector of the Commissioner. All equipment,
material, power, and labor necessary for such tests shall be furnished by the
person or persons who installed the work being tested, or, in the case of
blanket permits, by the owner of the premises where such work is installed.
   (g)   Inspection and Approval of Electrical Signs.
      (1)   No outdoor electrical sign shall be erected unless the electrical
wiring and equipment thereon is in conformity with the provisions of OBBC and
this Building Code, and such wiring and equipment has been inspected and
approved by the authorized inspector of the Commissioner. When deemed advisable
by the Commissioner, an electrical sign may be inspected at the point of
manufacture if such point of manufacture is within or immediately adjacent to
the City limits, or the cost of such inspection is borne by the person or
persons requesting the inspection.
      (2)   The location, size, construction, erection, attachments, supports,
anchors, and maintenance of every outdoor sign or display structure shall
conform to the applicable provisions of Chapter
3113.
      (3)   Portable electrical signs shall conform to the provisions of OBBC,
Zoning Code and this Building Code. Where such signs have not been approved
under the provisions of OBBC or this Building Code, they shall not be
installed, connected, or used unless they have been inspected and approved by
the Commissioner.
§ 3137.08 Energizing the System
   (a)   Whenever a permit to install electrical wiring or equipment is
required by OBBC and this Building Code, electric current shall not be supplied
to such wiring to such equipment, except for testing, until authorization to do
so has been given by the authorized inspector of the Commissioner. However,
such authorization shall not be required for electrical wiring or equipment
installed under a blanket permit.
   (b)   When electrical current has not been previously supplied to premises
where an installation of electrical wiring has been made, the service lines of
the utility company supplying the electrical current, if connected prior to
final inspection and approval, shall be connected through an opened switch
which shall be so sealed that it shall be impossible to close the switch
without breaking the seal. Such switch shall be closed only by a person
authorized to do so by the Commissioner and it shall be a violation of OBBC and
this Building Code for any other person to break such seal or close such
switch. Each such switch shall have a tag attached thereto specifying the
penalty for unauthorized operation. Whenever such switch is installed, a
written notification thereof shall be sent to the Commissioner.
§ 3137.09 Switching and Metering
   (a)   Lighting Switching. Switching shall be provided for each lighting
circuit, or for portions of each circuit, so that only those areas where
lighting is necessary need be illuminated.
   (b)   Three-Way Switches. Three (3) way switches shall be provided for all
stairways to control lighting outlets illuminating such stairways.
      (1)   Exception No. 1: Automatic control of lighting may be substituted
in lieu of three (3) way switches.
      (2)   Exception No. 2: Three (3) way switches are not required for
stairways to unoccupied attics or basements which have only one (1) means of
egress.
   (c)   In all dwellings provisions shall be made to determine the electrical
energy consumed by each tenant, excepting those dwellings where the owner pays
for the energy consumed.
§ 3137.10 Accident Notice
   Whenever electrical shock or burns from electrical current result in serious
injury or death of any person, the person, firm, or corporation owning or
operating the electrical wiring or equipment involved in such accident shall
file a report with the Commissioner describing the circumstances and conditions
under which such accident occurred. Each certificate of approval of electrical
installations shall bear a statement requiring such report.
§ 3137.11 Conformity With National Electrical Code
   Except as otherwise provided in this Building Code, or in statutes, or in
rules or regulations promulgated by authority of statute, all electrical wiring
and equipment shall be in accordance with the provisions of NFiPA 70 entitled
“National Electrical Code,” as listed in OAC Chapter 4101:2-46.
§ 3137.12 Residential Electrical Rehabilitation
   (a)   Scope. The provisions of this section shall apply to the
rehabilitation of electrical systems in one (1), two (2) and three (3) family
dwelling units when they have been determined to be inadequate as specified in
subsection (b) hereof.
   (b)   Evidence of Inadequate Wiring. Evidence of inadequate wiring shall
include one (1) or more of the following:
      (1)   Excessive use of flexible cords in lieu of permanent wiring;
      (2)   The use of oversized overcurrent protection device for branch
circuits, feeders or service;
      (3)   Unapproved extensions to the wiring system in order to provide
light, heat or power;
      (4)   The lack of two (2) duplex receptacles in every habitable room,
except there shall be a duplex receptacle outlet on each wall in the living
room and at least one (1) duplex receptacle in the bathroom;
      (5)   Electrical overloads resulting in frequent operation of an
overcurrent device;
      (6)   Misapplication of electrical equipment;
      (7)   Lack of an operable switched light fixture in every toilet room,
bathroom, laundry areas, furnace room, hall or stairwell;
      (8)   Lack of an independent circuit and a grounded receptacle for
laundry facilities;
      (9)   Lack of at least one (1) lighting outlet for each two hundred (200)
square feet of basement area;
      (10)   Lack of service premises grounding.
   (c)   Minimum Standards. The following requirements are the minimum
standards and shall satisfy the intent of this section.
      (1)   Entrances and Exits. Entrances and exits shall be illuminated by
exterior lighting fixtures. These shall be controlled by interior wall
switches, located for convenient and readily accessible use.
      (2)   Living Rooms. The living room shall be provided with illumination.
The lighting outlet shall be controlled by an interior wall switch located for
convenient and readily accessible use, near the entrance to the room.
      Receptacle outlets controlled by a wall switch are permitted in lieu of a
lighting outlet.
      Convenient duplex electrical receptacle outlets shall be provided equally
spaced around the room, with at least one (1) duplex outlet on each wall where
practical.
      (3)   Kitchens. Kitchens shall be provided with illumination. The main
lighting outlet shall be controlled by a wall switch, located for convenient
and readily accessible use, near the entrance to the room. Fixtures over the
sink shall be grounded and have a separate wall switch.
      Two (2) appliance circuits shall be provided, supplying a minimum of four
(4) grounding-type receptacle outlets. One (1) or two (2) shall be suitably
placed for connection of stove and refrigerator, and there shall be a minimum
of three (3) receptacles above table or counter height for the convenient
connection of small appliances, where practical. Appliance circuits shall be
twenty (20) ampere capacity.
      (4)   Bathrooms. Bathrooms shall be illuminated. The main lighting outlet
shall be controlled by a wall switch next to the entrance. Fixtures over the
sink shall be grounded and have a separate wall switch. Fixtures with
receptacles shall have the receptacles permanently disconnected.
      A grounding-type receptacle outlet separate from the light fixture shall
be provided and shall be located at least thirty (30) and not more than forty-
eight (48) inches above the floor adjacent to the wash basin and not more than
four (4) feet from the basin.
      (5)   All Other Habitable Rooms. Illumination for each habitable room
shall be provided. Lighting outlets shall be controlled by a wall switch. Wall
switches shall be located for convenient and readily accessible use.
Convenience duplex receptacle outlets shall be provided with a minimum of two
(2) receptacle outlets equally spaced around the room. An additional receptacle
outlet controlled by a wall switch is acceptable in lieu of a lighting outlet.
      (6)   Basements. Basements shall be wired for a minimum of one (1)
lighting outlet in each two hundred (200) square feet of major fraction of area
for use as general illumination. All enclosed areas, except coal bins, that may
be walked into, such as toilet rooms, fruit storage rooms, utility rooms,
excavated areas under porches, etc., shall be provided with at least one (1)
lighting outlet.
      Stairwell, laundry and electrical service area lighting outlets shall not
be counted as part of the required basement lighting outlets.
      (7)   Laundry Areas. The laundry area shall be provided with separate
illumination. The laundry receptacle circuit shall be an individual twenty (20)
ampere circuit. A wall mounted grounding-type duplex receptacle outlet shall be
provided and located near the laundry equipment.
      (8)   Space Heating System. Heating equipment requiring electrical energy
for operation and/or control shall be provided with an individual circuit. A
disconnect switch shall be provided on or adjacent to the heating equipment,
except for a thermopile controlled furnace.
      (9)   Stairwells and Hallways. Stairwells and hallways shall be
adequately illuminated. Lighting outlets shall be controlled by wall switches.
Wall switches shall be located for convenient and readily accessible use.
Switches shall not be located where it is necessary to use darkened stair
sections for their operation. Stairways to all finished portions of a dwelling
shall be provided with a three (3) way or multiple switch control.
      (10)   Service. Service to existing dwelling unit shall be a minimum of
one hundred (100) ampere, three (3) wire capacity. Service equipment shall be
dead front having no live parts exposed whereby accidental contact could be
made. Type “S” fuses shall be installed when fused equipment is used.
      Existing service of fifty (50) amperes or larger, two (2) or three (3)
wire capacity shall be accepted as an exception if adequate for the electrical
load being served.
      (11)   Service Meters. Supply to each dwelling unit shall be individually
metered. No service shall be supplied through a meter to an area other than
that controlled by the occupant, except where the owner pays for the
electricity.
      (12)   Service Main Disconnects and Panels. The area around the main
disconnect and branch panel shall be illuminated. The maximum height from the
floor to the top of any overcurrent device shall be six and one-half (6-1/2)
feet. Clearance in front shall be a minimum of three (3) feet for ready access.
      (13)   Grounding Electrode Conductors. One end of the grounding electrode
conductor shall be connected to the grounded conductor in the service equipment
on the supply side. The other end shall be connected to a metallic cold water
pipe system, and a jumper shall be placed around the water meter. If there is
no metallic cold water pipe system, then a ground rod electrode shall be
installed. The ground rod shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet long and of
approved diameter and material.
      (14)   Existing Receptacles. Replacements for existing receptacles in
rooms other than kitchen, bathrooms, basement or outdoor areas may be
nongrounding type. All new receptacles shall be of the grounded type.
      (15)   Existing Knob and Tube Circuits in Dwelling Units.
         A.   Number fourteen (14) wire shall be fused at fifteen (15) amperes.
         B.   Number twelve (12) wire shall be fused at twenty (20) amperes.
         C.   All splices and joints to other wiring methods shall be in boxes.
         D.   Any extension of knob and tube wiring shall be prohibited, except
by special permission.
         E.   All new and existing fixtures shall be mounted on shallow
workboxes if boxes are nonexistent.
         F.   All exposed abandoned wiring and equipment shall be removed.
      (16)   Door Bells. Existing door bell system shall be restored to
operating condition.
      (17)   Basement Wiring. Basement wiring in dwelling units shall:
         A.   Be in protective raceways or armored cable when bottom of joist
is less than seven (7) feet above the floor;
         B.   The size of the hole through the joist for nonmetallic sheathed
cable shall be one-fourth (1/4) inches to three-eighths (3/8) inches larger
than the diameter of the cable;
         C.   Only one (1) cable shall pass through each hole.
CHAPTER 3139 – REFRIGERATION
3139.01   Scope and Application
3139.02   Standard Compliance Code
3139.03   Definitions and Classifications
3139.04   Permits Required
3139.05   Work to be Concealed
3139.06   Certificates of Operation
3139.07   Permitted Quantity of Refrigerant, Maintenance and Periodic
Inspections
3139.08   Certificates of Qualification
   Note: The legislative history of this chapter, except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 1116-A-85, passed
February 10, 1986.
Cross-reference:
   Refrigeration permit fees, CO
3105.25
   Refrigeration system certificate fees, CO
3105.27
§ 3139.01 Scope and Application
   The provisions of OBBC and of this chapter shall govern the installation,
alteration, removal, replacement, repair, operation, and maintenance of all
mechanical refrigerating systems.
§ 3139.02 Standard Compliance Code
   Except as otherwise provided in OBBC and this Building Code and except where
more restrictive provisions govern, all mechanical refrigeration systems shall
be designed, constructed, installed, operated, and maintained, and all
alterations, relocations, inspections, and tests shall be made, in conformity
with the provisions of ANSI B9.1 entitled “Safety Code for Mechanical
Refrigeration”, as listed in Section
3101.07.
§ 3139.03 Definitions and Classifications
   (a)   In application and interpretation of this chapter, the classifications
of refrigerants and the definitions included in ANSI B9.1 shall apply.
   (b)   The following additional definitions shall also apply:
      (1)   “Alteration of a refrigerating system” means any change involving
an extension or addition to the system; a change in refrigeration from a
refrigerant of one (1) group classification to a refrigerant of another group
classification; an increase in the quantity of refrigerant contained in the
system; a change in the arrangement, type, or purpose of the original
installation; a change in the size of the equipment utilized; relocation of a
compressor, generator, condenser, condensing unit, or evaporator; or
replacement of any equipment, part, or installation which is not in conformity
with the provisions of OBBC and this Building Code;
      (2)   “Repair of a refrigerating system” means a replacement or renewal
of any part of an existing system, including replacement of an existing
compressor, condenser, generator, evaporator, or condensing unit, with material
or part of like type, make, and capacity, for the purpose of its maintenance;
provided that when such replacement or renewal is of a part not in conformity
with the provisions of OBBC and this Building Code, such replacement or renewal
shall be deemed to be an “alteration.”
§ 3139.04 Permits Required
   (a)   A permit shall be required for every new installation or alteration of
a refrigerating system, except window units.
   (b)   No permit for a refrigerating system containing a Group three (3)
refrigerant shall be issued and no such system shall be installed except after
approval by the Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals given upon
submission of acceptable evidence that no public hazard will be created
thereby. A refrigerating system containing a Group three (3) refrigerant shall
be installed in conformity with the provisions of OBBC and this Building Code
and in conformity with the conditions of approval specified by the Board.
   (c)   No permit shall be required for repair of a refrigerating system.
   (d)   Where a permit is not required by OBBC and this Building Code, such
exemption shall apply only to the requirement for a permit, and all
installations, alterations, or repairs, whether made with or without a permit,
shall be made in conformity with OBBC and this Building Code.
   (e)   Whenever the proposed installation is of such extent that it cannot be
adequately described on the application for the permit, the application shall
be accompanied by such drawings and descriptive data as are required to verify
compliance with the provisions of OBBC and this Building Code.
   (f)   Required permits shall be issued only to installers registered or
authorized to do such work under the applicable provisions of Chapter
3107.
§ 3139.05 Work to be Concealed
   No part of a refrigerating system for which a permit is required by OBBC and
this Building Code shall be concealed until it has been tested by the installer
in the presence of the authorized representative of the Commissioner and
inspected and approved by such representative. It shall be the duty of the
installer to give twenty-four (24) hours’ advance notice to the Commissioner
when such work is ready for test.
§ 3139.06 Certificates of Operation
   (a)   When Required. A Certificate of Operation shall be required for all
refrigerating systems which contain a Group three (3) refrigerant, or contain
more than five (5) pounds of a Group two (2) refrigerant, or more than twenty
(20) pounds of a Group one (1) refrigerant. In determining the quantity of
refrigerant contained within a refrigerating system the Commissioner may accept
the certified statement of the manufacturer or the certified statement of a
registered installer of refrigerating systems. Unless an existing refrigerating
system is certified by the manufacturer or by a registered installer of
refrigerating systems as containing twenty (20) pounds or less of a Group one
(1) refrigerant or five (5) pounds or less of a Group two (2) refrigerant, each
such system containing a Group three (3) refrigerant, and each such system
containing a Group one (1) refrigerant and having a motor of one (1) HP or
more, shall be required to have a Certificate of Operation.
   (b)   New and Altered Systems. A refrigerating system which has been
installed or altered under a required permit shall not be operated more than
five (5) days unless a Certificate of Operation has been issued by the
Commissioner.
   (c)   Existing Refrigerating Systems.
      (1)   Existing refrigerating systems operated under authority of a
certificate of inspection issued prior to June 27, 1949, may continue to
operate under such certificate of inspection until the expiration date of such
certificate. Subsequent to the expiration date of such certificate of
inspection, such refrigerating system shall be operated only if a required
Certificate of Operation has been issued by the Commissioner.
      (2)   An existing refrigerating system for which a certificate of
inspection was not previously issued and for which a Certificate of Operation
is required under the provisions of subsection (a) hereof, shall not be
operated for more than six (6) months after June 27, 1949, unless a Certificate
of Operation has been issued by the Commissioner.
   (d)   Issuing of Certificates.
      (1)   Whenever a refrigerating system has been installed or altered under
a required permit and such system has been completed in conformity therewith
and with the provisions of OBBC and this Building Code and the applicable rules
and regulations promulgated thereunder, and has been inspected, tested, and
approved by the Commissioner, the Commissioner shall issue a Certificate of
Operation to the person, firm or corporation installing or altering such
system, for delivery to the owner, authorizing the operation of such system. It
shall be the duty of the installer to give twenty-four (24) hours’ advance
notice to the Commissioner when such work is ready for test.
      (2)   A Certificate of Operation shall be issued for a refrigerating
system installed prior to June 27, 1949, when such system has been inspected
and found to be in safe operating condition.
   (e)   Revocation. The Commissioner may revoke a Certificate of Operation
issued for a refrigerating system whenever the Commissioner finds on inspection
that such system is not being maintained in safe operating condition. Notice of
revocation may be given in person or by registered mail to the owner of such
system or to the person holding a Certificate of Qualification to operate such
system. Whenever such notice is given, operation of such system shall cease
within the time period specified in such notice and such system shall not again
be operated until it has been placed in a safe operating condition and a new
Certificate of Operation issued.
   (f)   Operation Without Certificate Prohibited. Operation of a refrigerating
system without a required Certificate of Operation shall be a violation of OBBC
and this Building Code and subject to penalties provided by Section
3103.99.
   (g)   Each Certificate of Operation shall be affixed, under glass, in a
location adjacent to the compressor or generator of the refrigerating system.
§ 3139.07 Permitted Quantity of Refrigerant, Maintenance and Periodic
Inspections
   (a)   Whenever a refrigerating system is installed, and whenever the
quantity of refrigerant contained in a refrigerating system is increased, the
quantity of refrigerant to be used in the system shall be noted upon the
Certificate of Operation or the Certificate of Inspection, and thereafter such
system shall not at any time contain refrigerant in excess of such quantity
except by written authority from the Commissioner.
   (b)   Whenever the quantity of refrigerant in a refrigerating system
installed prior to June 27, 1949, is established by a certified statement from
the manufacturer or by a certified statement from a registered installer of
refrigerating systems, and such certified statement is accepted by the
Commissioner, such quantity of refrigerant shall be noted upon the Certificate
of Operation or Certificate of Inspection, and thereafter such system shall not
at any time contain refrigerant in excess of such quantity except by written
authority from the Commissioner.
   (c)   All refrigerating systems shall be maintained in safe operating
condition. Whenever a system is found to be in unsafe condition, the
Commissioner may require the removal of the refrigerant from the system.
   (d)   Every refrigerating system for which a Certificate of Operation is
required by OBBC and this Building Code shall be inspected by the Commissioner
at least once every year. If such a system is found to be in safe operating
condition, the Commissioner shall certify thereto by means of an endorsement
upon the Certificate of Operation. Such endorsement shall include the date of
the inspection and the signature of the inspector.
   (e)   Whenever upon inspection the Commissioner determines that a
refrigerating system is defective and a hazard to life or property, the
Commissioner shall require such changes or alterations as he or she deems
necessary to eliminate such hazard. When required changes or alterations are
not made within the time period specified in the order therefor, the
Commissioner may revoke the Certificate of Operation or the certificate of
inspection under which such system is operated.
§ 3139.08 Certificates of Qualification
   Whenever a Certificate of Operation is required for a refrigerating system,
such refrigerating system shall be under the responsible charge of the owner or
of other responsible person or persons designated by the owner, who shall be
familiar with the operation of such system and whose duty it shall be to see
that such system is maintained and operated in a safe manner. No person shall
be in charge of any such system unless he or she holds a Certificate of
Qualification issued by the Commissioner.
CHAPTER 3141 – ELEVATORS
3141.01   Scope and Application
3141.02   Definitions
3141.03   Permits Required
3141.04   Special Equipment
3141.05   Responsibility of Owner
3141.06   New Installations and Relocations
3141.07   Alterations
3141.08   Existing Installations
3141.09   Repairs
3141.10   Amusement Devices
3141.11   Inspection and Tests of New, Relocated or Altered Installations
3141.12   Certificates of Operation
3141.13   Accidents
3141.14   Periodic Inspections and Tests
3141.15   Order Discontinuing Use
3141.16   Certificate of Inspection
3141.17   Reshackling of Elevator Ropes

   Note: The legislative history of this chapter, except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 1116-A-85, passed
February 10, 1986.
Cross-reference:
   Elevator certificate fees, CO
3105.27
   Elevator permit fees, CO
3105.25
Statutory reference:
   Elevator Code, OAC 4101:5
   Elevators and conveying systems, OAC Ch. 4101:1-30
§ 3141.01 Scope and Application
   The provisions of OAC Chapter 4101:2-21 and the Ohio Elevator Code as set
forth in OAC Chapters 4101:5-1 to 4101:5-9 and this chapter shall apply to the
construction, alteration, maintenance, operation, inspections, and tests of
elevators, dumbwaiters, moving stairways, amusement devices, and special
devices herein defined as special equipment.
§ 3141.02 Definitions
   (a)   In the application and interpretation of this chapter, the definitions
included in the Ohio Elevator Code shall apply.
   (b)   The following additional definitions shall also apply:
      (1)   “Alteration” of an elevator, dumbwaiter, or moving stairway means
any change made to an existing installation, including any change to hoistway
enclosures, doors or gates, other than repairs or replacements of damaged, worn
or broken parts made incidental to maintenance.
      (2)   “Amusement device” means any manually or power operated device used
to convey persons in any direction as a form of amusement.
      (3)   “Existing installation” of an elevator, dumbwaiter, moving
stairway, amusement device or special equipment means an installation completed
prior to June 27, 1949 or one for which the application for a permit was filed
with the Commissioner prior to June 27, 1949.
      (4)   “New installation” of an elevator, dumbwaiter, moving stairway,
amusement device, or special equipment means a complete elevator, dumbwaiter,
moving stairway, amusement device, or special equipment installation, the
application for a permit for which is filed with the Commissioner after June
27, 1949.
      (5)   “Special equipment” means any permanently or semi-permanently
located device, manually or power operated, used for moving or lifting
materials or persons, and not considered an elevator, dumbwaiter, moving
stairway or amusement device.
      “Special equipment” includes devices inclined at an angle for carrying
one (1) or two (2) persons, or for carrying materials, but which are not
included under elevators or moving stairways; manhoists; lift bridges;
elevators which are used only for handling building material and workmen during
construction; elevators of a capacity exceeding thirty thousand (30,000) pounds
and a platform area exceeding three hundred (300) square feet when suspended by
cables near each corner of the hoistways and at additional positions; stage and
orchestra lifts; belt, bucket, scoop, roller, or similarly inclined or vertical
freight conveyors; telescopic ash hoists; tiering or piling machines; skip
hoists and wharf ramps; and similar apparatus.
§ 3141.03 Permits Required
   (a)   No elevator, dumbwaiter, moving stairway, amusement device, or special
device herein defined as “special equipment,” shall be erected or constructed,
or moved from one (1) location to another location, or altered, without a
permit from the Commissioner.
   (b)   The application for a permit shall be accompanied by drawings showing
the proposed construction, equipment, and mode of operation of the device to be
installed, moved, or altered.
   (c)   Permits shall be obtained for all electrical wiring and electrical
installations in connection with elevators, dumbwaiters, moving stairways,
amusement devices or special devices herein defined as “special equipment.” All
such electrical wiring and electrical installations shall be done in conformity
with the provisions of Chapter
3137.
§ 3141.04 Special Equipment
   When deemed necessary, the Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals
may promulgate rules or regulations applicable to the construction,
maintenance, operation, inspection and testing of special devices included
under the definition of “special equipment.” In the absence of such rules or
regulations, such devices shall be permitted and maintained only when the
design; material and method of operation are in conformity with the applicable
provisions of statutes and rules and regulations promulgated by authority of
statute, and are, from the standpoint of safety, approved by the Commissioner.
§ 3141.05 Responsibility of Owner
   The owner of a building or other structure in which an elevator, dumbwaiter,
moving stairway, amusement device, or special equipment is installed shall be
responsible for the safe operation and proper maintenance of such elevator,
dumbwaiter, moving stairway, amusement device, or special equipment after the
installation thereof has been approved by the Commissioner and during the
period of effectiveness of any limited certificate permitting operation
thereof. Such owner, or his or her duly appointed agent, shall also make and be
responsible for all periodic tests which the Commissioner may require under the
provisions of Ohio Elevator Code, OBBC and this Building Code.
§ 3141.06 New Installations and Relocations
   All new elevators, dumbwaiters, and moving stairways installed after July 1,
1979, and all relocated elevators, dumbwaiters, and moving stairways, shall
conform to the provisions of OBBC, the Ohio Elevator Code, and this Building
Code governing the new installations.
§ 3141.07 Alterations
   (a)   Any alterations made to elevators, dumbwaiters, or moving stairways
after July 1, 1979, shall be made in conformity with the provisions of OBBC,
the Ohio Elevator Code and this Building Code governing such alterations.
   (b)   Existing installations may be altered to obtain the advantage of any
provisions of OBBC, the Ohio Elevator Code and this Building Code, provided the
safety requirements governing such provisions are met.
§ 3141.08 Existing Installations
   Except as provided under Section
3141.02 elevators, dumbwaiters and moving stairways legally installed before
July 1, 1979 may be used without being reconstructed to comply with the
provisions of OBBC, the Ohio Elevator Code and this Building Code governing new
installations. Such existing installations shall be maintained in a safe
operating condition, and shall be subject to the inspections and tests required
by Section
3141.14. The Commissioner shall issue a Certificate of Operation for each
existing elevator, dumbwaiter, moving stairway, amusement device or special
equipment after such device has been inspected and found safe, which
certificate shall be posted in the elevator car, or on, near, or plainly
visible from the dumbwaiter, moving stairway, amusement device or special
equipment.
§ 3141.09 Repairs
   Damaged or defective parts shall be wholly or partly replaced at the
discretion of the Commissioner.
§ 3141.10 Amusement Devices
   Amusement devices shall be permitted only where the design, materials,
construction and method of operation are, from the standpoint of safety,
approved by the Commissioner.
§ 3141.11 Inspection and Tests of New, Relocated or Altered Installations
   (a)   Tests and Certificates of Operation Required. The operation or use of
any new, altered or relocated elevator, dumbwaiter, moving stairway, amusement
device or special equipment is prohibited until such equipment has passed OBBC,
the Ohio Elevator Code, and this Building Code, and a Certificate of Operation
has been issued in accordance with Section
3141.12.
   (b)   Tests of Elevators, Dumbwaiters and Moving Stairways. The person, firm
or corporation installing, relocating, or altering an elevator, dumbwaiter, or
moving stairway, shall notify the Commissioner, in writing, at least three (3)
days before completion of the work and shall, in the presence of a
representative of the Commissioner, subject the new, relocated, or altered
portions of the equipment to tests required by OBBC, and the Ohio Elevator Code
to show that such equipment meets the requirements specified.
   (c)   Tests of Special Equipment and Amusement Devices. The person, firm, or
corporation installing, relocating, or altering special equipment or amusement
devices shall, in the presence of a representative of the Commissioner, make
such tests as the Commissioner may prescribe in order to determine the safety
of such equipment.
§ 3141.12 Certificates of Operation
   (a)   Issuing of Certificates. A Certificate of Operation shall be issued by
the Commissioner when inspections and tests required by Section
3141.11 show that elevators, dumbwaiters, moving stairways, special equipment
or amusement devices are installed in accordance with the provisions of OBBC,
the Ohio Elevator Code and this Building Code.
   (b)   Numbering of Elevator Certificates. A Certificate of Operation for an
elevator shall show the serial number of the elevator for which it is issued.
   (c)   Posting of Certificates. The Certificate of Operation shall be
suitably framed, under glass, and shall be posted in a conspicuous location in
the elevator car, or on, near, or plainly visible from the dumbwaiter, moving
stairway, amusement device or special equipment to which it applies.
   (d)   Limited Certificates.
      (1)   The Commissioner may permit the temporary use of an elevator,
dumbwaiter, or moving stairway for service during the installation or
alteration of such equipment under the authority of a Limited Certificate of
Operation.
      (2)   Such Limited Certificate for an elevator shall not be issued until
the elevator shall have been tested under contract load, and the car safety and
terminal stopping equipment shall have been tested to determine the safety of
the equipment for construction purposes, and until permanent or temporary
guards of enclosures are placed on the car and around the hoistway and at the
landing entrances on each floor. Landing entrance guards shall be provided with
locks that can be released from the hoistway side only. Automatic and
continuous pressure elevators shall not be placed in temporary operation from
the landing push buttons unless door locking devices and/or interlocks required
by OBBC, the Ohio Elevator Code and this Building Code are installed and
operative.
   (e)   Life of Limited Certificates. Limited Certificates of Operation shall
be issued for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days. Such certificates may be
renewed at the discretion of the Commissioner.
   (f)   Posting of Special Notice. Where a Limited Certificate of Operation is
issued, a notice bearing the information that the equipment has not been
finally approved shall be conspicuously posted on, near or visible from each
entrance to such elevator, dumbwaiter or moving stairway.
§ 3141.13 Accidents
   The owner or lessee or person in charge of any of the devices regulated
under the provisions of this chapter shall immediately notify the Commissioner
of every accident to any person, or damage to the device or to apparatus on or
about or in connection with such device involving repairs or replacements
exceeding twenty-five dollars ($25.00) in cost, and shall afford the
Commissioner every facility for investigating such accident or damage. The
Commissioner shall make an investigation immediately thereafter, and shall file
in his or her Division a full and complete report of such investigation. Such
report shall give in detail all material facts and information available and
the cause or causes so far as they can be determined. Such report shall be open
to public inspection at all reasonable hours. When an accident involves the
failure or destruction of any part of the construction or operating mechanism
of such a device, it shall be unlawful to use such device until it has been
made safe, and the Commissioner may, if he or she deems it necessary, order the
discontinuance of the use of such device until a new Certificate of Operation
has been issued by him or her for its use. It shall be unlawful to remove any
part of the damaged construction or operating mechanism from the premises until
permission to do so has been granted by the Commissioner.
§ 3141.14 Periodic Inspections and Tests
   (a)   All elevators, amusement devices and special equipment shall be tested
by the owner in the presence of the Commissioner, or his or her authorized
representative, at least once every six (6) months, and all such devices shall
be inspected by the Commissioner or his or her authorized representative at the
time of testing.
   (b)   All moving stairways, and the miscellaneous safety devices on
dumbwaiters, shall be tested annually by the owner in the presence of the
Commissioner or his or her authorized representative, and all such equipment
shall be inspected by the Commissioner or his or her authorized representative
at the time of testing.
   (c)   All tests shall be made in conformity with the rules therefor issued
by the Cleveland Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals or any rules
of the Ohio Board of Building Standards.
§ 3141.15 Order Discontinuing Use
   Whenever the Commissioner shall, from inspection or tests of any elevator,
moving stairway, dumbwaiter, amusement device, or special equipment, determine
that in the interest of public safety such elevator, moving stairway,
dumbwaiter, amusement device, or special equipment, or any part or appliance
thereof, is out of order or in an unsafe condition, he or she shall have the
power to order the discontinuance of the use of any such elevator, moving
stairway, dumbwaiter, amusement device, or special equipment, and to compel the
person, firm, or corporation having control or possession or use thereof to
discontinue such use until such elevator, moving stairway, dumbwaiter,
amusement device, or special equipment, or part of appliance thereof, has been
satisfactorily repaired or replaced so that such elevator, moving stairway,
dumbwaiter, amusement device or special equipment, is in a safe and proper
condition.
   To enforce the provisions of this section the Commissioner may revoke an
existing Certificate of Operation and require that it be surrendered and may
seal or order the sealing of such parts of the operating mechanism as will make
the device inoperative, and it shall be a violation of OBBC, the Ohio Elevator
Code or this Building Code for any person or persons other than the authorized
inspector of the Commissioner to break or remove such seal.
§ 3141.16 Certificate of Inspection
   The Commissioner shall certify each elevator, dumbwaiter, moving stairway,
amusement device or special equipment which, after inspection, is judged to be
in conformity with the provisions of OBBC, the Ohio Elevator Code and this
Building Code. Such certification shall be in the form of an endorsement on the
Certificate of Operation required in Section
3141.12 and shall include the date of the inspection and the signature of the
inspector.
§ 3141.17 Reshackling of Elevator Ropes
   The hoisting ropes of power elevators having drum-type hoisting machines
shall be reshackled at the car ends once every twelve (12) months on machines
located over the hatchway. On machines located below or at side of the hatchway
the reshackling shall be done once in every twenty-four (24) months. When an
approved type emergency clamping device is installed reshackling at the periods
specified shall not be required.
   All counterweight ropes of drum machines shall be reshackled at the counter-
weight ends once in every four (4) years.
   Notwithstanding the requirements for reshackling within the periods
specified above, reshackling shall be made when inspection reveals any evidence
of weakness or failure at shackles.
   When ropes are reshackled there shall be attached thereto a metal tag, which
shall bear the name of the person or firm who performed such reshackling and
the date on which such work was performed.
CHAPTER 3143 – EXTERIOR WALLS AND APPURTENANCES; PARKING GARAGES
3143.01   Definitions
3143.02   Inspection and Reporting Requirements for Exterior Walls and
Appurtenances; Fee
3143.03   Certificate of Exterior Walls and Appurtenances Inspection
3143.04   Inspection and Reporting Requirements for Parking Garages
3143.05   Certificate of Parking Garage Inspection
3143.98   Rules
3143.99   Penalties
   Note: Pursuant to Section 6 of Ord. No. 1039-2023, the title to Chapter
3143 of the Codified Ordinances shall be amended to read “Exterior Walls and
Appurtenances; Parking Garages”.
§ 3143.01 Definitions
   (a)   "Substantial structure" means any structure of any construction type
or use that is five (5) stories or seventy-five (75) feet above grade,
whichever is shorter, at any point along its perimeter.
   (b)   “Parking Garage” means a multi-level structure of other than Type V
construction intended for the parking or storage of motor vehicles. A parking
garage may be accessory to a principal use or structure on a lot or may be the
principal structure on a lot.
   (c)   "Protected distance" means the horizontal distance measured
perpendicular from any substantial structure to a public way, public land,
other structure or adjoining property.
   (d)   "Qualified inspector" means either of the following: (1) a design
professional certified in inspection of the specific elements that make up the
facade of the structure, and licensed by the State of Ohio; or (2) a special
inspector or inspection agency accredited and experienced in the specific type
of structure being inspected, and qualified under the Ohio Building Code for
special inspectors.
(Ord. No. 1039-2023. Passed 2-5-24, eff. 2-6-24)
§ 3143.02 Inspection and Reporting Requirements for Exterior Walls and
Appurtenances; Fee
   In order to maintain a building's exterior walls and appurtenances in a safe
condition, the following requirements shall apply to all buildings that are at
least five (5) stories or seventy-five (75) feet above grade, whichever is
shorter, have a protected distance that is equal to or less than the height of
the substantial structure from its tallest height above grade, and are thirty
(30) years or older. This section shall not apply to one-, two- or three-family
residential buildings:
   (a)   Inspection Requirements. The owner of a substantial structure shall
conduct a critical inspection of the condition of exterior walls and
appurtenances at least once every five (5) years.
      (1)   Such inspection shall be conducted and witnessed by a qualified
inspector, by or on behalf of the owner of the building. Such inspection shall
meet or exceed the general inspection standards under the ASTM Standards for
Periodic Inspection of Building Facades for Unsafe Conditions contained in
Designation E2270-14. Any areas found to be deficient in the general inspection
shall require a detailed inspection.
      (2)   The owner shall complete such inspection and file a report within
the following time:
         A.   All new inspections and reports for structures fifty (50) years
or older shall be completed and filed within one (1) year of the effective date
of this section, and successive inspections and reports shall be completed
every five (5) years from the date of the original inspection report filed in
accordance with division (b).
         B.   All new inspections and reports for structures thirty (30) years
to fifty (50) years shall be completed and filed within two (2) years of the
effective date of this section, and successive inspections and reports shall be
completed every five (5) years from the date of the original inspection report
filed in accordance with division (b).
         C.   If a structure has already been inspected prior to the adoption
of this chapter, the owner must file a report of that inspection within one (1)
year of the effective date of this section, and successive inspections and
reports shall be completed every five (5) years from the date of the original
inspection report filed in accordance with division (b).
   (b)   Inspection Report. The owner of a substantial structure shall register
with the Director of Building and Housing by submitting a written report,
prepared by a qualified inspector who conducted or supervised the inspection,
as follows:
      (1)   Such report shall clearly document the condition of the exterior
walls and appurtenances as either safe, unsafe, or safe with a repair and
maintenance program. The report shall document all significant deterioration,
unsafe conditions, and movement observed, in sufficient detail so that a
comparison of successive reports will indicate any change of condition. Such
report must be signed by and bear the professional seal of the qualified
inspector.
      (2)   Such report shall be filed with the Director of Building and
Housing together with a fee, in an amount to be determined by the Board of
Control, within the time specified in division (a)(2).
      (3)   Such report shall include the following:
         A.   The location of the building by address and permanent parcel
number;
         B.   The year the building was built;
         C.   The date the building was inspected;
         D.   The name, address, and title of the person or firm who conducted
the inspection;
         E.   Complete description of inspections conducted based on ASTM
E2270-14, including the locations of and descriptions the general inspection
areas and any of detailed inspection areas.
      (4)   Such inspection report shall be filed with Director of Building and
Housing every five (5) years from the date of the original report. The owner
shall keep and maintain the complete and full inspection documentation on-site
or produce said documentation within forty-eight (48) hours of any request by
the Director of Building and Housing or the Chief of Fire, or their designees.
   (c)   Notice of Unsafe Condition. Upon the discovery of an unsafe condition
relating to the exterior walls or appurtenances, the owner shall notify the
Director of Building and Housing immediately in writing of such condition, and
immediately begin repair, reinforcement or precautionary measures, with the
required permits, to abate the unsafe condition to ensure public safety.
(Ord. No. 1533-15. Passed 4-4-16, eff. 6-6-16; Am. Ord. No. 326-18. Passed 4-2-
18, eff. 4-3-18)
§ 3143.03 Certificate of Exterior Walls and Appurtenances Inspection
   (a)   Issuing of Certificates. The Director of Building and Housing shall
issue an exterior wall and appurtenances certificate only after having received
satisfactory proof of inspection, and after the inspection report of the
architect or engineer reports a safe condition. No building owner or person in
control of a building, subject to the requirements in this chapter shall permit
the substantial structure to be occupied without such certificate.
   (b)   Keeping and Producing of Certificates. The owner or person in control
of a building subject to the requirements of this chapter shall keep and
maintain such certificate on-site or produce said certificate within forty-
eight (48) hours of any request by the Director of Building and Housing or the
Chief of Fire, or their designees. No building owner or person in control
subject to the requirements of this chapter shall fail to keep and maintain or
produce the required certificate.
(Ord. No. 1039-2023. Passed 2-5-24, eff. 2-6-24)
§ 3143.04 Inspection and Reporting Requirements for Parking Garages
   In order to maintain parking garages in a safe condition, the following
requirements shall apply:
   (a)   Inspection Requirements. The owner of a parking garage shall conduct a
critical inspection of the condition of parking garage and appurtenances at
least once every five (5) years.
      (1)   Such inspection shall be conducted and witnessed by a qualified
inspector, by or on behalf of the owner of the building. Such inspection shall
be for the purpose of determining whether the parking structure and all parts
thereof are either safe, unsafe, or safe with repairs and/or engineering
monitoring and whether, in the judgment of a qualified parking structure
inspector, remedial work is required. Any areas found to be deficient in the
general inspection shall require a detailed inspection.
      (2)   Such inspection shall be conducted using the most current ASCE 11
standard (Guideline for Structural Assessment of Existing Buildings). Qualified
personnel shall perform a preliminary assessment as defined in the standard and
provide a determination as to whether a detailed assessment is required. When
in the opinion of the qualified inspector a detailed assessment is required,
such an inspection shall be performed according to the standard and a detailed
report be produced.
      (3)   The owner shall complete such inspection and file a report within
the following time:
         A.   All new inspections and reports shall be completed and filed
within one (1) year of the effective date of this section, and successive
inspections and reports shall be completed every five (5) years from the date
of the original inspection report filed in accordance with division (c).
         B.   If a structure has already been inspected prior to the adoption
of this chapter, the owner must file a report of that inspection within one (1)
year of the effective date of this section, and successive inspections and
reports shall be completed every five (5) years from the date of the original
inspection report filed in accordance with division (c).
   (b)   Registration. The owner of a parking garage shall register with the
Director of Building and Housing by submitting a registration of the conditions
identified in the report on a form determined by the Director of Building and
Housing.
   (c)   Inspection Report. The owner of a parking garage shall register with
the Director of Building and Housing by submitting a written report, prepared
by a qualified inspector who conducted or supervised the inspection, as
follows:
      (1)   Such report shall clearly document the condition of the walls,
floors, ceilings, and ramps, and appurtenances as either safe, unsafe, or safe
with a repair and maintenance program. The report shall document all
significant deterioration, unsafe conditions, in sufficient detail so that a
comparison of successive reports will indicate any change of condition. Such
report must be signed by and bear the professional seal of the qualified
inspector.
      (2)   Such report shall be filed with the Director of Building and
Housing together with a fee, in an amount to be determined by the Board of
Control, within the time specified in division (a)(3).
      (3)   Such report shall be maintained for review by the Department of
Building and Housing at any time requested.
      (4)   Such report shall include the following:
         A.   The location of the parking garage by address and permanent
parcel number;
         B.   The year the parking garage was built;
         C.   The date the building was inspected;
         D.   The name, address, and title of the person or firm who conducted
the inspection;
         E.   Complete description of inspections conducted to determine
whether the parking structure and all parts thereof are either safe, unsafe, or
safe with repairs and/or engineering monitoring and whether, in the judgment of
a qualified parking structure inspector, remedial work is required, based on
the current version of ASCE 11 standard (Guideline for Structural Assessment of
Existing Buildings), including the locations of and descriptions the general
inspection areas and any of detailed inspection areas.
      (5)   Such inspection report shall be filed with Director of Building and
Housing every five (5) years from the date of the original report. The owner
shall keep and maintain the complete and full inspection documentation on-site
or produce said documentation within forty-eight (48) hours of any request by
the Director of Building and Housing or the Chief of Fire, or their designees.
   (d)   Notice of Unsafe Condition. Upon the discovery of an unsafe condition
relating to the exterior walls or appurtenances, the owner shall notify the
Director of Building and Housing immediately in writing of such condition, and
immediately begin repair, reinforcement or precautionary measures, with the
required permits, to abate the unsafe condition to ensure public safety.
(Ord. No. 1039-2023. Passed 2-5-24, eff. 2-6-24)
§ 3143.05 Certificate of Parking Garage Inspection
   (a)   Issuing of Certificates. The Director of Building and Housing shall
issue a parking garage certificate only after having received satisfactory
proof of inspection, and after the inspection report of the architect or
engineer reports a safe condition. No owner or person in control of a parking
garage subject to the requirements in this chapter shall permit the parking
garage to be used without such certificate.
   (b)   Keeping and Producing of Certificates. The owner or person in control
of a parking garage subject to the requirements of this chapter shall keep and
maintain such certificate on-site or produce said certificate within forty-
eight (48) hours of any request by the Director of Building and Housing or the
Chief of Fire, or their designees. No owner or person in control of a parking
garage subject to the requirements of this chapter shall fail to keep and
maintain or produce the required certificate.
(Ord. No. 1039-2023. Passed 2-5-24, eff. 2-6-24)
§ 3143.98 Rules
   The Director of Building and Housing shall promulgate any rules as may be
necessary for the purposes of carrying out the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 1533-15. Passed 4-4-16, eff. 6-6-16; Am. Ord. No. 326-18. Passed 4-2-
18, eff. 4-3-18; Am. Ord. No. 1039-2023. Passed 2-5-24, eff. 2-6-24)
§ 3143.99 Penalties
   In addition to any other method of enforcement provided for in
Chapter 3103, whoever violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day during which noncompliance or a
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. Organizations
convicted of an offense shall be fined as provided by Cleveland Codified
Ordinance Sections
601.10 and
601.99.
(Ord. No. 1533-15. Passed 4-4-16, eff. 6-6-16; Am. Ord. No. 326-18. Passed 4-2-
18, eff. 4-3-18)
CHAPTER 3167 – FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
3167.01   General Provisions
3167.02   Definitions
3167.03   Administration
3167.04   Use and Development Standards for Flood Hazard Reduction
3167.05   Appeals Board Established
3167.06   Enforcement
3167.99   Violations and Penalties
Statutory reference:
   Flood control bonds, RC 151.05 et seq.
   Marking flood areas, RC 1521.14
§ 3167.01 General Provisions
   (a)   Statutory Authorization. Article XVIII, Section
3, of the Ohio Constitution grants municipalities the legal authority to adopt
land use and control measures for promoting the health, safety, and general
welfare of its citizens.
   (b)   Findings of Fact. The City of Cleveland has special flood hazard areas
that are subject to periodic inundation which may result in loss of life and
property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental
services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief,
and impairment of the tax base. Additionally, structures that are inadequately
elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise protected from flood damage also
contribute to the flood loss. In order to minimize the threat of such damages
and to achieve the purposes hereinafter set forth, these regulations are
adopted.
   (c)   Statement of Purpose. It is the purpose of these regulations to
promote the public health, safety and general welfare, and to:
      (1)   Protect human life and health;
      (2)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
      (3)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
      (4)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
      (5)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard;
      (6)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the proper use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to protect property and
minimize future flood blight areas;
      (7)   Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions;
      (8)   Minimize the impact of development on adjacent properties within
and near flood prone areas;
      (9)   Ensure that the flood storage and conveyance functions of the
floodplain are maintained;
      (10)   Minimize the impact of development on the natural, beneficial
values of the floodplain;
      (11)   Prevent floodplain uses that are either hazardous or
environmentally incompatible; and
      (12)   Meet community participation requirements of the National Flood
Insurance Program.
   (d)   Methods of Reducing Flood Loss. In order to accomplish its purposes,
these regulations include methods and provisions for:
      (1)   Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health,
safety, and property due to water hazards, or which result in damaging
increases in flood heights or velocities;
      (2)   Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities,
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
      (3)   Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels,
and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood
waters;
      (4)   Controlling filling, grading, dredging, excavating, and other
development which may increase flood damage; and
      (5)   Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers, which
will unnaturally divert flood, waters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
   (e)   Lands to Which These Regulations Apply. These regulations shall apply
to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the City of
Cleveland as identified in division (f) of this section, including any
additional areas of special flood hazard annexed by the City of Cleveland.
   (f)   Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard. For the
purposes of these regulations, the following studies and/or maps are adopted:
      (1)   Flood Insurance Study Cuyahoga County, Ohio and Incorporated Areas
and Flood Insurance Rate map Cuyahoga County, Ohio and Incorporated Areas both
effective August 15, 2019.
      (2)   Other studies and/or maps, which may be relied upon for
establishment of the flood protection elevation, delineation of the one hundred
(100) year floodplain, floodways or delineation of other areas of special flood
hazard.
      (3)   Any hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis authored by a
registered Professional Engineer in the State of Ohio which has been approved
by the City of Cleveland as required by division (c) of Section
3167.04, Subdivisions and Other New Developments.
   Any revisions to the aforementioned maps and/or studies are hereby adopted
by reference and declared to be a part of these regulations. Such maps and/or
studies are on file at 601 Lakeside Avenue, Cleveland, Ohio 44114.
   (g)   Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. In the event of a conflict
between these regulations and any other ordinance, the more restrictive shall
be followed. These regulations shall not impair any deed restriction covenant
or easement but the land subject to such interests shall also be governed by
the regulations, and whichever imposes the more restrictive shall be followed.
   (h)   Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of these
regulations, all provisions shall be:
      (1)   Considered as minimum requirements;
      (2)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
      (3)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes. Where a provision of these regulations may be in conflict with
a state or Federal law, such state or Federal law shall take precedence over
these regulations.
   (i)   Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood protection
required by these regulations is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes
and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can
and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or
natural causes. These regulations do not imply that land outside the areas of
special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from
flooding or flood damage. These regulations shall not create liability on the
part of the City of Cleveland, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal
Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damage that results from reliance on
these regulations or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
   (j)   Severability. Should any section or provision of these regulations be
declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall
not affect the validity of the regulations as a whole, or any part thereof
other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
(Ord. No. 857-2019. Passed 7-24-19, eff. 7-26-19)
§ 3167.02 Definitions
   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in these
regulations shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give these regulations the most reasonable application.
   (a)   Accessory Structure. A structure on the same lot with, and of a nature
customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal structure.
   (b)   Appeal. A request for review of the floodplain administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of these regulations or a request for a
variance.
   (c)   Base Flood. The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year. The base flood may also be referred to
as the one percent (1%) chance annual flood or one hundred (100) year flood.
   (d)   Base (100-Year) Flood Elevation (BFE). The water surface elevation of
the base flood in relation to a specified datum, usually the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum of 1929 or the North American Vertical Datum of 1988, and
usually expressed in Feet Mean Sea Level (MSL). In Zone AO areas, the base
flood elevation is the lowest adjacent natural grade elevation plus the depth
number (from one (1) to three (3) feet).
   (e)   Basement. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
   (e.1)   Breakaway wall. A wall that is not part of the structural support of
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
   (e.2)   Coastal high hazard area. An area of special flood hazard extending
from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open
coast, and any other area subject to high velocity wave action from storms or
other seismic sources. A coastal high hazard area is identified on a
community's FIRM by the designation of zone VE.
   (f)   Development. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
   (g)   Enclosure Below the Lowest Floor. See “Lowest Floor.”
   (h)   Executive Order 11988 (Floodplain Management). Issued by President
Carter in 1977, this order requires that no federally assisted activities be
conducted in or have the potential to affect identified special flood hazard
areas, unless there is no practicable alternative.
   (i)   Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). The agency with the
overall responsibility for administering the National Flood Insurance Program.
   (j)   Fill. A deposit of earth material placed by artificial means.
   (k)   Flood or Flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters, and/or
      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
   (l)   Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM). Usually the initial map, produced by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency, or U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development, for a community depicting approximate special flood hazard
areas.
   (m)   Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). An official map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency or the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development has delineated the areas of special flood hazard.
   (n)   Flood Insurance Risk Zones. Zone designations on FHBMs and FIRMs that
indicate the magnitude of the flood hazard in specific areas of a community.
Following are the zone definitions:
      (1)   Zone A: Special flood hazard areas inundated by the one hundred
(100) year flood in any given year; base flood elevations are not determined.
      (2)   Zones A1-30 and Zone AE: Special flood hazard areas inundated by
the one hundred (100) year flood in any given year; base flood elevations are
determined.
      (3)   Zone AO: Special flood hazard areas inundated by the one hundred
(100) year flood in any given year; with flood depths of one (1) to three (3)
feet (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain); average depths are determined.
      (4)   Zone AH: Special flood hazard areas inundated by the one hundred
(100) year flood in any given year; flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet
(usually areas of ponding); base flood elevations are determined.
      (5)   Zone A99: Special flood hazard areas inundated by the one hundred
(100) year flood to be protected from the one hundred (100) year flood by a
Federal flood protection system under construction; no base flood elevations
are determined.
      (6)   Zone B and Zone X (shaded): Areas of five hundred (500) year flood;
areas subject to the one hundred (100) year flood with average depths of less
than one (1) foot or with contributing drainage area less than one (1) square
mile; and areas protected by levees from the base flood.
      (7)   Zone C and Zone X (unshaded): Areas determined to be outside the
five hundred (500) year floodplain.
      (8)   Zone V: Coastal special flood hazard area subject to a 100-year
flood from velocity hazard (wave action); base flood elevations are not
determined.
      (9)   Zone VE and V1-30: Coastal special flood hazard area subject to a
100-year flood from velocity hazard (wave action); base flood elevations are
determined.
   (o)   Flood Insurance Study (FIS). The official report in which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency or the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development has provided flood profiles, floodway boundaries (sometimes shown
on Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps), and the water surface elevations of the
base flood.
   (o.1)   Floodproofing. Any combination of structural and non-structural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
   (p)   Flood Protection Elevation. The Flood Protection Elevation, or FPE, is
the base flood elevation plus two (2) feet of freeboard. In areas where no base
flood elevations exist from any authoritative source, the flood protection
elevation can be historical flood elevations, or base flood elevations
determined and/or approved by the floodplain administrator.
   (q)   Floodway. A floodway is the channel of a river or other watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that have been reserved in order to pass the base
flood discharge. A floodway is typically determined through a hydraulic and
hydrologic engineering analysis such that the cumulative increase in the water
surface elevation of the base flood discharge is no more than a designated
height. In no case shall the designated height be more than one (1) foot at any
point within the community.
   The floodway is an extremely hazardous area, and is usually characterized by
any of the following: Moderate to high velocity flood waters, high potential
for debris and projectile impacts, and moderate to high erosion forces.
   (r)   Freeboard. A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood
level for the purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate
for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater
than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions,
such as wave action, obstructed bridge openings, debris and ice jams, and the
hydrologic effect of urbanization in a watershed.
   (s)   Historic Structure. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listings on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district; or
      (3)   Individually listed on the State of Ohio’s inventory of historic
places maintained by the Ohio Historic Preservation Office.
   (t)   Hydrologic and Hydraulic Engineering Analysis. An analysis performed
by a professional engineer, registered in the State of Ohio, in accordance with
standard engineering practices as accepted by FEMA, used to determine flood
elevations and/or floodway boundaries.
   (u)   Letter of Map Change (LOMC). A Letter of Map Change is an official
FEMA determination, by letter, to amend or revise effective Flood Insurance
Rate Maps, Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps, and Flood Insurance Studies. LOMCs
are broken down into the following categories:
      (1)   Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA). A revision based on technical data
showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood
hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective Flood Insurance Rate Map and
establishes that a specific property is not located in a special flood hazard
area.
      (2)   Letter of Map Revision (LOMR). A revision based on technical data
that, usually due to manmade changes, shows changes to flood zones, flood
elevations, floodplain and floodway delineations, and planimetric features. One
common type of LOMR, a LOMR-F, is a determination concerning whether a
structure or parcel has been elevated by fill above the base flood elevation
and is, therefore, excluded from the special flood hazard area.
      (3)   Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR). A comment by FEMA
regarding a proposed project that would, upon construction, affect the
hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and thus result in
the modification of the existing floodway, the effective base flood elevations,
or the special flood hazard area. A CLOMR does not amend or revise effective
Flood Insurance Rate Maps, Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps, or Flood Insurance
Studies.
   (v)   Lowest Floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement) of a structure. This definition excludes an “enclosure below the
lowest floor” which is an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure usable solely
for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a
basement area, provided that such enclosure is built in accordance with the
applicable design requirements specified in these regulations for enclosures
below the lowest floor.
   (w)   Manufactured Home. A structure, transportable in one (1) or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or
without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The
term “manufactured home” does not include a “recreational vehicle”. For the
purposes of these regulations, a manufactured home includes manufactured homes
and mobile homes as defined in RC Chapter 4781.
   (w.1)   Mean sea level. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to
which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are
referenced.
   (x)   Manufactured Home Park. As specified in the OAC 4781-12-01(K), a
manufactured home park means any tract of land upon which three (3) or more
manufactured homes, used for habitation are parked, either free of charge or
for revenue purposes, and includes any roadway, building, structure, vehicle,
or enclosure used or intended for use as part of the facilities of the park. A
tract of land that is subdivided and the individual lots are not for rent or
rented, but are for sale or sold for the purpose of installation of
manufactured homes on the lots, is not a manufactured home park, even though
three (3) or more manufactured homes are parked thereon, if the roadways are
dedicated to the local government authority. Manufactured home park does not
include any tract of land used solely for the storage or display for sale of
manufactured homes.
   (y)   National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). The NFIP is a Federal program
enabling property owners in participating communities to purchase insurance
protection against losses from flooding. This insurance is designed to provide
an insurance alternative to disaster assistance to meet the escalating costs of
repairing damage to buildings and their contents caused by floods.
Participation in the NFIP is based on an agreement between local communities
and the Federal government that states if a community will adopt and enforce
floodplain management regulations to reduce future flood risks to all
development in special flood hazard areas, the Federal government will make
flood insurance available within the community as a financial protection
against flood loss.
   (z)   New construction. Structures for which the "start of construction"
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain regulation adopted by
the City of Cleveland and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures. For the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for
which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the initial effective
date of the City of Cleveland Flood Insurance Rate Map, August 1, 1978 or after
December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements
to such structures.
   (aa)   Person. Includes any individual or group of individuals, corporation,
partnership, association, or any other entity, including state and local
governments and agencies. An agency is further defined in the RC 111.15 as any
governmental entity of the state and includes, but is not limited to, any
board, department, division, commission, bureau, society, council, institution,
state college or university, community college district, technical college
district, or state community college. “Agency” does not include the general
assembly, the controlling board, the adjutant general’s department, or any
court.
   (bb)   Recreational Vehicle. A vehicle which is (1) built on a single
chassis, (2) four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the
largest horizontal projection, (3) designed to be self-propelled or permanently
towable by a light duty truck, and (4) designed primarily not for use as a
permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping,
travel, or seasonal use.
   (cc)   Registered Professional Architect. A person registered to engage in
the practice of architecture under the provisions of RC 4703.01 to 4703.19.
   (dd)   Registered Professional Engineer. A person registered as a
professional engineer under RC Chapter 4733.
   (ee)   Registered Professional Surveyor. A person registered as a
professional surveyor under RC Chapter 4733.
   (ff)   Special Flood Hazard Area. Also known as “Areas of Special Flood
Hazard”, it is the land in the floodplain subject to a one percent (1%) or
greater chance of flooding in any given year. Special flood hazard areas are
designated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency on Flood Insurance Rate
Maps, Flood Insurance Studies, Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps and Flood
Hazard Boundary Maps as Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-30, A99, V, or VE. Special
flood hazard areas may also refer to areas that are flood prone and designated
from other federal state or local sources of data including but not limited to
historical flood information reflecting high water marks, previous flood
inundation areas, and flood prone soils associated with a watercourse.
   (gg)   Start of Construction. The date the building permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one
hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the
installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a
basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms;
nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings,
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural
part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of a building.
   (hh)   Structure. A walled and roofed building, manufactured home, or gas or
liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.
   (ii)   Substantial Damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred.
   (jj)   Substantial Improvement. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
“start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures,
which have incurred “substantial damage”, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include:
      (1)   Any improvement to a structure that is considered “new
construction;”
      (2)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified prior to the application for a development permit by
the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
      (3)   Any alteration of a “historic structure,” provided that the
alteration would not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
“historic structure”.
   (kk)   Variance. A grant of relief from the standards of these regulations
consistent with the variance conditions herein.
   (ll)   Violation. The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with these regulations.
(Ord. No. 857-2019. Passed 7-24-19, eff. 7-26-19)
§ 3167.03 Administration
   (a)   Designation of the Floodplain Administrator. The Director of Building
and Housing, or his or her designee, is appointed to administer and implement
these regulations and is referred to herein as the Floodplain Administrator.
   (b)   Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator. The
duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include but
are not limited to:
      (1)   Evaluate applications for permits to develop in special flood
hazard areas;
      (2)   Interpret floodplain boundaries and provide flood hazard and flood
protection elevation information;
      (3)   Issue permits to develop in special flood hazard areas when the
provisions of these regulations have been met, or refuse to issue the same in
the event of noncompliance;
      (4)   Inspect buildings and lands to determine whether any violations of
these regulations have been committed;
      (5)   Make and permanently keep all records for public inspection
necessary for the administration of these regulations including Flood Insurance
Rate Maps, Letters of Map Amendment and Revision, records of issuance and
denial of permits to develop in special flood hazard areas, determinations of
whether development is in or out of special flood hazard areas for the purpose
of issuing floodplain development permits, elevation certificates,
floodproofing certificates, VE-zone construction certifications, variances, and
records of enforcement actions taken for violations of these regulations;
      (6)   Enforce the provisions of these regulations;
      (7)   Provide information, testimony, or other evidence as needed during
variance hearings;
      (8)   Coordinate map maintenance activities and FEMA follow-up;
      (9)   Conduct substantial damage determinations to determine whether
existing structures, damaged from any source and in special flood hazard areas
identified by FEMA, must meet the development standards of these regulations.
   (c)   Floodplain Development Permits. It shall be unlawful for any person to
begin construction or other development activity including but not limited to
filling, grading, construction, alteration, remodeling, or expanding any
structure; or alteration of any watercourse wholly within, partially within or
in contact with any identified special flood hazard area, as established in
division (f) of Section
3167.01, until a floodplain development permit is obtained from the Floodplain
Administrator. Such floodplain development permit shall show that the proposed
development activity is in conformity with the provisions of these regulations.
No such permit shall be issued by the Floodplain Administrator until the
requirements of these regulations have been met.
   (d)   Application Required. An application for a floodplain development
permit shall be required for all development activities located wholly within,
partially within, or in contact with an identified special flood hazard area.
Such application shall be made by the owner of the property or his or her
authorized agent, herein referred to as the applicant, prior to the actual
commencement of such construction on a form furnished for that purpose. Where
it is unclear whether a development site is in a special flood hazard area, the
Floodplain Administrator may require an application for a floodplain
development permit to determine the development’s location. Such applications
shall include, but not be limited to:
      (1)   Site plans drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions,
and topography of the area in question; the location of existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location
of the foregoing;
      (2)   Elevation of the existing, natural ground where structures are
proposed;
      (3)   Elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed
structures;
      (4)   Such other material and information as may be requested by the
Floodplain Administrator to determine conformance with, and provide enforcement
of these regulations;
      (5)   Technical analyses conducted by the appropriate design professional
registered in the State of Ohio and submitted with an application for a
floodplain development permit when applicable:
         A.   Floodproofing certification for non- residential floodproofed
structure as required in division (e) of Section
3167.04;
         B.   Certification that fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor of
a structure not meeting the design requirements of division (d) of Section
3167.04 are designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces;
         C.   Description of any watercourse alteration or relocation that the
flood carrying capacity of the watercourse will not be diminished, and
maintenance assurances as required in division (i)(3) of Section
3167.04;
         D.   A hydrologic and hydraulic analysis demonstrating that the
cumulative effect of proposed development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood by more than one (1) foot in special flood hazard
areas where the Federal Emergency Management Agency has provided base flood
elevations but no floodway as required by division (i)(2) of Section
3167.04;
         E.   A hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis showing impact of
any development on flood heights in an identified floodway as required by
division (i)(1) of Section
3167.04;
         F.   Generation of base flood elevation(s) for subdivision and
largescale developments as required by division (c) of Section
3167.04;
         G.   Certification of structural design and methods of construction
for VE zone construction as required by division (j)(2) of Section
3167.04;
         H.   Certification of breakaway wall design, when applicable as
provided in division (j)(2) of Section
3167.04.
      (6)   A floodplain development permit application fee, which shall be the
fee for new construction established in Section
3105.25(b)(1).
   (e)   Review and Approval of a Floodplain Development Permit Application.
      (1)   Review.
         A.   After receipt of a complete application, the Floodplain
Administrator shall review the application to ensure that the standards of
these regulations have been met. No floodplain development permit application
shall be reviewed until all information required in division (d) of Section
3167.03 has been received by the Floodplain Administrator.
         B.   The Floodplain Administrator shall review all floodplain
development permit applications to assure that all necessary permits have been
received from those federal, state or local governmental agencies from which
prior approval is required. The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining
such permits as required including permits issued by the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers under Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act and Section 404 of the
Clean Water Act, and the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency under Section 401
of the Clean Water Act.
      (2)   Approval. Within thirty (30) days after the receipt of a complete
application, the Floodplain Administrator shall either approve or disapprove
the application. If an application is approved, a floodplain development permit
shall be issued. All floodplain development permits shall be conditional upon
the commencement of work within one hundred eighty (180) days. A floodplain
development permit shall expire one hundred eighty (180) days after issuance
unless the permitted activity has been substantially begun and is thereafter
pursued to completion.
   (f)   Inspections. The Floodplain Administrator shall make periodic
inspections at appropriate times throughout the period of construction in order
to monitor compliance with permit conditions.
   (g)   Post-Construction Certifications Required. The following as-built
certifications are required after a floodplain development permit has been
issued:
      (1)   For new or substantially improved residential structures, or
nonresidential structures that have been elevated, the applicant shall have a
Federal Emergency Management Agency Elevation Certificate completed by a
registered professional surveyor to record as-built elevation data. For
elevated structures in Zone A and Zone AO areas without a base flood elevation,
the elevation certificate may be completed by the property owner or owner’s
representative.
      (2)   For all development activities subject to the standards of division
(j)(1) of Section
3167.03, a Letter of Map Revision.
      (3)   For new or substantially improved non-residential structures that
have been floodproofed in lieu of elevation, where allowed, the applicant shall
supply a completed Floodproofing Certificate for Non-Residential Structures
completed by a registered professional engineer or architect together with
associated documentation.
   (h)   Revoking a Floodplain Development Permit. A floodplain development
permit shall be revocable, if among other things, the actual development
activity does not conform to the terms of the application and permit granted
thereon. In the event of the revocation of a permit, an appeal may be taken to
the Appeals Board (Cleveland Board of Building Standards) in accordance with
Section
3167.05 of these regulations.
   (i)   Activities to Which this Ordinance Applies. This Chapter shall be
applicable as follows:
      (1)   Exemption from Filing a Development Permit. An application for a
floodplain development permit shall not be required for maintenance work such
as roofing, painting, and basement sealing, or for small nonstructural
development activities (except for filling and grading) valued at less than two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
      (2)   State and Federal Development. State and Federal development must
comply as follows:
         (A)   Development that is funded, financed, undertaken, or preempted
by state agencies shall comply with minimum NFIP criteria.
         (B)   Before awarding funding or financing or granting a license,
permit, or other authorization for development that is or is to be located
within a 100-year floodplain, a state agency shall require the applicant to
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the agency that the development will comply
minimum NFIP criteria and any applicable local floodplain management resolution
or ordinance as required by the RC 1521.13. This includes, but is not limited
to:
            1.   Development activities in an existing or proposed manufactured
home park that are under the authority of the Ohio Department of Commerce and
subject to the flood damage reduction provisions of the OAC Chapter 4781-12.
            2.   Major utility facilities permitted by the Ohio Power Siting
Board under RC Chapter 4906.
            3.   Hazardous waste disposal facilities permitted by the Hazardous
Waste Siting Board under RC Chapter 3734.
         (C)   Development activities undertaken by a federal agency and which
are subject to Federal Executive Order 11988 – Floodplain Management. For these
activities, each federal agency has a responsibility to evaluate the potential
effects of any actions it may take in a floodplain; to ensure that its planning
programs and budget request reflect consideration of flood hazards and
floodplain management; and to prescribe procedures to implement the policies
and requirements of EO 11988.
   (j)   Map Maintenance Activities. To meet National Flood Insurance Program
minimum requirements to have flood data reviewed and approved by FEMA, and to
ensure that the City of Cleveland flood maps, studies and other data identified
in division (f) of Section
3167.01 accurately represent flooding conditions so appropriate floodplain
management criteria are based on current data, the following map maintenance
activities are identified:
      (1)   Requirement to Submit New Technical Data.
         A.   For all development proposals that impact floodway delineations
or base flood elevations, the community shall ensure that technical data
reflecting such changes be submitted to FEMA within six (6) months of the date
such information becomes available. These development proposals include:
            1.   Floodway encroachments that increase or decrease base flood
elevations or alter floodway boundaries;
            2.   Fill sites to be used for the placement of proposed structures
where the applicant desires to remove the site from the special flood hazard
area;
            3.   Alteration of watercourses that result in a relocation or
elimination of the special flood hazard area, including the placement of
culverts; and
            4.   Subdivision or large scale development proposals requiring the
establishment of base flood elevations in accordance with division (c) of
Section
3167.04.
         B.   It is the responsibility of the applicant to have technical data,
required in accordance with division (j)(1) of Section
3167.03 prepared in a format required for a Conditional Letter of Map Revision
or Letter of Map Revision, and submitted to FEMA. Submittal and processing fees
for these map revisions shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
         C.   The Floodplain Administrator shall require a Conditional Letter
of Map Revision prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit for:
            1.   Proposed floodway encroachments that increase the base flood
elevation; and
            2.   Proposed development which increases the base flood elevation
by more than one (1) foot in riverine areas where FEMA has provided base flood
elevations but no floodway.
         D.   Floodplain development permits issued by the Floodplain
Administrator shall be conditioned upon the applicant obtaining a Letter of Map
Revision from FEMA for any development proposal subject to division (j)(1)A. of
Section
3167.03.
      (2)   Right to Submit New Technical Data. The Floodplain Administrator
may request changes to any of the information shown on an effective map that
does not impact floodplain or floodway delineations or base flood elevations,
such as labeling or planimetric details. Such a submission shall include
appropriate supporting documentation made in writing by the Mayor of the City
of Cleveland and may be submitted at any time.
      (3)   Annexation/Detachment. Upon occurrence, the Floodplain
Administrator shall notify FEMA in writing whenever the boundaries of the City
of Cleveland have been modified by annexation or the community has assumed
authority over an area, or no longer has authority to adopt and enforce
floodplain management regulations for a particular area. In order that the City
of Cleveland’s Flood Insurance Rate Map accurately represent the City of
Cleveland boundaries, include within such notification a copy of a map of the
City of Cleveland suitable for reproduction, clearly showing the new corporate
limits or the new area for which the City of Cleveland has assumed or
relinquished floodplain management regulatory authority.
   (k)   Data Use and Flood Map Interpretation. The following guidelines shall
apply to the use and interpretation of maps and other data showing areas of
special flood hazard:
      (1)   In areas where FEMA has not identified special flood hazard areas,
or in FEMA identified special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation and
floodway data have not been identified, the Floodplain Administrator shall
review and reasonably utilize any other flood hazard data available from a
federal, state, or other source.
      (2)   Base flood elevations and floodway boundaries produced on FEMA
flood maps and studies shall take precedence over base flood elevations and
floodway boundaries by any other source that reflect a reduced floodway width
and/or lower base flood elevations. Other sources of data, showing increased
base flood elevations and/or larger floodway areas than are shown on FEMA flood
maps and studies, shall be reasonably used by the Floodplain Administrator.
      (3)   Use of Preliminary Flood Insurance Rate Maps and/or Flood Insurance
Study Data:
         A.   Zone A:
            1.   Within Zone A areas designated on an effective FIRM, data from
the preliminary FIRM and/or FIS shall reasonably be utilized as best available
data.
            2.   When all appeals have been resolved and a notice of final
flood elevation determination has been provided in a Letter of Final
Determination by the FEMA, BFE and floodway data from the preliminary FIRM and/
or FIS shall be used for regulating development.
         B.   Zones AE, A1-30, AH, AO, VE, and V1-30:
            1.   BFE and floodway data from a preliminary FIS or FIRM restudy
are not required to be used in lieu of BFE and floodway data contained in an
existing effective FIS and FIRM. However,
               a.   Where BFEs increase in a restudied area, communities have a
responsibility to ensure that new or substantially improved structures are
protected. Preliminary FIS or FIRM data shall be reasonably utilized in
instances where BFEs increase and floodways are revised to ensure that the
health, safety, and property of the citizens of the City of Cleveland are
protected.
               b.   Where BFEs decrease, preliminary FIS or FIRM data should
not be used to regulate floodplain development until LFD has been issued or
until all appeals have been resolved.
            2.   If a preliminary FIRM or FIS has designated floodways where
none had previously existed, this data must be reasonably utilized in lieu of
applying the encroachment performance standard of division (i)(2) of Section
3167.04 since the data in the draft or preliminary FIS represents the best data
available.
         C.   Zones B, C, and X: Use of BFE and floodway data from a
preliminary FIRM or FIS are not required for areas designated as Zone B, C, or
X on the effective FIRM which are being revised to Zone AE, A1-30, AH, AO, VE,
or V1-30. Preliminary FIS or FIRM data must be reasonably utilized to ensure
that the health, safety, and property of the citizens of Cleveland are
protected.
      (4)   The Floodplain Administrator shall make interpretations, where
needed, as to the exact location of the flood boundaries and areas of special
flood hazard. A person contesting the determination of the location of the
boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation
as provided in Section
3167.05, Appeals and Variances.
      (5)   Where an existing or proposed structure or other development is
affected by multiple flood zones, by multiple base flood elevations, or both,
the development activity must comply with the provisions of this ordinance
applicable to the most restrictive flood zone and the highest base flood
elevation affecting any part of the existing or proposed structure; or for
other developments, affecting any part of the area of the development.
   (l)   Substantial Damage Determinations. Damages to structures may result
from a variety of causes including flood, tornado, wind, heavy snow, fire, etc.
After such a damage event, the Floodplain Administrator shall:
      (1)   Determine whether damaged structures are located in special flood
hazard areas;
      (2)   Conduct substantial damage determinations for damaged structures
located in special flood hazard areas; and
      (3)   Require owners of substantially damaged structures to obtain a
floodplain development permit prior to repair, rehabilitation, or
reconstruction. Additionally, the Floodplain Administrator may implement other
measures to assist with the substantial damage determination and subsequent
repair process. These measures include issuing press releases, public service
announcements, and other public information materials related to the floodplain
development permits and repair of damaged structures; coordinating with other
federal, state, and local agencies to assist with substantial damage
determinations; providing owners of damaged structures materials and other
information related to the proper repair of damaged structures in special flood
hazard areas; and assisting owners of substantially damaged structures with
Increased Cost of Compliance insurance claims.
(Ord. No. 857-2019. Passed 7-24-19, eff. 7-26-19)
§ 3167.04 Use and Development Standards for Flood Hazard Reduction
   The following use and development standards apply to development wholly
within, partially within, or in contact with any special flood hazard area as
established in division (f) of Section
3167.01 or divisions (k)(1) or (k)(3) of Section
3167.03.
   (a)   Use Regulations.
      (1)   Permitted Uses. All uses not otherwise prohibited in this section
or any other applicable land use regulation adopted by the City of Cleveland
are allowed provided they meet the provisions of these regulations.
   (b)   Water and Wastewater Systems. The following standards apply to all
water supply, sanitary sewerage and waste disposal systems in the absence of
any more restrictive standard provided under the Ohio Revised Code or
applicable state rules or these Codified Ordinances:
      (1)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems;
      (2)   New and replacement sanitary sewerage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and
discharge from the systems into flood waters; and
      (3)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment
to or contamination from them during flooding.
   (c)   Subdivisions and Other New Developments.
      (1)   All subdivision proposals and all other proposed new development
shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and are subject to
all applicable standards in these regulations;
      (2)   All subdivision proposals and all other proposed new development
shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and
water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage;
      (3)   All subdivision proposals and all other proposed new development
shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage; and
      (4)   In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation
data are not available, the applicant shall provide a hydrologic and hydraulic
engineering analysis that generates base flood elevations for all subdivision
proposals and other proposed developments containing at least fifty (50) lots
or five (5) acres, whichever is less.
      (5)   The applicant shall meet the requirement to submit technical data
to FEMA in division (j)(1)A.4. of Section
3167.03 when a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis is completed that generates
base flood elevations as required by division (c)(4) of this section.
   (d)   Residential Structures. The requirements of this division shall apply
to new construction of residential structures and to substantial improvements
of residential structures in zones A, A1-30, AE, AO, and AH, when designated on
the effective FIRM, and when designated on a preliminary or final FIRM issued
by FEMA under the circumstances provided in division (k)(3) of Section
3167.03.
      (1)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting
from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
Where a structure, including its foundation members, is elevated on fill to or
above the base flood elevation, the requirements for anchoring and construction
materials resistant to flood damage in anchoring in division (d)(1) and
construction materials resistant to flood damage in division (d)(2) of this
section are satisfied.
      (2)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with methods and materials resistant to flood damage.
      (3)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment
and other service facilities that are designed and/or elevated so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding.
      (4)   New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure, including manufactured homes, shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated to or above the flood protection elevation. In Zone AO areas
with no elevations specified, the structure shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, elevated at least two (2) feet above the highest adjacent
natural grade.
      (5)   New construction and substantial improvements, including
manufactured homes, that do not have basements and that are elevated to the
flood protection elevation using pilings, columns, posts, or solid foundation
perimeter walls with openings to allow the automatic equalization of
hydrostatic pressure may have an enclosure below the lowest floor provided the
enclosure meets the following standards:
         A.   Be used only for the parking of vehicles, building access, or
storage; and
         B.   Be designed and certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters; or
         C.   Have a minimum of two (2) openings on different walls having a
total net area not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of
enclosed area, and the bottom of all such openings being no higher than one (1)
foot above grade. The openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
      (6)   Manufactured homes shall be affixed to a permanent foundation and
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of
over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.
      (7)   Repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a
determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure’s continued designation as a historic structure and is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure, shall
be exempt from the development standards of this section.
      (8)   In AO Zones and/or AH Zones, new construction and substantial
improvement shall have adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to
guide floodwaters around and away from the structure.
   (e)   Nonresidential Structures. The requirements of this division shall
apply to new construction and to substantial improvements of nonresidential
structures in zones A, A1-30, AE, AO, and AH, when designated on the FIRM, and
when designated on a preliminary or final FIRM issued by FEMA under the
circumstances provided in division (k)(3) of Section
3167.03.
      (1)   New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall meet the requirements of
division (d)(1), (d)(2), (d)(3), (d)(5), (d)(6), and (d)(7) of this section.
      (2)   New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other non-residential structure shall either have the lowest
floor, including basement, elevated to or above the level of the flood
protection elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, shall meet all of the following standards:
         A.   Be dry floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water to the level of the
flood protection elevation;
         B.   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
         C.   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect,
through the use of a Federal Emergency Management Agency Floodproofing
Certificate, that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
division (e)(2)A. and (e)(2)B.
      (3)   In Zone AO areas with no elevations specified, the structure shall
have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at least two (2) feet above
the highest adjacent natural grade.
   (f)   Accessory Structures. Structures that are six hundred (600) square
feet or less which are used for parking and storage only are exempt from
elevation or dry floodproofing standards within zones A, A1-30, AE, AO, and AH
designated on the FIRM. Such structures must meet the following standards:
      (1)   They shall not be used for human habitation;
      (2)   They shall be constructed of flood resistant materials;
      (3)   They shall be constructed and placed on the lot to offer the
minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters;
      (4)   They shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation;
      (5)   Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall
be elevated or floodproofed to or above the level of the flood protection
elevation; and
      (6)   They shall meet the opening requirements of division (d)(5)C. of
this section;
   (g)   Recreational Vehicles. Recreational vehicles on sites within zones A,
A1-A30, AE, AO, or AH must meet at least one (1) of the following standards:
      (1)   They shall not be located on sites in special flood hazard areas
for more than one hundred eighty (180) days; or
      (2)   They must be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
      (3)   They must be placed on the site pursuant to a floodplain
development permit issued under divisions (c) and (d) of Section
3167.03 and meet all standards in division (d) of this section.
   (h)   Gas or Liquid Storage Tanks.
      (1)   Within zone A, A1-30, AE, AO, or AH, new or substantially improved
above ground gas or liquid storage tanks shall be anchored to prevent flotation
or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads.
      (2)   In zones V or VE, new or substantially improved above ground gas or
liquid storage tanks shall be elevated with the bottom of the lowest horizontal
supporting member above BFE on the landward side of buildings.
      (3)   In zones V or VE, new or substantially improved underground gas or
liquid storage tanks must be installed below the lowest eroded ground
elevation.
   (i)   Assurance of Flood Carrying Capacity. Pursuant to the purpose and
methods of reducing flood damage stated in these regulations, the following
additional standards are adopted to assure that the reduction of the flood
carrying capacity of watercourses is minimized:
      (1)   Development in Floodways.
         A.   In floodway areas, development shall cause no increase in flood
levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. Prior to issuance of
a floodplain development permit, the applicant must submit a hydrologic and
hydraulic analysis, conducted by a registered professional engineer,
demonstrating that the proposed development would not result in any increase in
the base flood elevation; or
         B.   Development in floodway areas causing increases in the base flood
elevation may be permitted provided all of the following are completed by the
applicant:
            1.   Meet the requirements to submit technical data in division (j)
(1) of Section
3167.03;
            2.   An evaluation of alternatives, which would not result in
increased base flood elevations and an explanation why these alternatives are
not feasible;
            3.   Certification that no structures are located in areas that
would be impacted by the increased base flood elevation;
            4.   Documentation of individual legal notices to all impacted
property owners within and outside the community, explaining the impact of the
proposed action on their property; and
            5.   Concurrence of the Mayor of Cleveland and the Chief Executive
Officer of any other communities impacted by the proposed actions.
      (2)   Development in Riverine Areas with Base Flood Elevations but No
Floodways.
         A.   In riverine special flood hazard areas identified by FEMA where
base flood elevation data are provided but no floodways have been designated,
the cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the base flood
elevation more than one (1.0) foot at any point. Prior to issuance of a
floodplain development permit, the applicant must submit a hydrologic and
hydraulic analysis, conducted by a registered professional engineer,
demonstrating that this standard has been met; or
         B.   Development in riverine special flood hazard areas identified by
FEMA where base flood elevation data are provided but no floodways have been
designated causing more than one (1) foot increase in the base flood elevation
may be permitted provided all of the following are completed by the applicant:
            1.   An evaluation of alternatives which would result in an
increase of one (1) foot or less of the base flood elevation and an explanation
why these alternatives are not feasible;
            2.   Divisions (a)(1)B.1., (a)(1)B.3, (a)(1)B.4., and (a)(1)B.5. of
Section
3167.04.
      (3)   Alterations of a Watercourse. For the purpose of these regulations,
a watercourse is altered when any change occurs within its banks. The extent of
the banks shall be established by a field determination of the “bankfull
stage.” The field determination of “bankfull stage” shall be based on methods
presented in Chapter 7 of the USDA Forest Service General Technical Report RM-
245, Stream Channel Reference Sites: An Illustrated Guide to Field Technique or
other applicable publication available from a Federal, State, or other
authoritative source. For all proposed developments that alter a watercourse,
the following standards apply:
         A.   The bankfull flood carrying capacity of the altered or relocated
portion of the watercourse shall not be diminished. Prior to the issuance of a
floodplain development permit, the applicant must submit a description of the
extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the
proposed development, and certification by a registered professional engineer
that the bankfull flood carrying capacity of the watercourse will not be
diminished;
         B.   Adjacent communities, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and the
Ohio Department of Natural Resources, Division of Water, must be notified prior
to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse. Evidence of such notification
must be submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency;
         C.   The applicant shall be responsible for providing the necessary
maintenance for the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that
the flood carrying capacity will not be diminished. The Floodplain
Administrator may require the permit holder to enter into an agreement with the
City of Cleveland specifying the maintenance responsibilities. If an agreement
is required, it shall be made a condition of the floodplain development permit;
         D.   The applicant shall meet the requirements to submit technical
data in division (j)(1)A.3. of Section
3167.03 when an alteration of a watercourse results in the relocation or
elimination of the special flood hazard area, including the placement of
culverts.
   (j)   Development Standards for Coastal High Hazard Areas and Moderate Wave
Action ("MoWa") Areas. The requirements of division (j) apply to development in
coastal high hazard areas designated zone V or VE on the effective FIRM and
when designated on a preliminary or final FIRM issued by FEMA under the
circumstances provided in division (k)(3) of Section
3167.03. The requirements of division (j) also apply to development in Moderate
Wave Action areas, within zone AE between a Limit of Moderate Wave Action and
the landward limit of zone V or VE designated on the effective FIRM, or between
a Limit of Moderate Wave Action and the offshore limit of the City of
Cleveland's jurisdiction where zone V or VE is not designated on the effective
FIRM.
      (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be elevated
on pilings or columns that may be armored as necessary to withstand Lake Erie
ice forces so that:
         A.   The bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member supporting
the lowest floor (excluding the pilings or columns) is elevated to or above the
flood protection elevation, and
         B.   The pile or column foundation and structure attached thereto is
anchored to resist floatation, collapse and lateral movement due to the effects
of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components.
            1.   Water loading values shall be those associated with the base
flood.
            2.   Wind loading values shall be those defined according to the
American Society of Civil Engineers 7-13 Minimum Design loads and associated
criteria for buildings and other structures, or the current version adopted by
the Ohio Board of Building Standards.
            3.   A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop
or review the structural design, specifications and plans for the construction,
and shall certify that the design and methods of construction to be used are in
accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of
divisions (j)(2) and (j)(3).
      (2)    All new construction and substantial improvements shall have the
space below the lowest floor either free of obstruction or constructed with
non-supporting breakaway walls, open wood lattice-work, or insect screening
intended to collapse without causing collapse, displacement, or other
structural damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting
foundation system.
         A.   For the purpose of division (j)(2), a breakaway wall shall have a
design safe loading resistance of not less than 10 and no more than 20 pounds
per square foot.
         B.   Use of breakaway walls which exceed a design safe loading
resistance of 20 pounds per square foot (either by design or where so required
by these Codified Ordinances or state codes) may be permitted only if a
registered professional engineer or architect certifies that the designs
proposed meet all of the following conditions:
            1.   Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load less
than that which would occur during the base flood; and
            2.   The elevated portion of the building and supporting foundation
system shall not be subject to collapse, displacement, or other structural
damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all
building components (structural and non-structural). Water loading values shall
be those associated with the based flood. Wind loading values shall be those
defined according to the American Society of Civil Engineers 7-16 Minimum
design loads and associated criteria for buildings and other structures, or
equivalent standard.
            3.   All space enclosed by breakaway walls, open wood lattice-work,
or insect screening below the lowest floor shall be used solely for parking of
vehicles, building access, or storage.
      (3)   The use of fill or redistributed existing fill, placed after the
intial identification of Zones V, VE or V1-30 on the FIRM, for structural
support of buildings is prohibited.
      (4)   Alteration of sand dunes that will increase potential flood damage
is prohibited.
      (5)   Placement or substantial improvement of manufactured homes must
comply with divisions (j)(1) through (j)(5).
      (6)   Recreational vehicles must either:
         A.   Be on site for few than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive
days;
         B.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
         C.   Comply with divisions (j)(1) through (j)(5).
(Ord. No. 857-2019. Passed 7-24-19, eff. 7-26-19)
§ 3167.05 Appeals Board Established
   (a)   The Board of Building Standards and Buildings Appeals as established
by the Charter shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from
the requirements of this chapter.
   (b)   Powers and Duties.
      (1)   The Appeals Board shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged
there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by
the Floodplain Administrator in the administration or enforcement of these
regulations.
      (2)   Authorize variances in accordance with division (d) of this section
of these regulations.
   (c)   Appeals. Any person affected by any notice and order, or other
official action of the Floodplain Administrator may request and shall be
granted a hearing on the matter before the Appeals Board provided that such
person shall file, within thirty (30) days of the date of such notice and
order, or other official action, a brief statement of the grounds for such
hearing or for the mitigation of any item appearing on any order of the
Floodplain Administrator’s decision. Such appeal shall be in writing, signed by
the applicant, and be filed with the Floodplain Administrator. Upon receipt of
the appeal, the Floodplain Administrator shall transmit said notice and all
pertinent information on which the Floodplain Administrator’s decision was made
to the Appeals Board.
   Upon receipt of the notice of appeal, the Appeals Board shall fix a
reasonable time for the appeal, give notice in writing to parties in interest,
and decide the appeal within a reasonable time after it is submitted.
   (d)   Variances. Any person believing that the use and development standards
of these regulations would result in unnecessary hardship may file an
application for a variance. The Appeals Board shall have the power to
authorize, in specific cases, such variances from the standards of these
regulations, not inconsistent with Federal regulations, as will not be contrary
to the public interest where, owning to special conditions of the lot or
parcel, a literal enforcement of the provisions of these regulations would
result in unnecessary hardship.
      (1)   Application for a Variance.
         A.   Any owner, or agent thereof, of property for which a variance is
sought shall make an application for a variance by filing it with the
Floodplain Administrator, who upon receipt of the variance shall transmit it to
the Appeals Board.
         B.   Such application at a minimum shall contain the following
information: Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant; legal
description of the property; parcel map; description of the existing use;
description of the proposed use; location of the floodplain; description of the
variance sought; and reason for the variance request.
         C.   All application for a variance shall be accompanied by a Variance
Application Fee set in accordance with Section
329.05.
      (2)   Notice for Public Hearing. The Appeals Board shall schedule and
hold a public hearing within thirty (30) days after the receipt of an
application for a variance from the Floodplain Administrator. Prior to the
hearing, a notice of such hearing shall be given in one (1) or more newspapers
of general circulation in the community at least ten (10) days before the date
of the hearing.
      (3)   Public Hearing. At such hearing the applicant shall present such
statements and evidence as the Appeals Board requires. In considering such
variance applications, the Appeals Board shall consider and make findings of
fact on all evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other
sections of these regulations and the following factors:
         A.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
         B.   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
         C.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
         D.   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility
to the community;
         E.   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
that are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
         F.   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
         G.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
         H.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program for that area;
         I.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
         J.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site;
         K.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and
bridges. Variances shall only be issued upon:
         L.   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         M.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship due to the physical characteristics of the property.
Increased cost or inconvenience of meeting the requirements of these
regulations does not constitute an exceptional hardship to the applicant;
         N.   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights beyond that which is allowed in these regulations;
additional threats to public safety; extraordinary public expense, nuisances,
fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws.
         O.   A determination that the structure or other development is
protected by methods to minimize flood damages;
         P.   A determination that the variance is the minimum necessary,
considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
      Upon consideration of the above factors and the purposes of these
regulations, the Appeals Board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances, as it deems necessary to further the purposes of these regulations.
      (4)   Other Conditions for Variances.
         A.   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if
any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
         B.   Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, providing items in division (d)(3) of
Section
3167.05 have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half
(1/2) acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance
increases.
         C.   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given
written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and the cost of flood insurance
will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest
floor elevation.
   (e)   Procedure at Hearings.
      (1)   All testimony shall be given under oath.
      (2)   A complete record of the proceedings shall be kept, except
confidential deliberations of the Board, but including all documents presented
and a verbatim record of the testimony of all witnesses.
      (3)   The applicant shall proceed first to present evidence and testimony
in support of the appeal or variance.
      (4)   The administrator may present evidence or testimony in opposition
to the appeal or variance.
      (5)   All witnesses shall be subject to cross- examination by the adverse
party or their counsel.
      (6)   Evidence that is not admitted may be proffered and shall become
part of the record for appeal.
      (7)   The Board shall issue subpoenas upon written request for the
attendance of witnesses. A reasonable deposit to cover the cost of issuance and
service shall be collected in advance.
      (8)   The Board shall prepare conclusions of fact supporting its
decision. The decision may be announced at the conclusion of the hearing and
thereafter issued in writing or the decision may be issued in writing within a
reasonable time after the hearing.
   (f)   Appeal to the Court. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Appeals
Board may appeal such decision to the Cuyahoga County Court of Common Pleas, as
provided in RC Chapter 2506.
(Ord. No. 857-2019. Passed 7-24-19, eff. 7-26-19)
§ 3167.06 Enforcement
   (a)   Compliance Required.
      (1)   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, erected,
constructed, reconstructed, repaired, extended, converted, enlarged or altered
without full compliance with the terms of these regulations and all other
applicable regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of these
regulations, unless specifically exempted from filing for a development permit
as stated in division (i) of Section
3167.03.
      (2)   Failure to obtain a floodplain development permit shall be a
violation of these regulations and shall be punishable in accordance with
Section
3167.99.
      (3)   Floodplain development permits issued on the basis of plans and
applications approved by the Floodplain Administrator authorize only the use,
and arrangement, set forth in such approved plans and applications or
amendments thereto. Use, arrangement, or construction contrary to that
authorized shall be deemed a violation of these regulations and punishable in
accordance with Section
3167.99.
   (b)   Notice of Violation. Whenever the Floodplain Administrator determines
that there has been a violation of any provision of these regulations, he or
she shall give notice of such violation to the person responsible therefore and
order compliance with these regulations as hereinafter provided. Such notice
and order shall:
      (1)   Be put in writing on an appropriate form;
      (2)   Include a list of violations, referring to the section or sections
of these regulations that have been violated, and order remedial action, which,
if taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of these regulations;
      (3)   Specify a reasonable time for performance;
      (4)   Advise the owner, operator, or occupant of the right to appeal;
      (5)   Be served on the owner, occupant, or agent in person. However, this
notice and order shall be deemed to be properly served upon the owner,
occupant, or agent if a copy thereof is sent by registered or certified mail to
the person’s last known mailing address, residence, or place of business, and/
or a copy is posted in a conspicuous place in or on the dwelling affected.
(Ord. No. 1613-10. Passed 11-29-10, eff. 11-29-10)
§ 3167.99 Violations and Penalties
   Violation of the provisions of these regulations or failure to comply with
any of its requirements shall be deemed to be a strict liability offense, and
shall constitute a first degree misdemeanor. Any person who violates these
regulations or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon
conviction thereof be fined or imprisoned as provided by the laws of the city
of Cleveland. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Cleveland from
taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation. The City of Cleveland shall prosecute any violation of these
regulations in accordance with the penalties stated herein.
(Ord. No. 857-2019. Passed 7-24-19, eff. 7-26-19)
CHAPTER 3169 – MANUFACTURED HOMES
3169.01   Definition
3169.02   Standards
3169.03   Manufactured Homes
3169.04   Permitted Placement
Cross-reference:
   Flood hazard reduction standards, CO
3167.05
Statutory reference:
   Manufactured home parks, RC Ch. 3733; OAC Ch. 3701-27
§ 3169.01 Definition
   For purposes of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
   “Manufactured home” means a structure erected on-site, a mobile home or
mobile structure, a pre- manufactured or pre-cut structure, above or below
ground, designed primarily for the shelter, support or enclosure of persons or
property of any kind which dwelling unit was fabricated on or after June 15,
1976, in an off-site manufacturing facility for installation or assembly at the
building site and which complies with the standards set forth in this chapter
which shall be larger than nine hundred fifty (950) square feet of occupied
space and which is designed to be used as a year-round residential dwelling.
(Ord. No. 827-85. Passed 6-24-85, eff. 7-1-85)
§ 3169.02 Standards
   (a)   A manufactured home shall contain not more than one (1) dwelling unit
designed for residential use and shall comply with the following standards.
      (1)   It complies with the minimum square footage requirements of Title
Seven, Zoning Code, for the use district in which it is located.
      (2)   It has a minimum width of twenty-three (23) feet and complies in
all respects with the Building Code including minimum heights for habitable
rooms. Where a dwelling unit is required by law to comply with any State
standards or regulations for construction and where such standards or
regulations for construction are different than those imposed by the Building
Code, then and in that event, such State standard or regulation shall apply.
      (3)   It is firmly attached to a permanent foundation constructed on the
site in accordance with the Building Code and shall have a wall of the same
perimeter dimensions of the dwelling and constructed of such material and type
as required in the Building Code for single-family dwellings.
      (4)   No dwelling unit shall have any exposed towing mechanism,
undercarriage or chassis.
      (5)   The manufactured home is connected to a public sewer and water
supply or to such private facilities as may be approved by the Department of
Health.
      (6)   The manufactured home contains a storage capability area in a
basement located under the dwelling, in an attic area, in closet areas, or in a
separate structure of standard construction similar to or of better quality
than the principal dwelling, which storage area shall be equal to ten percent
(10%) of the square footage of the dwelling or one hundred (100) square feet,
whichever shall be less.
      (7)   The manufactured home is aesthetically compatible in design and
appearance with other residences in the vicinity, with either a roof overhang
of not less than six (6) inches on all sides, or alternatively, with window
sills or roof drainage systems concentrating roof drainage at collection points
along the sides of the dwelling, has not less than two (2) exterior doors with
the second one (1) being in either the rear or side of the dwelling; and
contains steps connected to such exterior door areas or to porches connected to
such door areas where a difference in elevation requires the same.
      The compatibility of design and appearance shall be determined in the
first instance by the Chief Building Official, a Staff Engineer and the
Supervisor of Plan Examination in the Division of Building and Housing upon
review of the plans submitted for a particular dwelling subject to appeal by an
aggrieved party to the Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals within
a period of fifteen (15) days from the receipt of notice of such Division of
Building and Housing’s decision. Any determination of compatibility shall be
based upon the standards set forth in this definition of “dwelling” as well as
the character, design and appearance of one (1) or more residential dwellings
located outside of mobile home parks within two thousand (2,000) feet of the
subject dwelling where such area is developed with dwellings to the extent of
not less than twenty percent (20%) of the lots situated within such area; or,
where such area is not so developed, by the character, design and appearance of
one (1) or more residential dwellings located outside of mobile home parks
throughout the City of Cleveland. The foregoing shall not be construed to
prohibit innovative design concepts involving such matters as solar energy,
view, unique land contour, or relief from the common or standard designed home.
      (8)   The manufactured home contains no additions or rooms or other areas
which are not constructed with similar quality or workmanship as the original
structure, including permanent attachment to the principal structure and
construction of a foundation as required herein.
      (9)   The manufactured home and all plumbing, electrical apparatus,
heating and insulation within and connected to said manufactured home complies
with the City of Cleveland Building Code and Fire Prevention Code and all
construction meets or exceeds the building snow load and wind load strength
requirements of the City of Cleveland Building Code.
      (10)   The foregoing standards shall not apply to a manufactured home
located in a licensed manufactured home park except to the extent required by
State or Federal law or otherwise specifically required in Title Seven, Zoning
Code, pertaining to such parks.
      (11)   All construction required herein shall be commenced only after a
building permit has been obtained in accordance with all Building Code
provisions and requirements.
      (12)   Further, such manufactured home shall first have obtained a
product approval of such dwelling unit pursuant to Section
3103.18(f) of this Building Code that the manufactured home meets the standards
set forth herein, except for subparagraph (7), above.
      (13)   That such manufactured home shall also have affixed a HUD approval
plate from the manufacturer.
(Ord. No. 827-85. Passed 6-24-85, eff. 7-1-85)
§ 3169.03 Manufactured Homes
   Manufactured homes which do not conform to the standards of Section
3169.02 shall not be used for dwelling purposes within the City of Cleveland
unless located within a manufactured home park or a manufactured home plat
zoned for such uses.
(Ord. No. 827-85. Passed 6-24-85, eff. 7-1-85)
§ 3169.04 Permitted Placement
   The establishment, location and use of manufactured homes as scattered-site
residences shall be permitted in any zone permitting installation of such
dwelling unit subject to requirements and limitations applying generally to
such residential use in the use district, and provided such homes shall meet
the requirements and limitations set forth in the foregoing sections.
(Ord. No. 827-85. Passed 6-24-85, eff. 7-1-85)
PART FOUR: TRAFFIC CODE
Title I: Administration
   Chapter
401   Definitions
   Chapter
403   Enforcement, Compliance and Penalty
   Chapter
405   Impounding
Title III: Streets and Traffic Control Devices
   Chapter
411   Street Obstructions and Special Uses
   Chapter
413   Traffic Control Devices
Title V: Vehicles
   Chapter
431   Operation Generally
   Chapter
433   Intoxication; Reckless Operation; Speed
   Chapter
435   Licensing and Accidents
   Chapter
437   Safety and Equipment
   Chapter
439   Commercial and Heavy Vehicles
   Chapter
441   Motor Buses – Repealed
   Chapter
443   Taxicabs
   Chapter
445   Sight-Seeing Cars
   Chapter
447   Carriages
   Chapter
449   Snowmobiles, Off-Highway Motorcycles, and All-Purpose Vehicles
   Chapter
450   Under-Speed Vehicles (Including Non-Modified Golf Carts)
Title VII: Parking
   Chapter
451   Parking Generally
   Chapter
453   Street Parking Meters
   Chapter
455   Municipal Parking Facilities
   Chapter
457   Public Garages and Parking Lots
   Chapter
459   Parking Infractions and Parking Violations Bureau
   Chapter
461   Residential Permit Parking Program
   Chapter
463   Valet Services
Title IX: Pedestrians, Bicycles and Motorcycles
   Chapter
471   Pedestrians
   Chapter
473   Bicycles, Motorcycles, Mobility Devices
Title XI: Water Traffic Code
   Chapter
481   Definitions, Enforcement, Compliance and Penalty
   Chapter
483   General Provisions
   Chapter
485   Watercraft Operation
   Chapter
487   Equipment
Title XIII: Helicopters and Other Aircraft
   Chapter
489   Helicopters
   Chapter
490   Unmanned Aircraft Systems
TITLE I: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
401   Definitions
   Chapter
403   Enforcement, Compliance and Penalty
   Chapter
405   Impounding
CHAPTER 401 – DEFINITIONS
401.01   Meaning of Words and Phrases
401.02   Agricultural Tractor
401.03   Alley
401.031   Arterial Street
401.04   Automatically Operated Gate
401.041   Beacon
401.05   Bicycle
401.06   Bus
401.07   Business District
401.08   Center or Center Line of Street
401.081   Child Day-Care Center and Type A Family Day-Care Home
401.09   Coach
401.10   Commercial Car or Truck
401.101   Commercial Motor Vehicle
401.11   Commercial Tractor
401.12   Commercial Unit
401.13   Controlled-Access Highway
401.14   Crosswalk
401.15   Driver or Operator
401.151   Electric Personal Assistive Mobility Device
401.152   E-Bike
401.153   E-Scooter
401.16   Emergency Vehicle
401.161   Explosives
401.17   Expressway
401.171   Flammable Liquid
401.18   Freeway
401.19   Funeral Escort Vehicle
401.20   Gross Weight
401.201   Highway Maintenance Vehicle
401.202   Highway Traffic Signal
401.21   Intersection
401.22   Laned Street or Highway
401.23   Median
401.231   Mobility Device
401.24   Motor Carrier
401.25   Motor Vehicle
401.26   Motorcycle
401.261   Motorized Bicycle or Moped
401.262   Motorized Wheelchair
401.263   Multi-Wheel Agricultural Tractor
401.27   Municipal Parking Facility
401.28   Municipal Parking Facility Drive
401.29   Net Weight
401.291   Operate
401.30   Operate for Hire
401.31   Park or Parking
401.32   Parking Key or Parking Card
401.33   Parking Meter
401.331   Parking Meter Zone
401.34   Parking Place
401.35   Parking Space
401.36   Parking Token
401.37   Pedestrian
401.371   Pedestrian Way
401.38   Person
401.39   Pole Trailer
401.40   Police Officer
401.401   Predicate Motor Vehicle or Traffic Offense
401.402   Private Road Open to Public Travel
401.41   Private Road or Driveway
401.42   Public Hack
401.43   Public Safety Vehicle
401.44   Railroad
401.45   Railroad Sign or Signal
401.46   Railroad Train
401.47   Receiving Station
401.48   Residence District
401.481   Ridesharing Arrangement
401.49   Right-of-Way
401.491   Road Service Vehicle
401.50   Roadway
401.501   Rollerskates
401.51   Safety Zone
401.52   School Bus
401.53   Semitrailer
401.531   Shared-Use Path
401.54   Sidewalk
401.55   Sight-Seeing Car
401.551   Skateboard
401.56   Standing
401.561   State Highway
401.57   State Route
401.58   Stop (When Required)
401.59   Stop or Stopping (When Prohibited)
401.60   Stop Intersection
401.61   Street or Highway
401.62   Taxicab
401.63   Taximeter
401.64   Through Street or Highway
401.65   Thruway
401.66   Traffic
401.67   Traffic Control Device
401.68   Traffic Control Signal
401.69   Trailer
401.70   Truck
401.71   Truck Zone
401.711   Under-Speed Vehicle
401.72   Urban District
401.73   Vehicle
Cross-reference:
   Blind person defined, CO
471.02
   Funeral procession defined, CO
431.24
   Junk vehicle defined, CO
451.27
   Sign defined, CO
457.04
   Street racing, stunt driving and street takeover defined, CO
433.07
   Studded tire defined, CO
439.14
   Tow truck defined, CO
405.10
Statutory reference:
   See sectional histories for similar State law
§ 401.01 Meaning of Words and Phrases
   The following words and phrases when used in this Traffic Code, except as
otherwise provided, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in
this chapter.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 401.02 Agricultural Tractor
   “Agricultural tractor” means every self-propelling vehicle designed or used
for drawing other vehicles or wheeled machinery, but having no provision for
carrying loads independently of such other vehicles, and used principally for
agricultural purposes.
(RC 4511.01(J); Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 401.03 Alley
   “Alley” means a street or highway intended to provide access to the rear or
side of lots or buildings in urban districts and not intended for the purpose
of through vehicular traffic, and includes any street or highway that is less
than thirty (30) feet wide between property lines, or that has been declared an
“alley” by the legislative authority of the municipal corporation in which the
street or highway is located.
(RC 4511.01(XX); Ord. No. 188-16. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 401.031 Arterial Street
   “Arterial street” means any United States or state numbered route,
controlled access highway, or other major radial or circumferential street or
highway designated by local authorities within their respective jurisdictions
as part of a major arterial system of streets or highways.
(RC 4511.01(CCC); Ord. No. 188-16. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 401.04 Automatically Operated Gate
   “Automatically operated gate” means any mechanical device placed or erected
within a Municipal parking facility, as defined in section 401.27, for the
regulation of parking, so designed that a gate across the exit or entrance of
such parking facility automatically raises to allow a single vehicle to be
moved through the exit or entrance upon the deposit in such gate of coins or
parking tokens, or upon the insertion in such gate of a parking key or parking
card, as indicated on the automatically operated gate.
(Ord. No. 188-16. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 401.041 Beacon
   “Beacon” means a highway traffic signal with one (1) or more signal sections
that operate in a flashing mode.
(RC 4511.01(KKK); Ord. No. 188-16. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 401.05 Bicycle
   “Bicycle” means every device, other than a device that is designed solely
for use as a play vehicle by a child, that is propelled solely by human power
upon which a person may ride, and that has two (2) or more wheels, any of which
is more than fourteen (14) inches in diameter.
(RC 4511.01(G); Ord. No. 188-16. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 401.06 Bus
   “Bus” means every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than nine (9)
passengers and used for the transportation of persons other than in a
ridesharing arrangement, as defined in section 401.481, and every motor
vehicle, automobile for hire, or funeral car, other than a taxicab or motor
vehicle used in a ridesharing arrangement, designed and used for the
transportation of persons for compensation.
(RC 4511.01(L); Ord. No. 188-16. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 401.07 Business District
   “Business district” means the territory fronting upon a street or highway,
including the street or highway, between successive intersections within
municipal corporations where fifty percent (50%) or more of the frontage
between such successive intersections is occupied by buildings in use for
business, or within or outside municipal corporations where fifty percent (50%)
or more of the frontage for a distance of three hundred (300) feet or more is
occupied by buildings in use for business, and the character of such territory
is indicated by official traffic control devices.
(RC 4511.01(NN); Ord. No. 188-16. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 401.08 Center or Center Line of Street
   “Center or center line of street” means the exact center of the improved
portion of the roadway, or that line designated and marked by traffic control
devices for the purpose of dividing traffic moving in opposite directions into
right and left sides of the roadway.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 401.081 Child Day-Care Center and Type A Family Day-Care Home
   “Child day-care center” and “type A family day-care home” have the same
meanings as in RC 5104.01.
(RC 4511.01(FFF); Ord. No. 188-16. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 401.09 Coach
   “Coach” means a public hack so designed and constructed to comfortably seat
four (4) or more persons inside thereof, in the opinion of the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 401.10 Commercial Car or Truck
   “Commercial car” or “truck” means any motor vehicle that has motor power and
is designed and used for carrying merchandise or freight, or that is used as a
commercial tractor.
(RC 4501.01(J); Ord. No. 188-16. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 401.101 Commercial Motor Vehicle
   “Commercial motor vehicle” means any motor vehicle designed or used to
transport persons or property that meets any of the following qualifications:
   (a)   Any combination of vehicles with a gross vehicle weight or combined
gross vehicle weight rating of twenty-six thousand one (26,001) pounds or more,
provided the gross vehicle weight or gross vehicle weight rating of the vehicle
or vehicles being towed is in excess of ten thousand (10,000) pounds;
   (b)   Any single vehicle with a gross vehicle weight or gross vehicle weight
rating of twenty-six thousand one (26,001) pounds or more;
   (c)   Any single vehicle or combination of vehicles that is not a class A or
class B vehicle, but is designed to transport sixteen (16) or more passengers
including the driver;
   (d)   Any school bus with a gross vehicle weight or gross vehicle weight
rating of less than twenty-six thousand one (26,001) pounds that is designed to
transport fewer than sixteen (16) passengers including the driver;
   (e)   Is transporting hazardous materials for which placarding required
under subpart F of 49 C.F.R. part 172, as amended;
   (f)   Any single vehicle or combination of vehicles that is designed to be
operated and to travel on a public street or highway and is considered by the
federal motor carrier safety administration to be a commercial motor vehicle,
including, but not limited to, a motorized crane, a vehicle whose function is
to pump cement, a rig for drilling wells, and a portable crane.
(RC 4506.01(D); Ord. No. 188-16. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 401.11 Commercial Tractor
   “Commercial tractor” means every motor vehicle having motive power designed
or used for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry any load
thereon, or designed or used for drawing other vehicles while carrying a
portion of such other vehicles, or the load thereon, or both.
(RC 4511.01(I); Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 401.12 Commercial Unit
   “Commercial unit” means any commercial tractor, truck, trailer, semitrailer,
pole trailer or commercial car; or any other combination of these vehicles,
when a commercial tractor, truck or commercial car is actually connected to one
(1) or more trailers, semitrailers, or pole trailers for the purpose of drawing
such vehicles.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 401.13 Controlled-Access Highway
   “Controlled-access highway” means every street or highway in respect to
which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal
right of access to or from the same, except at such points only and in such
manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over
such street or highway.
(RC 4511.01(CC); Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 401.14 Crosswalk
   “Crosswalk” means:
   (a)   That part of a roadway at intersections ordinarily included within the
real or projected prolongation of property lines and curb lines or, in the
absence of curbs, the edges of the traversable roadway;
   (b)   Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere, distinctly
indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface;
   (c)   Notwithstanding divisions (a) and (b) of this section, there shall not
be a crosswalk where local authorities have placed signs indicating no
crossing.
(RC 4511.01(LL); Ord. No. 188-16. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 401.15 Driver or Operator
   “Driver” or “operator” means every person who drives or is in actual
physical control of a vehicle, trackless trolley, or streetcar.
(RC 4511.01(Y); Ord. No. 835-03. Passed 6-10-03, eff. 6-12-03)
§ 401.151 Electric Personal Assistive Mobility Device
   “Electric personal assistive mobility device” means a self-balancing two (2)
non-tandem wheeled device that is designed to transport only one (1) person,
has an electric propulsion system of an average of seven hundred fifty (750)
watts, and when ridden on a paved level surface by an operator who weighs one
hundred seventy (170) pounds has a maximum speed of less than twenty (20) miles
per hour.
(RC 4501.01(TT); Ord. No. 188-16. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 401.152 E-Bike
   E-Bike or "electric bicycle" is a two (2) wheeled device that has
handlebars, a seat, and pedals designed to be operated similar to a bicycle,
and is powered by electricity. E-Bike or "electric bicycle" means a "class 1
electric bicycle", a "class 2 electric bicycle", or a "class 3 electric
bicycle" and is further defined as follows:
   (a)   "Class 1 electric bicycle" means a bicycle that is equipped with fully
operable pedals and an electric motor of less than seven hundred fifty (750)
watts that provides assistance only when the rider is pedaling and ceases to
provide assistance when the bicycle reaches the speed of twenty (20) miles per
hour. (RC 4511.01(SSS))
   (b)   "Class 2 electric bicycle" means a bicycle that is equipped with fully
operable pedals and an electric motor of less than seven hundred fifty (750)
watts that may provide assistance regardless of whether the rider is pedaling
and is not capable of providing assistance when the bicycle reaches the speed
of twenty (20) miles per hour. (RC 4511.01(TTT))
   (c)   "Class 3 electric bicycle" means a bicycle that is equipped with fully
operable pedals and an electric motor of less than seven hundred fifty (750)
watts that provides assistance only when the rider is pedaling and ceases to
provide assistance when the bicycle reaches the speed of twenty-eight (28)
miles per hour. (RC 4511.01(UUU))
(Ord. No. 464-2019. Passed 6-3-19, eff. 7-5-197-5-19; Am. Ord. No. 396-2020.
Passed 6-3-20, eff. 6-9-20)
§ 401.153 E-Scooter
   "E-Scooter" means a two (2) wheeled device that has handlebars, a floor
board, designed to be stood upon when operating and is powered by electricity.
The electricity is stored on board in a rechargeable battery.
(Ord. No. 464-2019. Passed 6-3-19, eff. 7-5-19; Am. Ord. No. 396-2020. Passed
6-3-20, eff. 6-9-20)
§ 401.16 Emergency Vehicle
   “Emergency vehicle” means emergency vehicles of municipal, township or
county departments or public utility corporations when identified as such as
required by law, the Ohio Director of Public Safety, or local authorities, and
motor vehicles when commandeered by a police officer.
(RC 4511.01(D); Ord. No. 91-96. Passed 3-18-96, eff. 3-26-96)
§ 401.161 Explosives
   “Explosives” means any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is
intended for the purpose of producing an explosion that contains any oxidizing
and combustible units or other ingredients in such proportions, quantities, or
packing that an ignition by fire, by friction, by concussion, by percussion, or
by a detonator of any part of the compound or mixture may cause such a sudden
generation of highly heated gases that the resultant gaseous pressures are
capable of producing destructive effects on contiguous objects, or of
destroying life or limb. Manufactured articles shall not be held to be
explosives when the individual units contain explosives in such limited
quantities, of such nature, or in such packing, that it is impossible to
procure a simultaneous or a destructive explosion of such units, to the injury
of life, limb, or property by fire, by friction, by concussion, by percussion,
or by a detonator, such as fixed ammunition for small arms, firecrackers, or
safety fuse matches.
(RC 4511.01(T); Ord. No. 188-16. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 401.17 Expressway
   “Expressway” means a divided arterial highway for through traffic with full
or partial control of access with an excess of fifty percent (50%) of all
crossroads separated in grade.
(RC 4511.01(ZZ); Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 401.171 Flammable Liquid
   “Flammable liquid” means any liquid that has a flash point of seventy
degrees Fahrenheit (70°F), or less, as determined by a tagliabue or equivalent
closed cup test device.
(RC 4511.01(U); Ord. No. 188-16. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 401.18 Freeway
   “Freeway” means a divided multi-lane highway for through traffic with all
crossroads separated in grade and with full control of access.
(RC 4511.01(YY); Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 401.19 Funeral Escort Vehicle
   “Funeral escort vehicle” means any motor vehicle, including a funeral
hearse, while used to facilitate the movement of a funeral procession.
(RC 4511.01(WW); Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 401.20 Gross Weight
   “Gross weight” means the weight of a vehicle plus the weight of any load
thereon.
(RC 4511.01(V); Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 401.201 Highway Maintenance Vehicle
   “Highway maintenance vehicle” means a vehicle used in snow and ice removal
or road surface maintenance, including a snow plow, traffic line striper, road
sweeper, mowing machine, asphalt distributing vehicle, or other such vehicle
designed for use in specific highway maintenance activities.
(RC 4511.01(QQQ); Ord. No. 188-16. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 401.202 Highway Traffic Signal
   “Highway traffic signal” means a power- operated traffic control device by
which traffic is warned or directed to take some specific action. “Highway
traffic signal” does not include a power- operated sign, steadily illuminated
pavement marker, warning light, or steady burning electric lamp.
(RC 4511.01(MMM); Ord. No. 188-16. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 401.21 Intersection
   “Intersection” means:
   (a)   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral
curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two
(2) highways that join one another at, or approximately at, right angles, or
the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways that join at
any other angle might come into conflict, or two (2) or more municipal parking
lot drives which join one another. The junction of an alley or driveway with a
roadway or highway does not constitute an intersection unless the roadway or
highway at the junction is controlled by a traffic control device.
   (b)   If a highway includes two (2) roadways that are thirty (30) feet or
more apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an
intersecting highway constitutes a separate intersection. If both intersecting
highways include two (2) roadways thirty (30) feet or more apart, then every
crossing of any two (2) roadways of such highways constitutes a separate
intersection.
   (c)   At a location controlled by a traffic control signal, regardless of
the distance between the separate intersections as described in division (b) of
this section:
      (1)   If a stop line, yield line, or crosswalk has not been designated on
the roadway within the median between the separate intersections, the two (2)
intersections and the roadway and median constitute one (1) intersection.
      (2)   Where a stop line, yield line, or crosswalk line is designated on
the roadway on the intersection approach, the area within the crosswalk and any
area beyond the designated stop line or yield line constitute part of the
intersection.
      (3)   Where a crosswalk is designated on a roadway on the departure from
the intersection, the intersection includes the area that extends to the far
side of the crosswalk.
(RC 4511.01(KK); Ord. No. 188-16. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 401.22 Laned Street or Highway
   “Laned street” or “highway” means a street or highway, the roadway of which
is divided into two (2) or more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic.
(RC 4511.01(GG); Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 401.23 Median
   “Median” means the area between two (2) roadways of a divided highway,
measured from edge of traveled way to edge of traveled way, but excluding turn
lanes. The width of a median may be different between intersections, between
interchanges, and at opposite approaches of the same intersection.
(RC 4511.01(NNN); Ord. No. 188-16. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 401.231 Mobility Device
   "Mobility device" means small mobility devices, such as scooters, e-
scooters, e-bikes, or other similar devices. A mobility device does not include
those designed solely for use by a child, or those used as assistive mobility
devices by persons with disabilities, or those defined as an electronic
personal assistive mobility device.
(Ord. No. 396-2020. Passed 6-3-20, eff. 6-9-20)
§ 401.24 Motor Carrier
   “Motor carrier” means any person engaged exclusively in the operation of
motor vehicles for carrying persons for hire from points within the City to
points outside the City.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 401.25 Motor Vehicle
   “Motor vehicle” means every vehicle propelled or drawn by power other than
muscular power or power collected from overhead electric trolley wires, except
motorized bicycles, road rollers, traction engines, power shovels, power
cranes, and other equipment used in construction work and not designed for or
employed in general highway transportation, hole-digging machinery, well-
drilling machinery, ditch-digging machinery, farm machinery, and trailers
designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of storage
and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a street or
highway for a distance of no more than ten (10) miles and at a speed of twenty-
five (25) miles per hour or less.
(RC 4511.01(B); Ord. No. 188-16. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 401.26 Motorcycle
   “Motorcycle” means every motor vehicle, other than a tractor, having a seat
or saddle for the use of the operator and designed to travel on not more than
three (3) wheels in contact with the ground, including, but not limited, to
motor vehicles known as “motor-driven cycle”, “motor scooter”, “cab-enclosed
motorcycle”, or “motorcycle” without regard to weight or brake horsepower.
(RC 4511.01(C); Ord. No. 188-16. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 401.261 Motorized Bicycle or Moped
   “Motorized bicycle” or “moped” means any vehicle that either has two (2)
tandem wheels or one (1) wheel in the front and two (2) wheels in the rear,
that may be pedaled, and that is equipped with a helper motor of not more than
fifty (50) cubic centimeters piston displacement that produces no more than one
(1) brake horsepower and is capable of propelling the vehicle at a speed of no
greater than twenty (20) miles per hour on a level surface. "Motorized bicycle"
or "moped" does not include an electric bicycle.
(RC 4501.01(L), 4511.01(H); Ord. No. 1178-2019. Passed 10-7-19, eff. 10-8-19)
§ 401.262 Motorized Wheelchair
   “Motorized wheelchair” means any self-propelled vehicle designed for, and
used by, a handicapped person and that is incapable of a speed in excess of
eight (8) miles per hour.
(RC 4511.01(EEE); Ord. No. 188-16. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 401.263 Multi-Wheel Agricultural Tractor
   “Multi-wheel agricultural tractor” means a type of agricultural tractor that
has two (2) or more wheels or tires on each side of one (1) axle at the rear of
the tractor, is designed or used for drawing other vehicles or wheeled
machinery, has no provision for carrying loads independently of the drawn
vehicles or machinery, and is used principally for agricultural purposes.
(RC 4511.01(GGG); Ord. No. 188-16. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 401.27 Municipal Parking Facility
   “Municipal parking facility” means any property owned by or under the
control of the City of Cleveland designed and used by the public for the
parking or storage of vehicles, except streets or highways.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 401.28 Municipal Parking Facility Drive
   “Municipal parking facility drive” means that portion of a Municipal parking
facility designated for the purpose of providing ingress and egress to vehicles
and used for the movement of vehicular travel within a Municipal parking
facility.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 401.29 Net Weight
   “Net weight” means the weight of any vehicle or commercial unit exclusive of
the weight of any load thereon.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 401.291 Operate
   “Operate” means to cause or have caused movement of a vehicle, streetcar, or
trackless trolley.
(RC 4511.01(HHH); Ord. No. 188-16. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 401.30 Operate for Hire
   “Operate for hire” includes “plying for hire” and “carrying passengers for
hire” and means the engaging by any person, firm or corporation, directly or
through any agent, lessee, representative, officer or employee in the business
of transporting persons, or of providing or furnishing such transportation
service, for hire to the public generally or under special or individual
contracts, over the streets and highways of the City, and also includes the
soliciting of public patronage upon the streets and highways of the City, the
demanding, accepting or receiving of any compensation, remuneration, reward,
gift, donation, gratuity, tip or other consideration, for transporting any
person or persons over the public streets of this City, whether the amount
received is equal to, greater or less than the rates prescribed in Section
443.26; the holding out of himself, herself, themselves or itself to the
general public as prepared to transport any person or persons without charge or
for such fee as the person or persons transported may voluntarily contribute;
and the employing of any other scheme, device or method to circumvent or evade
the provisions of this Traffic Code.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 401.31 Park or Parking
   “Park” or “parking” means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or
not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged
in loading or unloading.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 401.32 Parking Key or Parking Card
   “Parking key” or “parking card” means any key or card or similar device
issued by the Commissioner of Traffic Engineering and Parking designed to be
inserted into a parking meter upon a Municipal parking facility or
automatically operated gate so that upon such insertion the parking meter or
automatically operated gate will be set into operation.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 401.33 Parking Meter
   “Parking meter” means any mechanical or electronic device used, placed,
installed, or erected upon a Municipal parking facility or in a metered parking
zone where it is indicated thereon the legal parking time established by the
City or otherwise on property that is owned, leased, or operated by the City. A
parking meter includes, but is not limited to, single space meters, multi-space
meters, and parking mobile payment applications authorized by the City.
(Ord. No. 817-2023. Passed 9-18-23, eff. 9-21-23)
§ 401.331 Parking Meter Zone
   “Parking meter zone” means any section of a street or highway where parking
meters are installed adjacent to the curb.
(Ord. No. 188-16. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 401.34 Parking Place
   “Parking place” means any garage or other building or part thereof, or any
premises or parcel of land in or upon which a business of storing more than ten
(10) motor vehicles in any twenty-four (24) hour period, where the owner or
person storing such vehicles is charged a fee, but excluding the rental of
private garages and the all-night storing of vehicles upon the premises of and
in connection with the operation of regularly established gasoline stations.
(Ord. No. 726-2025. Passed 8-13-25, eff. 8-18-25)
§ 401.35 Parking Space
   “Parking space” means any space within Municipal parking facility which is
designated for the parking of a single vehicle by markings on the surface of
the Municipal parking facility.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 401.36 Parking Token
   “Parking token” means any special coin or device issued by the Commissioner
of Traffic Engineering and Parking, designed to be deposited into a parking
meter upon a Municipal parking facility or automatically operated gate so that
upon such deposit the parking meter or automatically operated gate will be set
into operation.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 401.37 Pedestrian
   “Pedestrian” means any natural person afoot.
(RC 4511.01(X); Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 401.371 Pedestrian Way
   “Pedestrian way” means property dedicated to the City of Cleveland upon
which pedestrian, bicycle and City-owned vehicular traffic is permitted, but
all other vehicular traffic is prohibited. A pedestrian way may include City-
operated gates or other barriers designed to control access during certain
hours.
(Ord. No. 195-94. Passed 3-14-94, eff. 3-23-94)
§ 401.38 Person
   “Person” means every natural person, firm, copartnership, association or
corporation.
(RC 4511.01(W); Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 401.39 Pole Trailer
   “Pole trailer” means every trailer or semitrailer attached to the towing
vehicle by means of a reach, pole or by being boomed or otherwise secured to
the towing vehicle, and ordinarily used for transporting long or irregular
shaped loads such as poles, pipes or structural members capable, generally, of
sustaining themselves as beams between the supporting connections.
(RC 4511.01(O); Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 401.40 Police Officer
   “Police officer” means every officer authorized to direct or regulate
traffic, or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
(RC 4511.01(Z); Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 401.401 Predicate Motor Vehicle or Traffic Offense
   “Predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense” means any of the following:
   (a)   A violation of RC 4511.03, 4511.051, 4511.12, 4511.132, 4511.16,
4511.20, 4511.201, 4511.21, 4511.211, 4511.213, 4511.22, 4511.23, 4511.25,
4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33,
4511.34, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38, 4511.39, 4511.40, 4511.41,
4511.42, 4511.43, 4511.431, 4511.432, 4511.44, 4511.441, 4511.451, 4511.452,
4511.46, 4511.47, 4511.48, 4511.481, 4511.49, 4511.50, 4511.511, 4511.522,
4511.53, 4511.54, 4511.55, 4511.56, 4511.57, 4511.58, 4511.59, 4511.60,
4511.61, 4511.64, 4511.66, 4511.661, 4511.68, 4511.70, 4511.701, 4511.71,
4511.711, 4511.712, 4511.713, 4511.72, 4511.73, 4511.763, 4511.771, 4511.78 or
4511.84;
   (b)   A violation of RC 4511.17(A)(2), 4511.51(A) to (D) or 4511.74(A);
   (c)   A violation of any provision of RC 4511.01 to 4511.76 for which no
penalty otherwise is provided in the section that contains the provision
violated;
   (d)   A violation of RC 4511.214;
   (e)   A violation of any section of this Traffic Code that is substantially
equivalent to any section or provision set forth or described in divisions (a),
(b), (c) or (d) of this section.
(RC 4511.01(III); Ord. No. 1178-2019. Passed 10-7-19, eff. 10-8-19)
§ 401.402 Private Road Open to Public Travel
   “Private road open to public travel” means a private toll road or road,
including any adjacent sidewalks that generally run parallel to the road,
within a shopping center, airport, sports arena, or other similar business or
recreation facility that is privately owned but where the public is allowed to
travel without access restrictions. “Private road open to public travel”
includes a gated toll road but does not include a road within a private gated
property where access is restricted at all times, a parking area, a driving
aisle within a parking area, or a private grade crossing.
(RC 4511.01(OOO); Ord. No. 188-16. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 401.41 Private Road or Driveway
   “Private road” or “driveway” means every way or place in private ownership
used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied
permission from the owner, but not by other persons.
(RC 4511.01(DD); Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 401.42 Public Hack
   “Public hack” or “hack” means any public vehicle whose owner or driver
secures or accepts passengers for hire on the public streets, or in public or
quasi- public places, except carriages as defined in division (a) of Section
447.01 and vehicles operated by the Cleveland Regional Transit Authority.
(Ord. No. 2459-A-91. Passed 12-14-92, eff. 12-18-92)
§ 401.43 Public Safety Vehicle
   “Public safety vehicle” means any of the following:
   (a)   Ambulances, including private ambulance companies under contract to a
municipal corporation, township, or county, and private ambulances and
nontransport vehicles bearing license plates issued under RC 4503.49.
   (b)   Motor vehicles used by public law enforcement officers or other
persons sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state.
   (c)   Any motor vehicle when properly identified as required by the Ohio
Director of Public Safety, when used in response to fire emergency calls or to
provide emergency medical service to ill or injured persons, and when operated
by a duly qualified person who is a member of a volunteer rescue service or a
volunteer fire department, and who is on duty pursuant to the rules or
directives of that service. The State Fire Marshal shall be designated by the
Ohio Director of Public Safety as the certifying agency for all public safety
vehicles described in this division (c).
   (d)    Vehicles used by fire departments, including motor vehicles when used
by volunteer firefighters responding to emergency calls in the fire department
service when identified as required by the Ohio Director of Public Safety.
   Any vehicle used to transport or provide emergency medical service to an ill
or injured person, when certified as a public safety vehicle, shall be
considered a public safety vehicle when transporting an ill or injured person
to a hospital, regardless of whether the vehicle has already passed a hospital.
   (e)   Vehicles used by the motor carrier enforcement unit for the
enforcement of orders and rules of the Public Utilities Commission as specified
in RC 5503.34.
(RC 4511.01(E); Ord. No. 188-16. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 401.44 Railroad
   “Railroad” means a carrier of persons or property operating upon rails
placed principally on a private right-of-way.
(RC 4511.01(P); Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 401.45 Railroad Sign or Signal
   “Railroad sign or signal” means any sign, signal or device erected by
authority of a public body or official or by a railroad and intended to give
notice of the presence of railroad tracks or the approach of a railroad train.
(RC 4511.01(SS); Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 401.46 Railroad Train
   “Railroad train” means a steam engine, or an electric or other motor, with
or without cars coupled thereto, operated by a railroad.
(RC 4511.01(Q); Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 401.47 Receiving Station
   “Receiving station” means any garage or parking lot which is guarded by an
attendant at all times, to which vehicles may be removed under regulations set
forth in this Traffic Code, when not called for by the owner before the hour of
closing such parking lot or before the hour at which such parking lot becomes
unattended.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 401.48 Residence District
   “Residence district” means the territory, not comprising a business
district, fronting on a street or highway, including the street or highway,
where, for a distance of three hundred (300) feet or more, the frontage is
improved with residences or residences and buildings in use for business.
(RC 4511.01(OO); Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 401.481 Ridesharing Arrangement
   “Ridesharing arrangement” means the transportation of persons in a motor
vehicle where such transportation is incidental to another purpose of a
volunteer driver and includes ridesharing arrangements known as carpools,
vanpools, and buspools.
(RC 4511.01(DDD); Ord. No. 188-16. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 401.49 Right-of-Way
   “Right-of-way” means either of the following, as the context requires:
   (a)   The right of a vehicle, streetcar, trackless trolley, or pedestrian to
proceed uninterruptedly in a lawful manner in the direction in which it or he
or she is moving in preference to another vehicle, streetcar, trackless
trolley, or pedestrian approaching from a different direction into its or his
or her path;
   (b)   A general term denoting land, property, or the interest therein,
usually in the configuration of a strip, acquired for or devoted to
transportation purposes. When used in this context, right-of-way includes the
roadway, shoulders or berm, ditch, and slopes extending to the right-of-way
limits under the control of the state or local authority.
(RC 4511.01(UU); Ord. No. 91-96. Passed 3-18-96, eff. 3-26-96)
§ 401.491 Road Service Vehicle
   “Road service vehicle” means wreckers, utility repair vehicles, and state,
county and municipal service vehicles equipped with visual signals by means of
flashing, rotating or oscillating lights.
(RC 4511.01(JJJ); Ord. No. 188-16. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 401.50 Roadway
   “Roadway” means that portion of a street or highway improved, designed or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel, except the berm or shoulder. If a street
or highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways, the term “roadway” means
any such roadway separately but not all such roadways collectively.
(RC 4511.01(EE); Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 401.501 Rollerskates
   Rollerskates means a device, propelled solely by human power, worn on the
user’s feet like shoes, consisting of a shoe or boot with wheels attached on
the bottom of the shoe or boot allowing the user to be propelled over land by
alternate action of the legs, this includes devices commonly known as
“rollerblades.”
(Ord. No. 1084-95. Passed 5-13-96, eff. 5-25-96 without the signature of the
Mayor)
§ 401.51 Safety Zone
   “Safety zone” means the area or space officially set apart within a roadway
for the exclusive use of pedestrians and protected or marked or indicated by
adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times.
(RC 4511.01(MM); Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 401.52 School Bus
   “School bus” means every bus designed for carrying more than nine (9)
passengers which is owned by a public, private or governmental agency or
institution of learning and operated for the transportation of children to or
from a school session or a school function, or owned by a private person and
operated for compensation for the transportation of children to or from a
school session or a school function; provided “school bus” does not include a
bus operated by a municipally owned transportation system, a mass transit
company operating exclusively within the territorial limits of the City, or
within such limits and the territorial limits of municipal corporations
immediately contiguous to the City, nor a common passenger carrier certified by
the Public Utilities Commission unless such bus is devoted exclusively to the
transportation of children to and from a school session or a school function,
and “school bus” does not include a van or bus used by a licensed child day-
care center or type A family day-care home to transport children from the child
day-care center or type A family day-care home to a school if the van or bus
does not have more than fifteen (15) children in the van or bus at any time.
(RC 4511.01(F); Ord. No. 91-96. Passed 3-18-96, eff. 3-26-96)
§ 401.53 Semitrailer
   “Semitrailer” means every vehicle designed or used for carrying persons or
property with another and separate motor vehicle so that in operation a part of
its own weight or that of its load, or both, rests upon and is carried by
another vehicle.
(RC 4511.01(N); Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 401.531 Shared-Use Path
   “Shared-use path” means a bikeway outside the traveled way and physically
separated from motorized vehicular traffic by an open space or barrier and
either within the highway right-of-way or within an independent alignment. A
shared-use path also may be used by pedestrians, including skaters, joggers,
users of manual and motorized wheelchairs, and other authorized motorized and
non-motorized users.
(RC 4511.01(PPP); Ord. No. 188-16. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 401.54 Sidewalk
   “Sidewalk” means that portion of a street between the curb lines, or the
lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for the
use of pedestrians.
(RC 4511.01(FF); Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 401.55 Sight-Seeing Car
   “Sight-seeing car” means a motor vehicle other than a bus and other than a
public hack, engaged or employed in the business of carrying passengers for
hire, or used in the conveyance for hire, of tourists and sight-seers, over the
public streets, exclusively for the purpose of a sight-seeing trip in the
visiting and viewing of places of interest.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 401.551 Skateboard
   “Skateboard” means a device, propelled solely by human power, upon which a
person may ride, consisting of a short, narrow board having a set of four (4)
wheels mounted under it.
(Ord. No. 2723-89. Passed 6-18-90, eff. 6-27-90)
§ 401.56 Standing
   “Standing” means any stopping of a vehicle, whether occupied or not.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 401.561 State Highway
   “State highway” means a highway under the jurisdiction of the Ohio
Department of Transportation, outside the limits of municipal corporations,
provided that the authority conferred upon the Ohio Director of Transportation
in RC 5511.01 to erect state highway route markers and signs directing traffic
shall not be modified by RC 4511.01 to 4511.79 and 4511.99.
(RC 4511.01(II); Ord. No. 188-16. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 401.57 State Route
   “State route” means every highway which is designated with an official State
route number and so marked.
(RC 4511.01(JJ); Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 401.58 Stop (When Required)
   “Stop” when required means a complete cessation of movement.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 401.59 Stop or Stopping (When Prohibited)
   “Stop or stopping” when prohibited means any cessation of movement except
when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
direction of a police officer or of traffic control devices.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 401.60 Stop Intersection
   “Stop intersection” means any intersection at one (1) or more entrances of
which stop signs are erected.
(RC 4511.01(BBB); Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 401.61 Street or Highway
   “Street” or “highway” are synonymous and mean the entire width between the
boundary lines of every way open to the use of the public as a thoroughfare for
purposes of vehicular travel.
(RC 4511.01(BB); Ord. No. 188-16. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 401.62 Taxicab
   “Taxicab” means a coach driven by mechanical power on which a taximeter is
affixed.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 401.63 Taximeter
   “Taximeter” means a mechanical instrument or device by which the charge for
hire of a public hack is mechanically calculated, either for distance traveled,
for waiting time or both, and upon which such charges are indicated by means of
figures.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 401.64 Through Street or Highway
   “Through street or highway” means every street or highway as provided in
Section
413.02.
(RC 4511.01(HH); Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 401.65 Thruway
   “Thruway” means a through street or highway whose entire roadway is reserved
for through traffic and on which roadway parking is prohibited.
(RC 4511.01(AAA); Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 401.66 Traffic
   “Traffic” means pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars,
trackless trolleys, and other devices, either singly or together, while using
for purposes of travel any highway or private road open to public travel.
(RC 4511.01(TT); Ord. No. 188-16. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 401.67 Traffic Control Device
   “Traffic control device” means a flagger, sign, signal, marking, or other
device used to regulate, warn, or guide traffic, placed on, over, or adjacent
to a street, highway, private road open to public travel, pedestrian facility,
or shared-use path by authority of a public agency or official having
jurisdiction, or, in the case of a private road open to public travel, by
authority of the private owner or private official having jurisdiction.
(RC 4511.01(QQ); Ord. No. 188-16. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 401.68 Traffic Control Signal
   “Traffic control signal” means any highway traffic signal by which traffic
is alternately directed to stop and permitted to proceed.
(RC 4511.01(RR); Ord. No. 188-16. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 401.69 Trailer
   “Trailer” means every vehicle designed or used for carrying persons or
property wholly on its own structure and for being drawn by a motor vehicle,
including any vehicle when formed by or operated as a combination of a
“semitrailer” and a vehicle of the dolly type, such as that commonly known as a
“trailer dolly”, a vehicle used to transport agricultural produce or
agricultural production materials between a local place of storage or supply
and the farm when drawn or towed on a street or highway at a speed greater than
twenty-five (25) miles per hour, and a vehicle designed and used exclusively to
transport a boat between a place of storage and a marina, or in and around a
marina, when drawn or towed on a street or highway for a distance of more than
ten (10) miles or at a speed of more than twenty-five (25) miles per hour.
(RC 4511.01(M); Ord. No. 188-16. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 401.70 Truck
   “Truck” means every motor vehicle, except trailers and semitrailers,
designed and used to carry property.
(RC 4511.01(K); Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 401.71 Truck Zone
   “Truck zone” means that portion of the roadway so designated for the loading
and unloading of materials and marked by signs.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 401.711 Under-Speed Vehicle
   “Under-speed vehicle” means a three- or four-wheeled vehicle, including a
vehicle commonly known as a golf cart, with an attainable speed on a paved
level surface of not more than twenty (20) miles per hour and with a gross
vehicle weight rating less than three thousand (3,000) pounds; as defined by RC
4501.01(XX) which may be updated from time to time. This does not include low-
speed vehicles as defined by RC 4501.01(WW) such as a golf cart modified to
attain a speed of more than twenty (20) miles per hour.
(Ord. No. 1215-2025. Passed 10-13-25, eff. 10-14-25)
§ 401.72 Urban District
   “Urban district” means the territory contiguous to and including any street
or highway which is built up with structures devoted to business, industry or
dwelling houses situated at intervals of less than one hundred (100) feet for a
distance of a quarter of a mile or more, and the character of such territory is
indicated by official traffic control devices.
(RC 4511.01(PP); Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 401.73 Vehicle
   “Vehicle” means every device, including a motorized bicycle, in, upon, or by
which any person or property may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except
that “vehicle” does not include any motorized wheelchair, any electric personal
assistive mobility device, any device that is moved by power collected from
overhead electric trolley wires or that is used exclusively upon stationary
rails or tracks, or any device, other than a bicycle, that is moved by human
power.
(RC 4511.01(A); Ord. No. 188-16. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
CHAPTER 403 – ENFORCEMENT, COMPLIANCE AND PENALTY
403.01   Police Enforcement Duty
403.02   Compliance with Lawful Order of Police Officer; Fleeing
403.03   Regulations by Director of Public Service
403.04   Downtown Area Parking
403.05   Regulations by Police Chief
403.06   Powers of Commissioner of Traffic Engineering and Commissioner of
Streets
403.07   Parking Enforcement
403.071   Idle Reduction, Enforcement
403.08   Littering Enforcement
403.09   Appeal from License or Permit Denial, Suspension or Revocation
403.10   Road Workers, Motor Vehicles and Equipment Excepted
403.11   Application to Persons Riding, Driving Animals Upon Roadway
403.12   Freeway Use Prohibited by Pedestrians, Bicycles and Animals
403.13   Application to Drivers of Government Vehicles
403.99   Traffic Code Misdemeanor Classifications and Penalties
Cross-reference:
   Improperly handling firearms in a motor vehicle, CO
627.05
   Motor vehicle trespass, CO
625.07
   Taxicab license suspension or revocation, CO
443.12
   Unauthorized use of a vehicle, CO
625.06
   Willfully leaving vehicles on private or public property, CO
451.27
Statutory reference:
   See sectional histories for similar State law
   Alteration of prima facie speed limits, RC 4511.21, 4511.22, 4511.23
   Designation of through streets and erection of stop or yield signs, RC
4511.65; CO
413.02
   Local traffic control devices, RC 4511.11
   Power of trial court of record to suspend or revoke license for certain
violations, RC 4507.16
   Power to designate highway as included in a freeway, expressway or thruway,
RC 4511.011
   Power to enact local traffic regulations, RC 4511.07, 4511.61
   Uniform application of Ohio Traffic Law, RC 4511.06
§ 403.01 Police Enforcement Duty
   The Police Division of the Department of Public Safety shall enforce the
provisions of this Traffic Code. The Chief of Police shall assign such officers
and members of the Division of Police as he or she determines necessary to the
Traffic Control Unit, who shall be charged with the specific duty of enforcing
the provisions of this Traffic Code. Pursuant to regulations made under Section
403.05, the Chief of Police may allow persons who are not officers or members
of the Division of Police to direct traffic. In the event of fire or other
emergency, or to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, members of the
Police and Fire Divisions may direct traffic as conditions may require,
notwithstanding any other provisions in this Traffic Code.
(Ord. No. 1635-13. Passed 11-25-13, eff. 11-26-13)
§ 403.02 Compliance with Lawful Order of Police Officer; Fleeing
   (a)   No person shall fail to comply with any lawful order or direction of
any police officer invested with authority to direct, control or regulate
traffic.
   (b)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle so as willfully to elude or
flee a police officer after receiving a visible or audible signal from a police
officer to bring the person's motor vehicle to a stop.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to comply
with an order or signal of a police officer.
      (2)   A violation of division (a) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
      (3)   Except as provided in divisions (c)(4) and (c)(5) of this section,
a violation of division (b) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
      (4)   Except as provided in division (c)(5) of this section, a violation
of division (b) of this section is a felony and shall be prosecuted under
appropriate state law if the jury or judge as trier of fact finds by proof
beyond a reasonable doubt that in committing the offense, the offender was
fleeing immediately after the commission of a felony.
      (5)   A.   A violation of division (b) of this section is a felony and
shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law if the jury or judge as trier
of fact finds any of the following by proof beyond a reasonable doubt:
            1.   The operation of the motor vehicle by the offender was a
proximate cause of serious physical harm to persons or property.
            2.   The operation of the motor vehicle by the offender caused a
substantial risk of serious physical harm to persons or property.
         B.   If a police officer pursues an offender who is violating division
(b) of this section and division (c)(5)A. of this section applies, the
sentencing court, in determining the seriousness of an offender's conduct for
purposes of sentencing the offender for a violation of division (b) of this
section, shall consider, along with the factors set forth in RC 2929.12 and
2929.13 that are required to be considered, all of the following:
            1.   The duration of the pursuit;
            2.   The distance of the pursuit;
            3.   The rate of speed at which the offender operated the motor
vehicle during the pursuit;
            4.   Whether the offender failed to stop for traffic lights or stop
signs during the pursuit;
            5.   The number of traffic lights or stop signs for which the
offender failed to stop during the pursuit;
            6.   Whether the offender operated the motor vehicle during the
pursuit without lighted lights during a time when lighted lights are required;
            7.   Whether the offender committed a moving violation during the
pursuit;
            8.   The number of moving violations the offender committed during
the pursuit;
            9.   Any other relevant factors indicating that the offender's
conduct is more serious than conduct normally constituting the offense.
   (d)   In addition to any other sanction imposed for a violation of division
(a) of this section or a misdemeanor violation of division (b) of this section,
the court shall impose a class five (5) suspension from the range specified in
RC 4510.02(A)(5). If the offender previously has been found guilty of an
offense under this section or under RC 2921.331 or any other substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, in addition to any other sanction imposed for
the offense, the court shall impose a class one (1) suspension as described in
RC 4510.02(A)(1). The court may grant limited driving privileges to the
offender on a suspension imposed for a misdemeanor violation of this section as
set forth in RC 4510.021. No judge shall suspend any portion of the suspension
under a class one (1) suspension of an offender's license, permit, or privilege
required by this division.
   (e)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   "Moving violation" has the same meaning as in RC 2743.70.
      (2)   "Police officer" has the same meaning as in RC 4511.01.
(RC 2921.331(A) - (C), (E), (F); Ord. No. 1275-15. Passed 5-16-16, eff. 5-18-
16)
§ 403.03 Regulations by Director of Public Service
   (a)   The Director of Public Service is hereby authorized to adopt
regulations as follows:
      (1)   Designating streets or parts of streets upon which stopping,
standing or parking of vehicles is prohibited at all times, prohibited during
certain hours or limited for a specified time period;
      (2)   Designating streets or parts of streets as fire lanes or snow
emergency streets with parking prohibited as provided in Sections
451.15 and
451.17;
      (3)   Designating streets or parts of streets upon which vehicular
traffic shall move in only one (1) direction;
      (4)   Designating streets or parts of streets upon which commercial units
are prohibited or restricted to a specified weight;
      (5)   Closing temporarily any street or portion thereof or restricting
the use thereof when required by public safety or convenience;
      (6)   Prohibiting or requiring left-hand turns by vehicles at designated
intersections or other locations, and exempting RTA vehicles from such
prohibitions;
      (7)   Designating streets, parts thereof or other locations for angle
parking;
      (8)   Designating stop or yield intersections.
   (b)   No such regulation shall permit parking in any of the places
prohibited by this Traffic Code, nor shall any such regulation limiting the
time of parking or prohibiting parking be deemed to apply on Sundays, holidays,
other than Saturday afternoon or between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.,
unless the regulations and the sign evidencing the same specifically so state.
Regulations shall become effective ten (10) days after publication in the City
Record and upon the erection of signs sufficient in number to apprise the
ordinarily observant person of the existence of the regulation, and shall
continue to have the force and effect of ordinances until rescinded by the
Director or disapproved by ordinance of Council. However, before adopting any
regulation the Director shall notify in writing council members from each ward
which are to be affected by such proposed regulation at least thirty (30) days
prior to the adoption of such proposed regulation. If the proposed regulation
meets with the disapproval of any councilman, then such regulation shall not be
adopted. The provisions of the Traffic Code shall be deemed to be regulations
adopted under this section and shall continue in full force and effect as such
regulations until changed in the manner provided herein. Violations of such
regulations so adopted and published shall be subject to the penalties
prescribed in Section
403.99.
   (c)   Council members affected by any proposed regulation of the Director
may waive in writing the thirty (30) days notice required by division (b)
hereof and request that such proposed regulation be published in the next
succeeding issue of the City Record in order that the regulation may become
effective ten (10) days after such publication and posting of signs as required
by division (b) hereof.
(Ord. No. 1806-2000. Passed 3-19-01, eff. 3-26-01) (BOC Res. No. 223-01.
Adopted 4-4-01)
§ 403.04 Downtown Area Parking
   (a)   Except as provided herein and in Chapter
451, no regulation adopted pursuant to Section
403.03 shall limit the time of parking nor prohibit parking between 10:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m. upon streets or parts of streets within the Downtown Parking Area
as defined in division (c) of this section. Any regulations that specifically
state otherwise are hereby disapproved, and signs evidencing such regulations
or otherwise contrary to this section shall be removed.
   (b)   Notwithstanding any provision of the Codified Ordinances to the
contrary, any parking meter space in the Downtown Parking Area shall be free of
charge on New Year’s Day, Martin Luther King Day, Memorial Day, Independence
Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, the day after Thanksgiving Day (“Black
Friday”), Christmas Day, and the day after Christmas Day.
   (c)   As used in this section, “Downtown Parking Area” means the area
bounded by Lake Erie from the Cuyahoga River to the easterly line of East 30th
Street extended; the easterly lines of East 30th Street connected from Lake
Erie to Carnegie Avenue; the southerly line of Carnegie Avenue from East 30th
Street to East 9th Street; the easterly line of East 9th Street to Carnegie
Avenue; the southerly line of Carnegie Avenue from Broadway to the Cuyahoga
River; and the Cuyahoga River from Carnegie Avenue to Lake Erie.
(Ord. No. 817-2023. Passed 9-18-23, eff. 9-21-23)
§ 403.05 Regulations by Police Chief
   The Police Chief or the Commissioner of Traffic Control is hereby authorized
to make and enforce regulations necessary to make effective provisions of this
Traffic Code and temporary regulations to cover emergencies, special conditions
or to establish play streets.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 403.06 Powers of Commissioner of Traffic Engineering and Commissioner of
Streets
   (a)   The Commissioner of Traffic Engineering is hereby authorized to
supervise erection and maintenance of traffic control devices as required by
this Traffic Code and as the Commissioner of Traffic Engineering may deem
necessary to regulate, guide or warn traffic, which are consistent with the
provisions of this Traffic Code. All traffic control devices placed pursuant to
the provisions of this Traffic Code shall conform to the Ohio Manual of Uniform
Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways, as set forth in RC 4511.09.
   (b)   The Commissioner of Traffic Engineering is hereby authorized to:
      (1)   Designate by appropriate devices or markings upon the surface of
the roadway, crosswalks or intersections and at such other places as he or she
deems necessary. The Commissioner of Streets shall place such devices and
markings;
      (2)   Establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such
places as he or she deems necessary for the protection of pedestrians;
      (3)   Determine lanes for traffic at such places as he or she deems
necessary. The Commissioner of Streets shall mark such lanes on street
pavements;
      (4)   Determine the right and left side of laned streets. The
Commissioner of Streets shall mark the center line of such streets;
      (5)   Establish temporarily a zone of quiet upon any street where a
person is seriously ill if requested by the written statement of at least one
(1) registered physician certifying to its necessity. A temporary zone of quiet
shall embrace all territory within a radius of two hundred (200) feet of the
building occupied by the person named in the request of the physician, and
shall be designated by placing at a conspicuous place in the street a sign
bearing the words “Quiet Zone,” which sign shall be placed by the Commissioner
of Streets;
      (6)   Determine the location of truck zones and placement of appropriate
signs indicating such and stating the hours during which the provisions
regarding truck zones are applicable;
      (7)   Designate by means of markers or signs placed above, within or
adjacent to intersections, the lanes from which right or left turns only shall
be made, or the lanes from which right or left turns may be made by vehicles
turning at such intersections;
      (8)   Determine the location of loading and unloading zones where there
are physically recessed areas from the street provided for loading and
unloading and when no parking is permitted within the block. The appropriate
signs indicating such and stating the hours during which the provisions
regarding such loading and unloading zones are applicable shall be placed and
maintained by the Commissioner of Streets;
      (9)   Determine the location of taxicab stands signs indicating such and
stating the prohibitions or provisions relative thereto shall be placed and
maintained by the Commissioner of Streets;
      (10)   Establish parking meter zones on streets or parts thereof where
parking meters shall be installed and maintained by the Division of Parking
Facilities, and where parking shall be regulated by the provisions of Chapter
453;
      (11)   Establish criteria for the installation of traffic control signals
at private accessways. All costs relative to such installations shall be borne
by the industrial or commercial establishment or other traffic generator or any
part or combination thereof who benefits from such installation.
(Ord. No. 1806-2000. Passed 3-19-01, eff. 3-26-01) (BOC Res. No. 223-01.
Adopted 4-4-01)
§ 403.07 Parking Enforcement
   The Director of Public Safety may designate civilian employees of the Police
Division, employees of the Division of Traffic Engineering and Parking and
employees of the Division of Parking Facilities to enforce all parking
regulations of the City including those relative to Municipal parking
facilities and to issue citations for any violation thereof.
(Ord. No. 1525-81. Passed 6-29-81, eff. 7-2-81)
§ 403.071 Idle Reduction, Enforcement
   The Director of Public Safety and the Director of Public Health may
designate appropriate employees to enforce Section
431.44, and to issue citations for any violation of that section.
(Ord. No. 710-2025. Passed 7-9-25, eff. 7-14-25)
§ 403.08 Littering Enforcement
   Upon the request of the Commissioner of the Division of Health, the Director
of Public Safety may designate employees of the Division of Traffic Engineering
and Parking to enforce Sections
551.24,
613.02,
613.03,
613.05 and
613.14 of the Codified Ordinances, and to issue citations for any violation
thereof.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 403.09 Appeal from License or Permit Denial, Suspension or Revocation
   License and permit issuance shall be authorized and under the control of the
Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses. In case of the refusal to issue a
license or permit or the revocation or suspension of a license or permit by the
Commissioner, the applicant, licensee or permittee may appeal from such order
to the Board of Zoning Appeals established pursuant to Charter Section
76-6; provided that written appeal is filed with the Board Secretary within ten
(10) days of the date the decision being appealed was made. The Board shall
conduct a hearing and render a decision in accord with City ordinances and
regulations governing its conduct and procedure.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 403.10 Road Workers, Motor Vehicles and Equipment Excepted
   (a)   The provisions of this Traffic Code, except for Section
433.01, do not apply to persons, teams, motor vehicles, and other equipment
while actually engaged in work upon the surface of a highway within an area
designated by traffic-control devices, but apply to those persons and vehicles
when traveling to or from that work.
   (b)   The driver of a highway maintenance vehicle owned by this state or any
political subdivision of this state, while the driver is engaged in the
performance of official duties upon a street or highway, provided the highway
maintenance vehicle is equipped with flashing lights and any other markings as
are required by law and the lights are in operation when the driver and vehicle
are so engaged, shall be exempt from criminal prosecution for violations of RC
4511.22, 4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.33,
4511.35, 4511.66, 4513.02 and 5577.01 to 5577.09, and any substantially
equivalent section of this Traffic Code or these Codified Ordinances.
   (c)   (1)   This section does not exempt a driver of a highway maintenance
vehicle from civil liability arising from a violation of RC 4511.22, 4511.25,
4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.33, 4511.35, 4511.66 or
4513.02 or 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially equivalent section of this
Traffic Code or these Codified Ordinances.
      (2)   This section does not exempt the driver of a vehicle that is
engaged in the transport of highway maintenance equipment from criminal
liability for a violation of RC 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially
equivalent section of this Traffic Code or these Codified Ordinances.
(RC 4511.04; Ord. No. 1275-15. Passed 5-16-16, eff. 5-18-16)
§ 403.11 Application to Persons Riding, Driving Animals Upon Roadway
   Every person riding, driving or leading an animal upon a roadway shall be
subject to the provisions of this Traffic Code applicable to the driver of a
vehicle, except those provisions of such sections which by their nature are
inapplicable.
(RC 4511.05; Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 403.12 Freeway Use Prohibited by Pedestrians, Bicycles and Animals
   (a)   No person, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, shall:
      (1)   As a pedestrian, occupy any space within the limits of the right-
of-way of a freeway, except: in a rest area; on a facility that is separated
from the roadway and shoulders of the freeway and is designed and appropriately
marked for pedestrian use; in the performance of public works or official
duties; as a result of an emergency caused by an accident or breakdown of a
motor vehicle; or to obtain assistance.
      (2)   Occupy any space within the limits of the right-of-way of a
freeway, with an animal-drawn vehicle, a ridden or led animal, herded animals,
a pushcart, a bicycle, except on a facility that is separated from the roadway
and shoulders of the freeway and is designed and appropriately marked for
bicycle use, a bicycle with motor attached, a motor-driven cycle with a motor
which produces not to exceed five (5) brake horsepower, an agricultural tractor
or farm machinery, except in the performance of public works or official
duties.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one (1) year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
(1) predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one (1) year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two (2) or more
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(RC 4511.051; Ord. No. 1275-15. Passed 5-16-16, eff. 5-18-16)
§ 403.13 Application to Drivers of Government Vehicles
   The provisions of this Traffic Code applicable to the drivers of vehicles
shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles owned or operated by the United
States, any state or any political subdivision thereof, including the City,
except as may be otherwise provided by law and subject to such specific
exceptions as are set forth with reference to authorized emergency and public
safety vehicles.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 403.99 Traffic Code Misdemeanor Classifications and Penalties
   (a)   General Traffic Code Penalty. Whoever violates any provision of this
traffic code for which no penalty otherwise is provided in the section violated
is guilty of one (1) of the following:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (a)(2) or (a)(3) of this
section, a minor misdemeanor;
      (2)   If, within one (1) year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one (1) predicate motor vehicle or
traffic offense, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree;
      (3)   If, within one (1) year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two (2) or more predicate motor vehicle
or traffic offenses, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(RC 4511.99)
   (b)   Misdemeanor Penalties. Whoever is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of this traffic code shall be imprisoned for a definite term or
fined, or both, which term of imprisonment and fine shall be fixed by the court
as provided in this section.
 
Misdemeanor Classification Maximum Imprisonment Term Maximum
                                                     Fine
1st degree                 180 days                  $1,000.00
2nd degree                 90 days                   $750.00
3rd degree                 60 days                   $500.00
4th degree                 30 days                   $250.00
Minor                      None                      $150.00
 
(Ord. No. 1275-15. Passed 5-16-16, eff. 5-18-16)
CHAPTER 405 – IMPOUNDING
405.01   Vehicle Pounds Authorized
405.02   Impounding of Vehicles
405.021   Ticketing and Impoundment of Vehicles by the Division of Parking
Facilities
405.022   Release of Vehicles Impounded by the Division of Parking Facilities
405.023   Continuous Violation Tickets
405.03   Report of Condition of Vehicle Towed by Private Agency
405.04   Storage Fee at Vehicle Pound
405.05   Redemption of Impounded Vehicles; Bond; Hearing; Trial
405.06   Impounding and Towing Fees
405.07   Pound Records
405.08   Impounding Commercial Vehicles; Fees
405.09   Impounding Bicycles
405.10   Towing Preparation Fees
405.11   Fee for Incompleted Tow
405.12   Fee for Diverting Recovered Stolen Vehicles and Other Vehicles from
Impoundment; Agreements Authorized
405.13   Auctioning of Impounded Motor Vehicles that are Unclaimed or Abandoned
Cross-reference:
   Abandoned junk vehicles, CO
451.27
   Abandoned vehicles, CO
451.25
   Driving unsafe, damaged vehicles, CO
437.01
   Use of illegal license plates prohibited, CO
435.11
Statutory reference:
   Disposition of unclaimed vehicles, RC 737.32, 4513.62 et seq.
§ 405.01 Vehicle Pounds Authorized
   The Director of Public Safety is hereby authorized to create vehicle pounds,
to which vehicles may be removed by police officers in the manner hereinafter
provided. Such pounds shall be located at such places as may be designated by
the Director. Each pound shall be in the charge of a police officer. The Chief
of Police shall designate a police officer to remain in attendance at each
pound from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. each day except Sunday, for the purpose of
receiving, safeguarding and discharging vehicles as hereinafter provided.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 405.02 Impounding of Vehicles
   Police officers are authorized to provide for the removal of a vehicle under
the following circumstances:
   (a)   When any vehicle is left unattended upon any street, alley or bridge
and constitutes an unreasonable hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of
traffic or unreasonably interferes with street cleaning or snow removal
operations, or when any vehicle is left on any street or public property for
more than seventy-two (72) hours.
   (b)   (1)   Upon complaint of any person adversely affected, when any motor
vehicle, other than an abandoned junk motor vehicle as defined in RC 4513.63,
that has been left on private residential or private agricultural property for
at least four (4) hours without the permission of the person having the right
to the possession of the property.
(RC 4513.60(A)(1))
      (2)   When any motor vehicle, other than an abandoned junk motor vehicle
as defined in RC 4513.63, has been left on a public street or other property
open to the public for the purposes of vehicular travel, or upon or within the
right-of-way of any road or highway, for forty-eight (48) hours or longer
without notification to the Chief of Police of the reasons for leaving the
motor vehicle in such place. (RC 4513.61(A)(2))
      (3)   When any motor vehicle is an abandoned junk motor vehicle as
defined in RC 4513.63 and removal is authorized by that section.
      (4)   When any junk motor vehicle as defined in RC 4513.65 has not been
either covered by being housed in a garage or other suitable structure, or
removed from the property, within ten (10) days of the date of receipt of a
notice meeting the requirements of division (b) of Section
451.27 by the person having the right to possession of the property on which
the junk motor vehicle is left.
   (c)   When any vehicle has been stolen or operated without the consent of
the owner.
   (d)   When any vehicle is parked on any street or other public property and
displays illegal plates or fails to display the current lawfully required
license plates.
   (e)   When any vehicle has been used in or connected with the commission of
procuring, soliciting, prostitution, soliciting drug sales in violation of
Section
607.20, or any felony.
   (f)   When any vehicle has been damaged or wrecked so as to be inoperable or
violates equipment provisions of this Traffic Code, whereby its continued
operation would constitute a condition hazardous to life, limb or property.
   (g)   When any vehicle is left unattended due to the removal of an ill,
injured or arrested operator.
   (h)   When any vehicle has been operated by any person who failed to stop in
case of accident or collision.
   (i)   When any vehicle has been operated by any person who is driving
without a lawful license or while his or her license has been suspended or
revoked.
   (j)   When any vehicle is found standing or parked in violation of the
provisions of Section
451.04,
451.05,
451.06,
451.11,
451.13,
453.01,
453.02,
455.05,
455.06 or
455.07 of these Codified Ordinances and such vehicle has four (4) or more of
any combination of:
      (1)   Unpaid parking infraction judgments, and/or
      (2)   Notices of liability under Section
413.031 for red light or speeding violations, provided that the notices of
liability under Section
413.031 are not on appeal; and/or
      (3)   Previously issued outstanding criminal citations or notices of
violation of any of the provisions of this Traffic Code.
   (k)   When any vehicle constitutes an unreasonable hazard to persons or
property at the scene of a fire, accident, disaster, riot or emergency of any
kind.
   (l)   When any vehicle is found standing or parked in violation of the
provisions of Sections
451.03,
451.041,
451.08 through
451.10,
451.12,
451.15 through
451.25, divisions (i), (j) or (k) of Section
451.33, or division (a) of Section
461.15.
   (m)   When any vehicle is ordered immobilized pursuant to RC Chapters 4503,
4507, or 4511.
   (n)   When any vehicle that is subject to an order of immobilization and
impoundment under RC 4503.233 is found being operated on any street or highway.
   (o)   When any vehicle:
      (1)   Displays license plates that are associated with five (5) or more
of any combination of unpaid parking infraction judgments and/or notices of
liability under Section
413.031 for red light or speeding violations, provided that the notices of
liability under Section
413.031 are not on appeal; and
      (2)   Is found standing or parked on any street or highway in the Central
Business District, without regard to whether any parking infraction is being
committed at the time. As used in this division, “Central Business District”
has the same meaning as in Section
325.12 of the Codified Ordinances; and
      (3)   The Parking Violations Bureau has sent a notice by regular U.S.
mail to the person to whom the license plates are registered that the
conditions in division (o)(1) of this section exist and that the vehicle may be
towed as provided in this division.
(Ord. No. 1276-15. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 405.021 Ticketing and Impoundment of Vehicles by the Division of Parking
Facilities
   (a)   The persons described in division (c) of this section may issue a
parking infraction ticket when a vehicle is parked in violation of any section
of these Codified Ordinances that section
459.01 defines as a parking infraction.
   (b)   A condition report shall be made in the manner described in Section
405.03 for any vehicle caused to be impounded by an employee of the Division of
Parking Facilities. The original report shall be retained by the Division of
Parking Facilities, and the copies shall be distributed as provided in Section
405.03. The employee causing the vehicle to be impounded shall stay on the
scene until the vehicle is removed.
   (c)   This section shall apply to those employees of the Division of Parking
Facilities whose duties include issuing parking infraction tickets or providing
for the impoundment of vehicles. This section shall not affect the authority of
any other City employee.
(Ord. No. 1484-90. Passed 6-18-90, eff. 6-27-90)
§ 405.022 Release of Vehicles Impounded by the Division of Parking Facilities
   Any vehicle impounded pursuant to Section
405.021 shall be released in the manner described in Section
459.08.
(Ord. No. 1495-87. Passed 11-23-87, eff. 11-25-87)
§ 405.023 Continuous Violation Tickets
   (a)   No person shall stand or park a vehicle in continuous violation of any
parking infraction offense.
   (b)   Any person authorized to issue parking infraction tickets who observes
that a vehicle has been parked for two (2) hours or more in continuous
violation of a parking infraction offense may issue a second parking infraction
ticket served in accordance with Chapter
459.
   (c)   No vehicle found standing or parked in continuous violation of any
parking infraction offense shall be ticketed more than twice per calendar day
for the same infraction in the same location.
(Ord. No. 645-06. Passed 6-12-06, eff. 6-16-06)
§ 405.03 Report of Condition of Vehicle Towed by Private Agency
   (a)   The police officer who orders a motor vehicle to be taken into custody
and towed by private towing agencies from the scene where found, shall make a
report of the general condition of the vehicle and a list of its contents found
in and about the interior. Such report shall be made in quadruplicate at the
time the order or request to tow is made, upon forms prescribed by the Division
of Police. The original and one (1) copy of the report shall be kept in the
files of the Division, one (1) copy shall be delivered to the person who is to
tow the vehicle and one (1) copy shall be delivered to the owner of the vehicle
at the time of release. The person who tows the vehicle shall sign all copies
of the report prior to removing the vehicle from the scene. However, in the
case of junk, abandoned or stripped vehicles, in the case of vehicles towed
away under the emergency snow ban Section
451.17, or in the case of vehicles towed to City lots, it shall not be
necessary that the police officer remain at the scene until the arrival of the
towing agency. In any case of urgent police necessity, the officer may leave
the scene, but shall return immediately after disposition of the emergency, or
if the vehicle has been towed away, he or she shall go immediately to the
towing agency, reinspect the vehicle and obtain the signature of the tow truck
operator or the agency representative.
   (b)   No person shall remove tires, parts, equipment or anything of value
from a motor vehicle taken into tow.
   (c)   The tow truck operator and the agency which he or she represents shall
then be held responsible for the safe keeping of such vehicle until such time
as it is reclaimed by the owner. If the vehicle is not maintained in the same
condition as when received or has had anything detached or removed from it the
towing agency shall be liable and shall compensate the owner accordingly.
   (d)   A conviction under this section or failure to fulfill this
responsibility to properly safe keep such vehicle or to compensate for damage
or loss shall result in the forfeiture of any agency’s right and authority to
conduct any further towing transaction for the Division of Police.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 405.04 Storage Fee at Vehicle Pound
   Whenever any vehicle, except a bicycle, is stored in a vehicle pound for any
reason, the person reclaiming the vehicle shall be charged a storage fee of
nine dollars ($9.00) for the first five (5) days or fraction thereof, and
thereafter shall be charged six dollars ($6.00) for each day or fraction of a
day. No fee for storage shall be charged when the vehicle is the property of
the victim of a crime and said vehicle is being held by the Division of Police
for processing.
(Ord. No. 2208-2000. Passed 6-19-01, eff. 6-27-01)
§ 405.05 Redemption of Impounded Vehicles; Bond; Hearing; Trial
   (a)   The owner or other person lawfully entitled to possession of an
impounded vehicle shall have the following three (3) options with respect to
such vehicle:
      (1)   The owner or other person lawfully entitled to possession of such
vehicle shall pay a towing charge of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for an
ordinary tow or thirty-five dollars ($35.00) for a dolly tow, all outstanding
fines for violating provisions of this Traffic Code, and a storage fee of three
dollars ($3.00) for each day or part thereof the vehicle is impounded after the
first twenty-four (24) hours. Upon such payment, the vehicle shall be released.
      (2)   The owner or other person lawfully entitled to possession of such
vehicle shall furnish a bond in an amount as set by rule of the Municipal
Court. Such bond shall be upon condition that such owner or other person appear
in the Municipal Court to answer the violation which caused the vehicle to be
impounded. The date for such appearance shall be scheduled when the bond is
posted. Upon the posting of such bond, the vehicle shall be released.
      (3)   The owner or other person lawfully entitled to possession of such
vehicle shall request a probable cause hearing. The hearing shall take place on
the day after such owner or other person has given written notice to the
Cleveland Police Division Vehicle Impound Unit of his or her intention to
challenge the towing. If, however, such day is a Saturday, Sunday or legal
holiday, the hearing will be held on the next day which is not a Saturday,
Sunday or legal holiday.
      The hearing shall be held before a judge in the Municipal Court. The
scope of the hearing shall be confined to the issue of whether there was
probable cause to believe the vehicle was parked in violation of law at the
time of towing. The Court shall receive into evidence the Police Division’s
dispatch card on the vehicle or the traffic citation or notice which led to the
impoundment of the vehicle. The Court shall also receive into evidence a
computer printout from the Cleveland Alert Law Enforcement System (CALES) if
the vehicle was towed pursuant to Section
405.02(j). The admission into evidence of the dispatch card or traffic citation
or notice, or the dispatch card or traffic citation or notice and the computer
printout where the vehicle was towed pursuant to Section
405.02(j), shall constitute a prima facie showing of probable cause. Additional
evidence however, may be offered by the City. The owner or other person
lawfully entitled to possession of the vehicle may offer evidence at the
conclusion of the City’s case, which may be followed by rebuttal. The hearing
shall be conducted under the rules of evidence prevailing in criminal trials
generally. Upon conclusion of all the evidence, the Court shall do one (1) of
the following:
         A.   Find that there was no probable cause to believe that the vehicle
was parked in violation of law at the time of towing, in which case the vehicle
shall be released without charge.
         B.   Find that there was probable cause to believe that the vehicle
was parked in violation of law at the time of towing, in which case the vehicle
shall be held pending trial on the traffic citation. The trial on the merits of
the traffic citation shall be scheduled upon a finding of probable cause.
However, the owner or other person lawfully entitled to possession of the
vehicle may furnish a bond as provided in subsection (a)(2) hereof, and claim
the vehicle pending trial.
   (b)   If at the trial on the merits of the traffic citation, the Court finds
the defendant not guilty, the vehicle, if impounded, shall be released without
charge. If the Court finds the defendant guilty, the Court shall, in addition
to court costs and any sentence on the traffic citation, impose a fine
consisting of the impounding fee and towing fee established by Section
405.04. The fine comprised of the impounding fee, the towing fee and the
storage fee is mandatory, and the Court shall not suspend any part of such
fine. Upon the payment of all of the foregoing sums, the vehicle shall be
released.
   (c)   No vehicle shall be released pursuant to this section unless the
person claiming ownership or lawful possession produces proof of identity and
ownership.
(Ord. No. 1054-A-80. Passed 1-12-81, eff. 1-16-81)
§ 405.06 Impounding and Towing Fees
   (a)   In addition to the storage fee provided for in Section
405.04, the following fees shall be assessed against the owner or other person
claiming an impounded vehicle:
      (1)   An impound fee of thirty dollars ($30.00), except that the impound
fee shall be reduced to ten dollars ($10.00) for a person reclaiming a
recovered stolen vehicle.
      (2)   A towing fee of one hundred and twenty-five dollars ($125.00),
except that the towing fee shall be reduced to fifty dollars ($50.00) for a
person reclaiming a recovered stolen vehicle, and shall be increased to one
hundred and seventy-five dollars ($175.00) for a person reclaiming a vehicle
impounded incident to an arrest.
   The towing charge shall be increased by thirty-five dollars ($35.00) if a
dolly or flatbed is used or if a tire or tires are changed.
   (b)   No towing or impounding fees shall be charged when the vehicle is the
property of the victim of a crime and such vehicle is being held by the
Division of Police for processing.
(Ord. No. 857-14. Passed 8-20-14, eff. 8-22-14)
§ 405.07 Pound Records
   The police officer or person in charge of the vehicle pound shall keep the
names of all owners of vehicles impounded, license plate numbers and the nature
and circumstances of each violation, as well as the disposition of each case.
The Clerk of the Municipal Court shall account for all fees collected under
this chapter and pay the same into the City Treasury.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 405.08 Impounding Commercial Vehicles; Fees
   (a)   Storage Fee. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section
405.04, whenever any commercial vehicle is impounded and stored, either in a
vehicle pound operated by the City or other area designated by the Director of
Public Safety, a charge of ten dollars ($10.00) per day or fraction thereof in
excess of twenty-four (24) hours, shall be charged for the storage of all
commercial vehicles not exceeding five (5) tons net weight, and a charge of
twenty dollars ($20.00) per day or fraction in excess of twenty-four (24)
hours, shall be charged for the storage of all commercial vehicles in excess of
five (5) tons net weight.
   (b)   Towing Fees. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section
405.06, the fees for towing a commercial vehicle will be assessed in accordance
with this division. Each firm that is under contract with the City for the
towing of commercial vehicles under the authority of Section
135.42 shall be paid in accordance with the schedule of its commercial rates on
file with the Director of Public Safety as required by division (d) of Section
135.42.
   (c)   Impounding Fee. An impounding fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) shall be
charged.
   (d)   Fees Assessed. The storage and impounding fees provided for in this
section shall be assessed against the owner or other person claiming such
impounded vehicles.
(Ord. No. 292-07. Passed 6-11-07, eff. 6-15-07)
§ 405.09 Impounding Bicycles
   Whenever any bicycle is operated by any minor under the age of eighteen (18)
years in violation of the provisions of this Traffic Code, such bicycle may be
impounded by any police officer in any vehicle pound established under
authority of Section
405.01. When any bicycle has been impounded, written notice or personal service
shall be made forthwith by the officer in charge of such pound to a parent or
guardian of the licensee of such bicycle. The bicycle so impounded shall be
surrendered to a parent or guardian of such minor after payment of any
impounding charge and a full explanation to the parent or guardian of the
reason for seizing the bicycle. When any impounded bicycle is not redeemed
within three (3) days after mailing of notice or personal service, a charge of
twenty-five cents ($0.25) per day but not to exceed one dollar ($1.00) shall be
made by the officer in charge of the pound and collected by the Clerk of the
Municipal Court for such impounding.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 405.10 Towing Preparation Fees
   (a)   The owner or other person claiming an impounded vehicle other than a
commercial vehicle shall be assessed the following towing preparation fees in
addition to the other fees and costs provided for in these Codified Ordinances:
      (1)   Three dollars ($3.00) for each fuse needed.
      (2)   Two dollars ($2.00) for removal of the transmission pin.
      (3)   A rate of seven dollars ($7.00) per quarter hour or fraction
thereof in excess of one-half (1/2) hour for the preparation of the vehicle for
towing, commencing at the arrival of the tow truck at the vehicle to be
impounded, provided that any of the following circumstances exist:
         A.   When the vehicle is not on the traveled portion or berm of the
roadway, such as over an embankment or in deep snow or mud; or
         B.   When it is necessary to separate vehicles or pull the vehicle
from an obstruction; or
         C.   When it is necessary to right the vehicle on its wheels.
   (b)   The owner or other person claiming an impounded commercial vehicle
shall be assessed the following towing preparation fees in addition to the
other fees and costs provided for in these Codified Ordinances:
      (1)   Three dollars ($3.00) for each fuse needed.
      (2)   Seventy five dollars ($75.00) per dolly required.
      (3)   A rate of thirty-six dollars ($36.00) per hour or fraction thereof,
and thereafter a rate of eighteen dollars ($18.00) per half hour or fraction
thereof, per additional helper.
      (4)   Two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each rescue kit (air bags) per
hour or fraction thereof to a maximum of one thousand two hundred dollars
($1,200.00).
(Ord. No. 578-89. Passed 6-19-89, eff. 6-28-89)
§ 405.11 Fee for Incompleted Tow
   (a)   If the owner or other person claiming a right to lawful possession of
a vehicle to be impounded for a violation of any of the parking infraction
offenses listed in division (l) of Section
405.02 arrives at the scene prior to the actual conveyance of the vehicle and
identifies himself or herself and establishes to the satisfaction of the police
officer that he or she is entitled to possession of the vehicle, the police
officer providing for the removal of the vehicle shall direct that the activity
to remove the vehicle be ceased. The police officer shall then direct that the
possession of the vehicle be retained by or returned to the owner or other
person claiming lawful possession of the vehicle, provided that all of the
following are true, in the opinion of the police officer:
      (1)   The owner or other person claiming lawful possession of the vehicle
is capable of safely taking possession of the vehicle; and
      (2)   The flow of traffic will not be unreasonably impeded; and
      (3)   The health, safety or welfare of the public will not be adversely
affected.
   (b)   If the circumstances described in division (a) of this section occur
after a tow truck has arrived at the vehicle and activity to remove the vehicle
has commenced, then the owner or other person claiming lawful possession of the
vehicle shall be charged a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00), twenty dollars
($20.00) of which shall be for the cost of the activity to remove the vehicle
and five dollars ($5.00) of which shall be attributed to the cost of releasing
the vehicle.
   (c)   A police officer shall not direct that a vehicle be retained by or
returned to the owner or other person pursuant to division (a) of this section
in cases in which there are four (4) or more parking infraction judgments or
previously issued outstanding criminal citations or notices of violation of any
of the provisions of this Traffic Code associated with the vehicle.
(Ord. No. 533-91. Passed 3-4-91, eff. 3-4-91)
§ 405.12 Fee for Diverting Recovered Stolen Vehicles and Other Vehicles from
Impoundment; Agreements Authorized
   A fee shall be charged to participants in a program established by the
Director of Public Safety to divert, as an alternative to impoundment,
recovered stolen vehicles, damaged or wrecked vehicles resulting from traffic
accidents that are subject to impoundment under Section
405.02, and other classes of vehicles as determined by the Director, to the
possession of an insurance company, the owner of the vehicle, or a third party
acting on behalf of the insurance company or owner. The Board of Control shall
establish a fee per vehicle to be charged to the participants in the program.
The Director of Public Safety may enter into agreements to conduct a vehicle
diversion program as described in this section.
(Ord. No. 1119-91. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 6-26-91)
§ 405.13 Auctioning of Impounded Motor Vehicles that are Unclaimed or Abandoned
   (a)   The Director of Public Safety may arrange for the auction of non-
commercial and commercial vehicles that are impounded under the authority of
these Codified Ordinances, other than vehicles subject to forfeiture under RC
Chapter 2933 where the disposition of the vehicle is governed by that chapter,
and that are unclaimed or abandoned and authorized to be disposed of under RC
Chapter 4513 or other applicable law. The provisions of this section do not
limit the authority of the Director of Public Safety to dispose of such
vehicles under any contract that the Director may have entered into with motor
vehicle salvage dealers or scrap metal processing facilities under the
authority of division (a)(3) of section 135.42 for the disposal of such
vehicles.
   (b)   If a vehicle is auctioned under the authority of this section, then
the proceeds of the auction shall be deposited in an agency fund. The proceeds
of the auction shall be disbursed from the agency fund in the following
priority: the towing firm that impounded the vehicle shall be paid first, in
the amount authorized for its services in these Codified Ordinances, up to the
amount of the proceeds obtained. The storage company shall be paid next, in the
amount authorized for its services in these Codified Ordinances, for storage
for the number of days that the vehicle was stored or thirty (30) days,
whichever is less, up to the amount of proceeds remaining after the towing firm
is paid. Any other costs required to be paid by the City in connection with the
auction shall be paid next, up to the amount of the proceeds remaining after
the towing and storage firms are paid as provided in this division. Any
remaining funds shall be paid to the credit of the general fund.
   (c)   The Director of Public Safety may allow a vendor under contract with
the City under the authority of section 135.42 for the towing of commercial
vehicles to itself conduct the auction of unclaimed commercial vehicles under
such terms as the Director may prescribe. In any such case, the proceeds
obtained at auction shall be dispersed by the vendor in the same amounts as
that specified in division (b) of this section for auctions conducted by the
City.
(Ord. No. 292-07. Passed 6-11-07, eff. 6-15-07)
TITLE III: STREETS AND TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
   Chapter
411   Street Obstructions and Special Uses
   Chapter
413   Traffic Control Devices
CHAPTER 411 – STREET OBSTRUCTIONS AND SPECIAL USES
411.01   Placing Injurious Material or Obstruction in Street
411.011   Street and Sidewalk Obstruction Permits
411.02   Disposal of Snow
411.03   Play Streets
411.04   Toy Vehicles and Games on Streets; Seizure and Disposal of Mobile
Basketball Hoops
411.05   Parade Permits and Fee
411.06   Marathons, Walkathons and Other Races
Cross-reference:
   Dropping, sifting and leaking loads, CO
439.11
Statutory reference:
   See sectional histories for similar State law
   Power to regulate processions or assemblages, RC 4511.07
§ 411.01 Placing Injurious Material or Obstruction in Street
   (a)   (1)   No person shall place or knowingly drop upon any part of a
highway, lane, road, street or alley any tacks, bottles, wire, glass, nails or
other articles which may damage or injure any person, vehicle or animal
traveling along or upon the highway, except such substances that may be placed
upon the roadway by proper authority for the repair or construction thereof.
      (2)   Any person who drops or permits to be dropped or thrown upon any
highway any destructive or injurious material shall immediately remove the
same.
      (3)   Any person authorized to remove a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a
highway shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the
highway from the vehicle.
      (4)   No person shall place any obstruction in or upon a highway without
proper authority.
   (b)   No person, with intent to cause physical harm to a person or a
vehicle, shall place or knowingly drop upon any part of a highway, lane, road,
street or alley any tacks, bottles, wire, glass, nails or other articles which
may damage or injure any person, vehicle or animal traveling along or upon the
highway, except substances that may be placed upon the roadway by proper
authority for the repair or construction thereof.
   (c)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one
(1) year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to one (1) predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever
violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. If, within one (1) year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two (2) or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses,
whoever violates division (a) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(RC 4511.74; Ord. No. 1277-15. Passed 4-24-17, eff. 4-25-17)
§ 411.011 Street and Sidewalk Obstruction Permits
   (a)   No person shall place or cause to be placed any object or property so
as to obstruct the public's use of any highway, lane, road, street or alley
without first obtaining a street obstruction permit and/or a street opening
permit, if necessary, from the Director of Capital Projects.
   (b)   An application for a street obstruction permit shall contain the
following information:
      (1)   The name of the applicant;
      (2)   The location of the proposed obstruction;
      (3)   The purpose of the obstruction;
      (4)   A description of the obstruction;
      (5)   The proposed commencement date, time and estimated duration of the
obstruction; and
      (6)   A traffic maintenance plan.
   (c)   An application for a street obstruction permit for construction and
rehabilitation projects regulated by Chapter
3115, shall contain the information required in division (b)(1) through (b)(5)
above, and in addition shall include a traffic and pedestrian maintenance plan.
Such plan shall be approved, subject to revision, by the Division of
Engineering and Construction in consultation with the Division of Traffic
Engineering, according to pedestrian safety criteria required by rules and
regulations promulgated by the Directors of Capital Projects and Public Works
based on Ohio Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices (OMUTCD) standards. In
addition to the requirements of Chapter
3115, required criteria shall include the following:
      (1)   A plan for safe alternative re-routing of pedestrians and
wheelchair riders, if the applicant presents specific reasons that the existing
sidewalk cannot stay open or abutting walkway cannot be maintained with safety
measures during construction;
      (2)   Pedestrians and wheelchair riders shall not be lead into conflict
with vehicles, equipment, or operations moving through or around the work zone;
      (3)   Temporary pedestrian access re-routes or detours must be
continuous, unobstructed, and protected from construction;
      (4)   Accessibility and compliance with the Americans with Disabilities
Act (ADA);
      (5)   If a temporary pedestrian access re-route must involve crossing the
roadway, a plan to direct pedestrians and wheelchair riders with advance
signing directing them to the nearest official crosswalk; and
      (6)   A plan to erect appropriate signage notifying pedestrians and
wheelchair riders of work zones in compliance with rules and regulations and to
post a copy of such permit at each approach to the work zone.
   (d)   The application shall be accompanied with the applicable fees set
forth below for the permit and any inspection costs related thereto. The
application shall also be accompanied with evidence of a public liability
insurance policy issued by an insurer authorized to transact business in Ohio,
in an amount not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), listing the
City of Cleveland as an additional insured. As used in this division, a City-
Sponsored Event means an event supported or produced by one of the branches,
departments, or offices of the City of Cleveland that furthers the functions or
goals of that branch, department or office, and a CDC qualifying event means an
event held or sponsored by a community development corporation, organized under
R.C. Chapter 1702, that is open to the public at no charge, is anticipated to
attract and/or keep members of the public at the event location, and includes
food truck staging or is a festival that obstructs the street, and includes
food truck staging or is a festival that obstructs the street.
   The Director of Capital Projects shall charge the following fees for
obstruction permits issued under this section:
      (1)   Construction work partially taking a portion of the street and may
include the sidewalk:
         A.   In Central Business District:
            $50.00 per week for 20 LF up to 4 weeks
            After 4 weeks, $190.00 per month for 20 LF
         B.   In Other Commercial Districts:
            $25.00 per week for 20 LF up to 4 weeks
            After 4 weeks, $85.00 per month for 20 LF
         C.   In Residential Areas: $20.00 per month.
      (2)   Construction work entirely taking the street and may include the
sidewalk:
         A.   In Central Business District:
            $100.00 per week for 20 LF up to 4 weeks
            After 4 weeks, $380.00 per month for 20 LF
         B.   In Other Commercial Districts:
            $50.00 per week for 20 LF up to 4 weeks
            After 4 weeks, $190.00 per month for 20 LF
         C.   In Residential Areas: $20.00 per month.
      (3)   Construction work partially taking the sidewalk only:
         A.   In Central Business District:
            $25.00 per week for 20 LF up to 4 weeks
            After 4 weeks, $85.00 per month for 20 LF
         B.   In Other Commercial Districts:
            $12.50 per week for 20 LF up to 4 weeks
            After 4 weeks, $44.50 per month for 20 LF
         C.   In Residential Areas: $20.00 per month.
      (4)   Construction work taking the entire sidewalk only:
         A.   In Central Business District:
            $50.00 per week for 20 LF up to 4 weeks
            After 4 weeks, $190.00 per month for 20 LF
         B.   In Other Commercial Districts:
            $25.00 per week for 20 LF up to 4 weeks
            After 4 weeks, $85.00 per month for 20 LF
         C.   In Residential Areas: $20.00 per month.
      (5)   Dumpster or Portable Onsite Storage Unit:
         A.   In Central Business District: $20.00 per month plus an additional
$50.00 for inspection.
         B.   In Other Commercial Districts: $20.00 per month plus an
additional $50.00 for inspection.
         C.   In Residential Areas: $20.00 per month.
      (6)   City-Sponsored Special Event: No charge.
      (7)   Non-City-Sponsored Special Event: $100.00 per event.
      (8)   CDC Qualifying Event: no charge.
      (9)   Block Party: $25.00 per event.
      (10)   Filming: $20.00 per filming location.
      (11)   Bus Parking: $50.00 per day for each bus.
      (12)   Expedited Reviews: $50.00 additional fee for any requested and
performed expedited reviews.
   (e)   The Director may deny or revoke a street obstruction permit whenever
the Director finds:
      (1)   The applicant has previously violated the provisions of a street
obstruction permit or has submitted materially false or incomplete information
on any street obstruction permit application; or
      (2)   The obstruction would unreasonably interfere with another
obstruction for which a permit has been issued; or
      (3)   The time, place or size of the obstruction would unreasonably
interfere with public convenience and safe use of the street; or
      (4)   The obstruction would unreasonably interfere with the movement or
service capability of emergency or service vehicles; or
      (5)   The obstruction would unreasonably interfere with a construction
project.
   (f)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section shall be fined not less
than two hundred dollars ($200.00).
   (g)   This section shall not apply to any person that has been issued a
permit under Chapter
3109 relating to encroachment permits.
(Ord. No. 1141-2023. Passed 2-3-25, eff. 2-4-25)
§ 411.02 Disposal of Snow
   No person removing snow from any private driveway within the City shall
deposit such snow upon the pavement of any public street or on any tree lawn on
any public street, except the tree lawn immediately in front of the premises
from which the snow is removed.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 411.03 Play Streets
   Whenever authorized signs are erected designating any street or part thereof
as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon such street or portion
thereof unless necessary to the service or convenience of persons residing on
such street or unless such person resides thereon.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 411.04 Toy Vehicles and Games on Streets; Seizure and Disposal of Mobile
Basketball Hoops
   (a)   No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster,
toy vehicle or similar device, shall go upon a roadway except while crossing a
street at a crosswalk and except upon streets set aside as play streets when
authorized as such.
   (b)   No person shall fly a kite or play any game of ball, including playing
or using mobile or moveable basketball hoops, or other game on any street
unless the same has been set aside for playground purposes.
   (c)   In addition to the penalties set forth in Section
403.99, any mobile or moveable basketball hoop or any equipment or device used
as a mobile or moveable basketball hoop, found to have been used in violation
of division (b) of this section, without regard to the ownership of the
property, is hereby declared to be contraband, and shall be seized and disposed
of in accordance with RC Chapter 2981.
(Ord. No. 501-10. Passed 7-14-10, eff. 7-22-10)
§ 411.05 Parade Permits and Fee
   (a)   Definitions. As used in this section:
      (1)   "Chief" means the Chief of Police or the Chief's designee.
      (2)   "Crosswalk" shall have the same meaning as defined in Section
401.14.
      (3)   "Impromptu Demonstration" means a spontaneously-announced parade,
whether proposed by a person or group, with little or no advanced planning and
usually with the help of social media in response to events of great community
or public interest occurring within two (2) days of the parade.
      (4)   "Parade" means any formation, march, procession of any kind, or
motorcade consisting of persons, animals, or vehicles, or combination thereof
traveling in unison for a common purpose upon the streets and public grounds
within the City with an intent of attracting public attention that interferes
with the normal flow or regulation of vehicular or pedestrian traffic upon the
streets, sidewalks, and public grounds within the City.
      (5)   "Pedestrian" shall have the same meaning as defined in Section
401.37.
      (6)   "Person" shall have the same meaning as defined in Section
401.38.
      (7)   "Public Grounds" means property under the control of the City to
which the general public has access, including all parks, malls, public lands
and any paved areas on such property, but excluding streets, public buildings,
and sidewalks.
      (8)   "Sidewalk" means the portion of a street adjacent to the curb lines
or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines, intended for
use of pedestrians.
      (9)   "Social Media" means online or electronic communication created by
individuals using publicly-accessible technologies through the internet.
      (10)   “Special Event” shall have the same meaning as defined in Section
133.07 and a permit as provided in Section
133.07.
      (11)   "Street" means any place or way set aside or open to the general
public for purposes of vehicular traffic, including any berm or shoulder
parkway, right-of-way, or median strip thereof, excluding sidewalks.
      (12)   "Vehicle" shall have the same meaning as defined in Section
401.73.
   (b)   Permit Required. Except as provided in division (f)(2) of this
section, no person shall engage in or conduct a parade without first obtaining
a permit issued as provided in this section.
   (c)   Application Filing. A person seeking a parade permit shall file an
application with the Office of Special Events and Marketing on the forms and in
the manner provided and the application form shall be signed by the applicant.
      (1)   A permit application for a parade to be held with a special event
shall be filed at least fourteen (14) days before the special event is proposed
to commence.
      (2)   A permit application for a parade that will not be held with a
special event shall be filed at least four (4) business days before the parade
is proposed to commence.
      (3)   An application for a parade permit shall be considered filed upon
receipt of the fully completed application by the Office of Special Events and
Marketing.
   (d)   Application Contents. The application for a parade permit shall set
forth the following information:
      (1)   The name, address, day-time telephone number, and email, if
available, of the applicant;
      (2)   The name, address, and telephone number of the headquarters of the
organization for which the parade is to be conducted;
      (3)   The name and telephone number of the on-site coordinator or person
in charge of the parade if different from the applicant;
      (4)   The date, time and estimated duration of the parade including time
to organize before and disperse after the parade, and any possible alternative
dates and times;
      (5)   A description of the route to be traveled, if applicable, including
the starting point, the identification of and the directions to be followed on
all streets, the termination point, and any areas to be used to set up before
and disperse after the parade;
      (6)   An aerial street map of the route to be traveled clearly
delineating all of the affected streets, compass coordinates and any proposed
street closures;
      (7)   A statement of whether the proposed parade is a new or a recurring
event;
      (8)   The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles
which, will constitute the parade and the types of animals and vehicles
participating in the parade;
      (9)   The contact information for any private security services to be
provided by the organizer for the parade, if applicable; and
      (10)   A description of any sound amplification equipment to be used in
connection with the parade, if applicable.
   (e)   Application Review. Applications for parade permits shall be reviewed
by the Office of Special Events and Marketing and the Division of Police, and
approved by the Chief and the Directors of Public Safety and Public Works, or
the Director's designees, before a permit is issued. In determining whether to
issue a permit, the following factors shall be considered:
      (1)   Whether the information contained in the permit application is
found to be false, misleading, or incomplete in any material detail;
      (2)   Whether the time, place, or size of the parade including the
assembly areas and route of march, will unreasonably interfere with the safe
and expeditious movement of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, ingress or egress
to or use of adjoining private property, or unreasonably disrupt the use of a
street when it is usually subject to significant traffic congestion;
      (3)   Whether the parade will present an unreasonable danger to the
health or safety of the parade participants or other members of the public, or
cause damage to public or private property;
      (4)   Whether the conduct of the parade will require the diversion of so
great a number of City police officers to properly police the line of movement
and contiguous areas as to prevent normal police protection within the City,
including previously permitted parades and special events;
      (5)   Whether the parade would unreasonably interfere with the movement
of police vehicles, fire-fighting equipment, or ambulance service to other
areas of the City;
      (6)   Whether a permit for a parade or special event has been granted or
has previously been filed and will be granted, for the same time and
approximate location, or would unreasonably interfere with another parade or
special event for which a permit has been issued;
      (7)   Whether the parade will substantially interfere with any
construction or maintenance work schedule to take place along the planned route
or location; and
      (8)   Whether the applicant, the organization, or persons represented by
the applicant or organization have previously violated the provisions of a
similar permit or have violated any City ordinances or state or federal laws in
connection with a previous parade in the City.
   (f)   Policy; Exceptions. It is the policy of the City of Cleveland that
persons and groups have the right to organize and participate in peaceful
parades and impromptu demonstrations on the streets and public grounds of the
City, subject to reasonable restrictions designed to protect public safety,
persons and property, and to accommodate the interest of persons not
participating in the assemblies to use the streets and sidewalks to travel to
their intended destinations, and use public grounds for their intended
purposes. For this reason:
      (1)   Except as provided in division (f)(2) of this section, all parades
shall obtain a parade permit under this section and all reasonable efforts
shall be taken to expedite the review of any application for a permit for a
parade;
      (2)   A person or group is not required to obtain a permit for a parade
before conducting the parade where:
         A.   The parade is not associated with a special event, will take
place on sidewalks and crosswalks and will not prevent pedestrian traffic from
using the sidewalks or crosswalks or interfere with vehicular traffic on the
streets at the crosswalks, and will not occur on streets; or
         B.   The event is an impromptu demonstration, provided that a person
involved in organizing the event notifies the Chief, by telephone, in writing,
or in person, at least eight (8) hours prior to the parade of: 1) the date and
time of the parade; 2) the name and telephone number of an on-site coordinator
or a person in charge of the parade; and 3) a description of the proposed route
to be traveled, including the starting point, the identification of and the
directions to be followed on all streets, the termination point, and any areas
to be used to set up before and disperse after a parade.
      (3)   The Chief may impose reasonable time, place, and manner
restrictions on parades that have not obtained a permit under division (f)(2)
of this section based on the Chief's determination that the parade will
substantially interfere with:
         A.   The safe and expeditious movement of pedestrian and vehicular
traffic, ingress or egress to or use of adjoining private property, or
unreasonably disrupt the use of a street when it is usually subject to
significant traffic congestion;
         B.   The health or safety of the parade participants or other members
of the public, or cause damage to public or private property;
         C.   The movement of police vehicles, fire-fighting equipment, or
ambulance service to other areas of the City;
         D.   Another parade, special event, or impromptu demonstration; or
         E.   Any construction or maintenance work schedule to take place along
a route or location to be used by the parade.
   (g)   Permit Fee. A fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) to cover the
administrative cost of processing the permit shall be paid to the City when the
approved permit is obtained from the Division of Assessments and Licenses. This
fee is separate from and in addition to any fees or charges paid for special
events under Section
133.08.
   (h)   Permit Revocation. Based on the recommendation of the Director of
Public Safety or the Director's designee, the Commissioner of Assessments and
Licenses may revoke or suspend any permit granted under this section because of
any false statement made in the application for the permit.
   (i)   Appeals. If an application for a parade permit is denied or revoked,
the applicant or permittee shall be notified in writing by email, if available,
or by telephone and regular mail to the address on the application with the
reason for the denial or revocation. An applicant or permittee shall have the
right to appeal the denial or revocation of a parade permit within three (3)
business days of receipt of the notice of denial to the Director of Public
Safety. The Director of Public Safety, or his designee, shall hold a hearing on
the denial or revocation within three (3) business days of receipt of the
notice of appeal. If the Director determines that the permit should be granted,
the applicant shall be notified in writing and obtain the permit from the
Division of Assessments and Licenses upon payment of the fee. If the Director
determines that a revoked permit should be reinstated, the permittee shall be
notified in writing and proceed as if the permit was not revoked. If the
Director affirms the denial or revocation of the permit, the applicant shall be
immediately notified of the decision and shall have the right to appeal the
denial within the same time and in the same manner provided in Section
403.09.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 411.06 Marathons, Walkathons and Other Races
   No person shall hold a marathon, walkathon or other race in or upon any of
the streets, highways, parks or public grounds of the City without both the
consent and approval of Council and meeting the requirements as established in
Section
411.05.
(Ord. No. 2299-83. Passed 11-21-83, eff. 11-23-83)
CHAPTER 413 – TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
413.01   Obedience to Traffic Control Devices
413.02   Through Streets; Stop and Yield Right-of- Way Signs
413.03   Traffic Control Signal Terms and Lights
413.031   Use of Automated Cameras to Impose Civil Penalties upon Red Light and
Speeding Violators
413.032   Costs of Collection of Unpaid Tickets for Photo-Enforced Offenses
413.04   Lane-Use Control Signals Over Individual Lanes
413.05   Pedestrian Control Signals
413.06   Flashing Traffic Signals – Repealed
413.07   Unauthorized Signs and Signals; Hiding from View; Advertising
413.08   Tampering with Traffic Control Devices Prohibited
413.09   No Right Turns on Red
413.10   No Right Turns on Red During Certain Hours
413.11   Driver’s Duties Upon Approaching Ambiguous or Non-Working Traffic
Signal
Cross-reference:
   Traffic control device defined, CO
401.67
Statutory reference:
   See sectional histories for similar State law
   Designation of through streets or stop intersections, RC 4511.07, 4511.65
   Placing and maintaining local traffic control devices, RC 4511.10, 4511.11
   Uniform system of traffic control devices, RC 4511.09, 4511.11
§ 413.01 Obedience to Traffic Control Devices
   (a)   (1)   No pedestrian or driver of a vehicle or operator of a streetcar
or trackless trolley, shall disobey the instructions of any traffic-control
device placed in accordance with the provisions of this Traffic Code, unless at
the time otherwise directed by a police officer. When both traffic control
signals and stop signs are erected at intersections, traffic shall be governed
by the traffic control signal while it is in operation.
      (2)   No provision of this Traffic Code for which signs are required
shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the
alleged violation an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently
legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular
section of this Traffic Code does not state that signs are required, that
section shall be effective even though no signs are erected or in place.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one
(1) year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to one (1) predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever
violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. If, within one (1) year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two (2) or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses,
whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
(RC 4511.12; Ord. No. 1278-15. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 413.02 Through Streets; Stop and Yield Right- of-Way Signs
   (a)   All State routes are hereby designated as through streets or highways,
provided that stop signs, yield signs or traffic control signals shall be
erected at all intersections with such through streets or highways by the Ohio
Department of Transportation as to streets or highways under its jurisdiction
and by the City as to streets or highways under its jurisdiction, except as
otherwise provided in this section. Where two (2) or more state routes that are
through streets or highways intersect and no traffic control signal is in
operation, stop signs or yield signs shall be erected at one (1) or more
entrances thereto, except as otherwise provided in this section.
   Whenever the Director of the Ohio Department of Transportation determines on
the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that stop signs are
necessary to stop traffic on a through highway for safe and efficient
operation, nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent such
installations. When circumstances warrant, the Director also may omit stop
signs on roadways intersecting through highways under his or her jurisdiction.
Before the Director either installs or removes a stop sign under this division,
he or she shall give notice, in writing, of that proposed action to the City at
least thirty (30) days before installing or removing the stop sign.
   (b)   Other streets or highways, or portions thereof, are hereby designated
through streets or highways, if they are within the City, if they have a
continuous length of more than one (1) mile between the limits of such street
or highway or portion thereof, and if they have “stop” or “yield” signs or
traffic control signals at the entrances of the majority of intersecting
streets or highways. For purposes of this section, the limits of such street or
highway or portion thereof, shall be a municipal corporation line, the physical
terminus of the street or highway or any point on such street or highway at
which vehicular traffic thereon is required by regulatory signs to stop or
yield to traffic on the intersecting street, provided that in residence
districts the City may by ordinance designate such street or highway, or
portion thereof, not to be a through street or highway and thereafter the
affected residence district shall be indicated by official traffic control
devices. Where two (2) or more through streets or highways designated under
this subsection (b) intersect and no traffic control signal is in operation,
stop signs or yield signs shall be erected at one (1) or more entrances thereto
by the City, except as otherwise provided in this section.
   (c)   Stop signs need not be erected at intersections so constructed as to
permit traffic to safely enter a through street or highway without coming to a
stop. Signs shall be erected at such intersections indicating that the operator
of a vehicle shall yield the right-of- way to or merge with all traffic
proceeding on the through street or highway.
   (d)   Council may designate additional through streets or highways whereupon
the appropriate executive officers shall erect stop signs, yield signs or
traffic control signals at all streets and highways intersecting such through
streets or highways, or may designate any intersection as a stop or yield
intersection and shall erect like signs at one (1) or more entrances to such
intersection.
(RC 4511.65)
   (e)   The following are additional through streets or highways designated by
Council:
   Bellaire Rd., from West 130th St. to Puritas Ave.;
   Berea Rd., from Detroit Ave. to Triskett Rd.;
   Carnegie Ave.;
   Columbus Rd.;
   East Blvd.;
   Fairhill Rd.;
   Fulton Rd.;
   Independence Rd.;
   Jennings Rd.;
   Lake Ave., from Detroit Ave. to Clifton Rd., and from West Blvd. to West
117th St.;
   Lee Rd.;
   Liberty Blvd.;
   Nottingham Rd., from East 185th St. to southerly City limits.;
   Scranton Rd.;
   Train Ave., from Scranton Rd. to West 47th St.;
   Triskett Rd., from West 117th St. to Lorain Ave.;
   Turney Rd.;
   West 117th St.;
   West Blvd.
(Ord. No. 91-96. Passed 3-18-96, eff. 3-26-96)
§ 413.03 Traffic Control Signal Terms and Lights
   Highway traffic signal indications for vehicles and pedestrians shall have
the following meanings:
   (a)   Steady Green Signal Indication.
      (1)   A.   Vehicular traffic, streetcars, and trackless trolleys facing a
circular green signal indication are permitted to proceed straight through or
turn right or left or make a u-turn movement except as such movement is
modified by a lane-use sign, turn prohibition sign, lane marking, roadway
design, separate turn signal indication, or other traffic control device. Such
vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left or making a u-turn
movement, shall yield the right-of-way to both of the following:
            1.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.
         B.   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a u-turn
movement to the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles approaching
from the opposite direction so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard
during the time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the
intersection.
      (2)   Vehicular traffic, streetcars, and trackless trolleys facing a
green arrow signal indication, displayed alone or in combination with another
signal indication, are permitted to cautiously enter the intersection only to
make the movement indicated by such arrow, or such other movement as is
permitted by other indications displayed at the same time. Such vehicular
traffic, including vehicles turning right or left or making a u-turn movement,
shall yield the right-of-way to both of the following:
         A.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
         B.   Other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
      (3)   A.   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication,
as provided in RC 4511.14, pedestrians facing a circular green signal
indication are permitted to proceed across the roadway within any marked or
unmarked associated crosswalk. The pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to
vehicles lawfully within the intersection or so close as to create an immediate
hazard at the time that the green signal indication is first displayed.
         B.   Pedestrians facing a green arrow signal indication, unless
otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or other traffic control
device, shall not cross the roadway.
   (b)   Steady Yellow Signal Indication.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic, streetcars, and trackless trolleys facing a
steady circular yellow signal indication are thereby warned that the related
green movement or the related flashing arrow movement is being terminated or
that a steady red signal indication will be exhibited immediately thereafter
when vehicular traffic, streetcars, and trackless trolleys shall not enter the
intersection. The provisions governing vehicular operation under the movement
being terminated shall continue to apply while the steady circular yellow
signal indication is displayed.
      (2)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow arrow signal indication is
thereby warned that the related green arrow movement or the related flashing
arrow movement is being terminated. The provisions governing vehicular
operation under the movement being terminated shall continue to apply while the
steady yellow arrow signal indication is displayed.
      (3)   Pedestrians facing a steady circular yellow or yellow arrow signal
indication, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication as
provided in RC 4511.14 or other traffic control device, shall not start to
cross the roadway.
   (c)   Steady Red Signal Indication.
      (1)   A.   Vehicular traffic, streetcars, and trackless trolleys facing a
steady circular red signal indication, unless entering the intersection to make
another movement permitted by another signal indication, shall stop at a
clearly marked stop line; but if there is no stop line, traffic shall stop
before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection; or if there
is no crosswalk, then before entering the intersection; and shall remain
stopped until a signal indication to proceed is displayed except as provided in
divisions (c)(1), (c)(2), and (c)(3) of this section.
         B.   Except when a traffic control device is in place prohibiting a
turn on red or a steady red arrow signal indication is displayed, vehicular
traffic facing a steady circular red signal indication is permitted, after
stopping, to enter the intersection to turn right, or to turn left from a one
(1) way street into a one (1) way street. The right to proceed with the turn
shall be subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a stop at a
stop sign.
      (2)   A.   Vehicular traffic, streetcars, and trackless trolleys facing a
steady red arrow signal indication shall not enter the intersection to make the
movement indicated by the arrow and, unless entering the intersection to make
another movement permitted by another signal indication, shall stop at a
clearly marked stop line; but if there is no stop line, before entering the
crosswalk on the near side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk,
then before entering the intersection; and shall remain stopped until a signal
indication or other traffic control device permitting the movement indicated by
such red arrow is displayed.
         B.   When a traffic control device is in place permitting a turn on a
steady red arrow signal indication, vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow
indication is permitted, after stopping, to enter the intersection to turn
right, or to turn left from a one (1) way street into a one (1) way street. The
right to proceed with the turn shall be limited to the direction indicated by
the arrow and shall be subject to the provisions that are applicable after
making a stop at a stop sign.
      (3)   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication as
provided in RC 4511.14 or other traffic control device, pedestrians facing a
steady circular red or steady red arrow signal indication shall not enter the
roadway.
      (4)   The municipality by ordinance, or the Ohio Director of
Transportation on state highways, may prohibit a right or a left turn against a
steady red signal at any intersection, which shall be effective when signs
giving notice thereof are posted at the intersection.
   (d)   Flashing Green Signal Indication. A flashing green signal indication
has no meaning and shall not be used.
   (e)   Flashing Yellow Signal Indication.
      (1)   A.   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing a
flashing circular yellow signal indication, is permitted to cautiously enter
the intersection to proceed straight through or turn right or left or make a u-
turn movement except as such movement is modified by lane-use signs, turn
prohibition signs, lane markings, roadway design, separate turn signal
indications, or other traffic control devices. Such vehicular traffic,
including vehicles turning right or left or making a u-turn movement, shall
yield the right-of-way to both of the following:
            1.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.
         B.   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a u-turn to
the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles approaching from the
opposite direction so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the
time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the intersection.
      (2)   A.   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing a
flashing yellow arrow signal indication, displayed alone or in combination with
another signal indication, is permitted to cautiously enter the intersection
only to make the movement indicated by such arrow, or other such movement as is
permitted by other signal indications displayed at the same time. Such
vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left or making a u-turn,
shall yield the right-of-way to both of the following:
            1.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.
         B.   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a u-turn to
the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles approaching from the
opposite direction so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the
time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the intersection.
      (3)   Pedestrians facing any flashing yellow signal indication at an
intersection, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or
other traffic control device, are permitted to proceed across the roadway
within any marked or unmarked associated crosswalk. Pedestrians shall yield the
right- of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the
flashing yellow signal indication is first displayed.
      (4)   When a flashing circular yellow signal indication is displayed as a
beacon to supplement another traffic control device, road users are notified
that there is a need to pay additional attention to the message contained
thereon or that the regulatory or warning requirements of the other traffic
control device, which might not be applicable at all times, are currently
applicable.
   (f)   Flashing Red Signal Indication.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing a
flashing circular red signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop
line; but if there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near
side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, at the point nearest the
intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the
intersecting roadway before entering the intersection. The right to proceed
shall be subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a stop at a
stop sign.
      (2)   Pedestrians facing any flashing red signal indication at an
intersection, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or
other traffic control device, are permitted to proceed across the roadway
within any marked or unmarked associated crosswalk. Pedestrians shall yield the
right- of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the
flashing red signal indication is first displayed.
      (3)   When a flashing circular red signal indication is displayed as a
beacon to supplement another traffic control device, road users are notified
that there is a need to pay additional attention to the message contained
thereon or that the regulatory requirements of the other traffic control
device, which might not be applicable at all times, are currently applicable.
Use of this signal indication shall be limited to supplementing stop, do not
enter, or wrong way signs, and to applications where compliance with the
supplemented traffic control device requires a stop at a designated point.
   (g)   In the event an official traffic-control signal is erected and
maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this
section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature
can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking
on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of
any such sign or marking the stop shall be made at the signal.
   (h)   This section does not apply at railroad grade crossings. Conduct of
drivers of vehicles, streetcars, and trackless trolleys approaching railroad
grade crossings shall be governed by RC 4511.61 and 4511.62.
(RC 4511.13; Ord. No. 1278-15. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 413.031 Use of Automated Cameras to Impose Civil Penalties upon Red Light and
Speeding Violators
   (a)   Civil Enforcement System Established. The City of Cleveland hereby
adopts a civil enforcement system for red light and speeding offenders
photographed by means of an "automated traffic enforcement camera system" as
defined in division (p). This civil enforcement system imposes monetary
liability on the "owner" of a vehicle as defined in division (p) for failure of
an operator to stop at a traffic signal displaying a steady red light
indication or for the failure of an operator to comply with a speed limitation.
   (b)   Red Light Offense – Liability Imposed. The owner of a vehicle shall be
liable for the penalty imposed under this section if the vehicle crosses a
marked stop line or the intersection plane at a system location when the
traffic signal for that vehicle's direction is emitting a steady red light.
   (c)   Speeding Offense – Liability Imposed. The owner of a vehicle shall be
liable for the penalty imposed under this section if the vehicle is operated at
a speed in excess of the limitations set forth in Section
433.03.
   (d)   Liability Does Not Constitute a Conviction. The imposition of
liability under this section shall not be deemed a conviction for any purpose
and shall not be made part of the operating record of any person on whom the
liability is imposed.
   (e)   Other Offenses and Penalties Not Abrogated. Nothing in this section
shall be construed as altering or limiting Sections
433.03 or
413.03 of these Codified Ordinances, the criminal penalties imposed by those
sections, or the ability of a police officer to enforce those sections against
any offender observed by the officer violating either of those sections.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the liability of an
operator of a vehicle for any violation of division (b) or (c) of this section.
   (f)   Selection of Camera Sites. The selection of the sites where automated
cameras are placed and the enforcement of this ordinance shall be made on the
basis of sound professional traffic engineering and law enforcement judgments.
Automated cameras shall not be placed at any site where the speed restrictions
or the timing of the traffic signal fail to conform to sound professional
traffic engineering principles.
   (g)   Locations. The following are the locations for the Automated Traffic
Enforcement Camera System:
   Locations
   Shaker Boulevard at Shaker Square
   Chester Avenue at Euclid Avenue
   West Boulevard at North Marginal Road
   Shaker Boulevard at East 116th Street
   West Boulevard at I-90 Ramp
   Chester Avenue at East 71st Street
   East 55th Street at Carnegie Avenue
   Woodland Avenue in the 4500 to 4700 block
   Euclid Avenue between Cliffview Road and Torbenson Road
   East 131st Street at Harvard Avenue
   Carnegie Avenue at East 30th Street
   Cedar Avenue at Murray Hill Road
   Grayton Road at I-480 Ramp
   Euclid Avenue at Mayfield Road
   Warren Road at I-90 Ramp
   Prospect Avenue at East 40th Street
   East 116th Street at Union Avenue
   Pearl Road at Biddulph Road
   Carnegie Avenue at East 100th Street
   Carnegie Avenue at Martin Luther King Jr. Drive
   Memphis Avenue at Fulton Road
   Lakeshore Boulevard at East 159th Street
   St. Clair Avenue at London Road
   Clifton Boulevard between West 110th Street and West 104th Street
   Chester Avenue between East 55th Street and East 40th Street
   Woodland Avenue between East 66th Street and East 71st Street
   West Boulevard between I-90 Ramp and Madison Avenue
   Lee Road between Tarkington Avenue and I-480 Ramp
   I-90 and West 41st Street
   I-90 and West 44th Street
   Woodland Avenue at East 55th Street
   Harvard Avenue at Lee Road
   Orange Avenue at East 30th Street
   Chester Avenue at East 105th Street
   St. Clair Avenue at East 152nd Street
   Kinsman Road at East 93rd Street
   Lee Road at Miles Road
   Stokes Boulevard at Cedar Avenue
   West 25th Street at Clark Avenue
   I-490 at East 55th Street
   Pearl Road at Denison Avenue
   Broadview Road at Brookpark Road
   West 65th Street and Clark Avenue
   St. Clair Avenue at East 105th Street
   Woodland Avenue at East 30th Street
   Lorain Avenue at West 65th Street
   Broadview Road at Spring Road
   St. Clair Avenue at East 55th Street
   Puritas Avenue at West 150th Street
   Martin Luther King Jr. Drive at East 105th Street
   East 105th Street and Superior Avenue
   East 156th Street and Waterloo Road
   Neff Road and East 185th Street
   The Director of Public Safety shall cause the general public to be notified
by means of a press release issued at least thirty (30) days before any given
camera is made fully operational and is used to issue tickets to offenders.
Before a given camera issues actual tickets, there shall be a period of at
least two (2) weeks, which may run concurrently with the thirty (30) day
public-notice period, during which only "warning" notices shall be issued.
   At each site of a red light or fixed speed camera, the Director of Public
Works shall cause signs to be posted to apprise ordinarily observant motorists
that they are approaching an area where an automated camera is monitoring for
red light or speed violators. Mobile speed units shall be plainly marked
vehicles.
   (h)   Notices of Liability. Any ticket for an automated red light or
speeding system violation under this section shall:
      (1)   Be reviewed by a Cleveland police officer;
      (2)   Be forwarded by first-class mail or personal service to the
vehicle's registered owner's address as given on the state's motor vehicle
registration, and
      (3)   Clearly state the manner in which the violation may be appealed.
   (i)   Penalties. Any violation of division (b) or division (c) of this
section shall be deemed a noncriminal violation for which a civil penalty shall
be assessed and for which no points authorized by RC 4507.021 ("Point system
for license suspension") shall be assigned to the owner or driver of the
vehicle.
   (j)   Ticket Evaluation, Public Service, and Appeals. The program shall
include a fair and sound ticket-evaluation process that includes review by the
vendor and a police officer, a strong customer-service commitment, and an
appeals process that accords due process to the ticket respondent and that
conforms to the requirements of the Ohio Revised Code.
   (k)   Appeals. A notice of appeal shall be filed with the Hearing Officer
within twenty-one (21) days from the date listed on the ticket. The failure to
give notice of appeal or pay the civil penalty within this time period shall
constitute a waiver of the right to contest the ticket and shall be considered
an admission.
   Appeals shall be heard by the Parking Violations Bureau through an
administrative process established by the Clerk of the Cleveland Municipal
Court. At hearings, the strict rules of evidence applicable to courts of law
shall not apply. The contents of the ticket shall constitute a prima facie
evidence of the facts it contains. Liability may be found by the hearing
examiner based upon a preponderance of the evidence. If a finding of liability
is appealed, the record of the case shall include the order of the Parking
Violations Bureau, the ticket, other evidence submitted by the respondent or
the City of Cleveland, and a transcript or record of the hearing, in a written
or electronic form acceptable to the court to which the case is appealed.
   Liability shall not be found where the evidence shows that the automated
camera captured an event that is not an offense, including each of the
following events and such others as may be established by rules and regulations
issued by the Director of Public Safety under the authority of division (n) of
this section:
      (1)   The motorist stops in time to avoid violating a red light
indication;
      (2)   The motorist proceeds through a red light indication as part of
funeral procession;
      (3)   The motorist is operating a City-owned emergency vehicle with its
emergency lights activated and proceeds through a red light indication or
exceeds the posted speed limitation;
      (4)   The motorist is directed by a police officer on the scene contrary
to the traffic signal indication.
   Liability shall also be excused if a vehicle is observed committing an
offense where the vehicle was stolen prior to the offense and the owner has
filed a police report.
   The Director of Public Safety, in coordination with the Parking Violations
Bureau, shall establish a process by which a vehicle owner who was not the
driver at the time of the alleged offense may, by affidavit, name the person
who the owner believes was driving the vehicle at the time. Upon receipt of
such an affidavit timely submitted to the Parking Violations Bureau, the Bureau
shall suspend further action against the owner of the vehicle and instead
direct notices and collection efforts to the person identified in the
affidavit. If the person named in the affidavit, when notified, denies being
the driver or denies liability, then the Parking Violations Bureau shall resume
the notice and collection process against the vehicle owner, the same as if no
affidavit had been submitted, and if the violation is found to have been
committed by a preponderance of evidence, the owner shall be liable for any
penalties imposed for the offense.
   A decision in favor of the City of Cleveland may be enforced by means of a
civil action or any other means provided by the Ohio Revised Code.
   (l)   Evidence of Operation. It is prima facie evidence that the person
registered as the owner of the vehicle with the Ohio Bureau of Motor Vehicles,
or with any other state vehicle registration office, or in the case of a leased
or rented vehicle, the "lessee" as defined in division (p), was operating the
vehicle at the time of the offenses set out in divisions (b) and (c) of this
section.
   (m)   Program Oversight. The Director of Public Safety shall oversee the
program authorized by this section. The Director of Public Works shall oversee
the installation and maintenance of all automated cameras. An encroachment
permit shall be authorized in the legislation in which locations are selected.
   (n)   Rules and Regulations. The Director of Public Safety may issue rules
and regulations to carry out the provisions of these sections, which shall be
effective thirty (30) days after publication in the City Record.
   (o)   Establishment of Penalty. The penalty imposed for a violation of
division (b) or (c) of this section shall be follows:
 
413.031(b)
   All violations                                              $100.00
413.031(c)
   Up to 24 mph over the speed limit:                          $100.00
   25 mph or more over the speed limit:                        $200.00
   Any violation of a school or construction zone speed limit: $200.00
 
   Late penalties: for both offenses, if the penalty is not paid within twenty
(20) days from the date of mailing of the ticket to the offender, an additional
twenty dollars ($20.00) shall be imposed, and if not paid within forty (40)
days from that date, another forty dollars ($40.00) shall be imposed, for a
total additional penalty in such a case of sixty dollars ($60.00).
   (p)   Definitions. As used in this section:
      (1)   "Automated traffic enforcement camera system" means an electronic
system consisting of a photographic, video, or electronic camera and a vehicle
sensor installed to work alone or in conjunction with an official traffic
controller and to automatically produce photographs, video, or digital images
of each vehicle violating divisions (b) or (c).
      (2)   "Lessee" includes renter and means:
         A.   the person identified as a vehicle lessee or renter by a motor
vehicle leasing dealer or motor vehicle renting dealer pursuant to RC 4511.092
and further identified by the dealer as the person having care, custody or
control of the vehicle at the time of a violation of divisions (b) or (c); or
         B.   the person identified as the lessee or as an additional owner of
a vehicle in the records of the Ohio Bureau of Motor Vehicles or the records of
any other state motor vehicle bureau.
      (3)   "System location" means the approach to an intersection or a street
toward which a photographic, video or electronic camera is directed and is in
operation. It is the location where the automated camera system is installed to
monitor offenses under this section.
      (4)   "Vehicle owner" or "owner" means the person or entity identified by
the Ohio Bureau of Motor Vehicles, or registered with any other State vehicle
registration office, as the registered owner of a vehicle, or in the case of a
leased or rented vehicle, the "lessee".
(Ord. No. 1072-13. Passed 8-14-13, eff. 8-16-13)
§ 413.032 Costs of Collection of Unpaid Tickets for Photo-Enforced Offenses
   In addition to any other fees or charges authorized by these Codified
Ordinances in relation to the commission of a violation of division (b) or
division (c) of Section
413.031, a person liable for the penalties established by division (o) of
Section
413.031 may be assessed a fee under this section in an amount equal to the
costs paid by the City to any vendor for the costs of collection of the debt.
(Ord. No. 1029-07. Passed 8-8-07, eff. 8-16-07)
§ 413.04 Lane-Use Control Signals Over Individual Lanes
   The meanings of lane-use control signal indications are as follows:
   (a)   A Steady Downward Green Arrow. A road user is permitted to drive in
the lane over which the arrow signal indication is located.
   (b)   A Steady Yellow “X”. A road user is to prepare to vacate the lane over
which the signal indication is located because a lane control change is being
made to a steady red “X” signal indication.
   (c)   A Steady White Two (2) Way Left-Turn Arrow. A road user is permitted
to use a lane over which the signal indication is located for a left turn, but
not for through travel, with the understanding that common use of the lane by
oncoming road users for left turns also is permitted.
   (d)   A Steady White One (1) Way Left-Turn Arrow. A road user is permitted
to use a lane over which the signal indication is located for a left turn,
without opposing turns in the same lane, but not for through travel.
   (e)   A Steady Red “X”. A road user is not permitted to use the lane over
which the signal indication is located and that this signal indication shall
modify accordingly the meaning of other traffic controls present.
(RC 4511.131; Ord. No. 1278-15. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 413.05 Pedestrian Control Signals
   Whenever special pedestrian-control signals exhibiting the words “walk” or
“don't walk”, or the symbol of a walking person or an upraised palm are in
place, these signals shall indicate the following instructions:
   (a)   A steady walking person signal indication, which symbolizes “walk”,
means that a pedestrian facing the signal indication is permitted to start to
cross the roadway in the direction of the signal indication, possibly in
conflict with turning vehicles. The pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to
vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the walking person
signal indication is first shown.
   (b)   A flashing upraised hand signal indication, which symbolizes “don't
walk”, means that a pedestrian shall not start to cross the roadway in the
direction of the signal indication, but that any pedestrian who has already
started to cross on a steady walking person signal indication shall proceed to
the far side of the traveled way of the street or highway, unless otherwise
directed by a traffic control device to proceed only to the median of a divided
highway or only to some other island or pedestrian refuge area.
   (c)   A steady upraised hand signal indication means that a pedestrian shall
not enter the roadway in the direction of the signal indication.
   (d)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to invalidate the continued
use of pedestrian control signals utilizing the word “wait” if those signals
were installed prior to March 28, 1985.
   (e)   A flashing walking person signal indication has no meaning and shall
not be used.
(RC 4511.14; Ord. No. 1278-15. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 413.06 Flashing Traffic Signals – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1278-15. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 413.07 Unauthorized Signs and Signals; Hiding from View; Advertising
   (a)   (1)   No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of
any street any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to
be, is an imitation of, or resembles a traffic control device or railroad sign
or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides
from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any traffic control device or
any railroad sign or signal, and no person shall place or maintain, nor shall
any public authority permit, upon any street any traffic sign or signal bearing
thereon any commercial advertising. This section does not prohibit the erection
upon private property adjacent to streets of signs giving useful directional
information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for traffic control devices
or the erection upon private property of traffic control devices by the owner
of real property in accordance with RC 4511.211 and RC 4511.32.
      (2)   Every such prohibited sign, signal, marking or device is a public
nuisance, and the Director of Public Safety is authorized to remove the same or
cause it to be removed.
(RC 4511.16(A))
   (b)   No person shall stick, post or attach any advertisement, poster, sign,
handbill or placard of any kind or description upon any portion of a traffic
control device or pole, post or stanchion upon which such device is placed or
to which such device is attached, except such as may be required or permitted
by the State laws or City ordinances.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one (1) year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
(1) predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one (1) year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two (2) or more
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(RC 4511.16(B); Ord. No. 1278-15. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 413.08 Tampering with Traffic Control Devices Prohibited
   (a)    No person, without lawful authority, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly move, deface, damage, destroy, or otherwise improperly
tamper with any traffic control device, any railroad sign or signal, or any
inscription, shield, or insignia on the device, sign, or signal, or any part of
the device, sign, or signal;
      (2)   Knowingly drive upon or over any freshly applied pavement marking
material on the surface of a roadway while the marking material is in an
undried condition and is marked by flags, markers, signs, or other devices
intended to protect it;
      (3)   Knowingly move, damage, destroy, or otherwise improperly tamper
with a manhole cover.
   (b)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a)(1) or (a)(3) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
third degree. If a violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(3) of this section
creates a risk of physical harm to any person, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If a violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(3) of
this section causes serious physical harm to property that is owned, leased, or
controlled by a state or local authority, the offender is guilty of a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a)(2) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within
one (1) year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to one (1) predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever
violates division (a)(2) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree. If, within one (1) year of the offense, the offender previously
has been convicted of two (2) or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offenses, whoever violates division (a)(2) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(RC 4511.17; Ord. No. 1278-15. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 413.09 No Right Turns on Red
   (a)   Pursuant to RC 4511.13, Council does hereby prohibit right turns
against a steady red signal at various intersections in the City as listed in
schedules on file with the Clerk of Council as File No. 107-76, pursuant to
this section.
   (b)   When signs have been erected giving notice thereof, no driver of any
vehicle facing a steady red signal shall make a right turn at any of the
following intersections:
      Addison Rd., Linwood Ave. and E. 79th St., southeastbound Addison Rd.;
      Aetna Rd., Fleet Ave. and East 75th St., eastbound and southbound;
      Baltic Rd. and West Blvd., eastbound;
      Berea Rd. and Lakewood Heights Blvd., eastbound;
      Berea Rd. and Triskett Rd., northbound;
      Bridge Ave. and West 25th St., eastbound and westbound;
      Bridge Ave. and West 44th St., southbound;
      Broadview Rd. and Valley Rd., westbound;
      Broadway, Ackley Rd. and Union Ave., northbound and westbound;
      Broadway and Aetna Rd., northwestbound Broadway.;
      Broadway and Blanche Ave., northeastbound Blanche Ave.;
      Broadway, Miles Ave. and Warner Rd., westbound;
      Broadway and E. 55th St., northbound and westbound;
      Buckeye Rd., Steinway Ave. and E. 93rd St., northwestbound Buckeye Rd.;
      Buckeye Rd., Woodhill Rd. and Shaker Blvd., northwestbound Buckeye Rd.;
      Carnegie Ave. and E. 21st St., eastbound;
      Castlewood Ave. and E. 123rd St., eastbound;
      Chester Ave. and E. 12th St., eastbound and westbound;
      Clifton Blvd. and Baltic Rd., eastbound and westbound Clifton Blvd.;
      Detroit Ave. and Berea Rd., northeastbound Berea Rd.;
      Detroit Ave. and W. 65th St., all directions.;
      Detroit Ave. and W. 110th St., westbound;
      Detroit Ave. and W. 101st St., northbound;
      Detroit Ave. and Lake Ave. and W. 75th St., eastbound and westbound;
      Detroit Ave. and W. 25th St., northbound;
      Dolloff Ave. and Hamm Ave., eastbound;
      E. 55th St., S. Marginal Rd. and exit ramp from I-90, eastbound from the
exit ramp.;
      East Blvd. and Fairhill Rd., westbound;
      Euclid Ave., and E. Roadway (Public Square), westbound;
      Euclid Ave. and Chester Ave., westbound;
      Euclid Ave. and E. 4th St., northbound;
      Euclid Ave. and E. 13th St., southbound;
      Euclid Ave., Huron Rd. and E. 14th St., eastbound
      Euclid Ave. and northeastbound Huron Rd.;
      Euclid Ave. and E. 17th St., southbound;
      Euclid Ave. and E. 46th St., eastbound;
      Fairfield Ave. and W. 14th St., westbound;
      Fleet Ave. and E. 49th St., southbound;
      Fulton Rd., Bush Ave. and W. 41st St., southbound Fulton Rd.;
      Fulton Rd., Denison Ave. and Brookside Pk. Dr., eastbound Denison Ave.
and northeastbound Brookside Pk. Dr.;
      Fulton Rd. and I-71 southerly ramp, northbound;
      Fulton Rd., Bridge Ave. and W. 32nd St., northeastbound Fulton Rd. and
northbound W. 32nd St.;
      Grand Ave. and E. 75th St., southbound;
      Holton Ave. and E. 79th St., all directions.;
      Kinsman Rd. and E. 93rd St., northbound;
      Lake Ave. and West Blvd., westbound;
      Lakeshore Blvd. and E. 152nd St., southbound;
      Lakeview Rd. and Moulton Ave., eastbound;
      Lee Rd. and McCracken Rd., eastbound;
      Liberty Blvd. and ramp from E. 82nd St., eastbound;
      Lorain Ave. and W. 98th St., eastbound, westbound, northbound and
southbound;
      Lorain Ave. and Groveland Ave., westbound;
      Lorain Ave. and W. 73rd St., westbound;
      Lorain Ave. and W. 90th St., eastbound and northbound;
      Lorain Ave., Denison Ave. and W. 101st St., westbound and southbound;
      Lorain Ave., Groveland Ave. and Riveredge Rd., eastbound Lorain Ave.;
      Lorain Ave. and Rocky River Dr., eastbound;
      Lorain Ave. and Warren Rd., southbound;
      Lucknow Ave. and E. 152nd St., northbound;
      Marble Ave. and E. 78th St., southbound;
      Ontario St. and Huron Rd., eastbound;
      Pearl Rd., State Rd., Henritze Ave. and Altoona Ave., northbound State
Rd. and westbound Altoona Ave.;
      Pearl Rd. and Broadview Rd., northbound;
      Platt Ave. and E. 79th St., westbound;
      Prospect Ave. and E. 21st St., eastbound;
      Prospect Ave. and Prospect Rd., eastbound;
      Puritas Ave. and RTA Roadway, southbound;
      Quincy Ave. and E. 79th St., eastbound;
      Ridge Rd. and Russell Lane, southbound;
      Scranton Rd., Fairfield Ave. and Train Ave., northbound Scranton Rd.;
      Shaker Blvd. and E. 103rd St., eastbound and westbound;
      Shaker Blvd. and East Blvd., eastbound and westbound;
      Shaker Blvd. and E. 116th St., eastbound and westbound;
      Shaker Blvd. and E. 121st St., eastbound and westbound;
      Shaker Blvd. and Van Aken Blvd., eastbound;
      Shaker Blvd. at Shaker Square, eastbound and westbound;
      Shaker Square at Shaker Blvd., northbound and southbound;
      St. Clair Ave., Ivanhoe Rd. and E. 152nd St., eastbound, northbound and
northwestbound Ivanhoe Rd.;
      St. Clair Ave., Herrick Rd. and Yale Ave., northwestbound Herrick Rd.,
and eastbound;
      St. Clair Ave. and Nottingham Rd., eastbound;
      St. Clair Ave., Arbor Rd. and E. 131st St., westbound;
      Storer Ave. and W. 58th St., eastbound;
      Superior Ave., Columbus Rd., Huron Rd. and W. 9th St., eastbound,
southbound and northeastbound Columbus Rd.;
      Superior Ave. and E. 18th St., southbound;
      Triskett Rd. and Warren Rd., northbound;
      W. 25th St. and I-71 southerly ramp, northbound;
      W. 33rd St. and Denison Ave., northbound and southbound;
      W. 33rd St. and Denison Ave., eastbound and westbound;
      W. 130th St. and I-71 southerly ramp, northbound;
      W. 150th St. and I-71 southerly ramp, northbound;
      Wade Park Ave., Ansel Rd. and ramp from Liberty Blvd., westbound and
southwestbound out of the ramp.;
      West Blvd., Parkhurst Ave. and W. 105th St., southwestbound West Blvd.
and northbound W. 105th St.;
      Woodland Ave., Kinsman Rd. and E. 55th St., northwestbound Kinsman Rd.;
      Woodland Ave., Larchmere Blvd., N. Moreland Blvd. and Kemper Rd.,
northeastbound N. Moreland.
   (c)   Violations of this section shall be punishable under the penalty
provided for violations of Section
413.01.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76; Ord. No. 1396-76. Passed 6-29-
76, eff. 7-6-76)
   Note: Pursuant to RC 4511.13 and Codified Ordinance Section
413.09, File 107-76 has been amended. The amendments are contained in File 107-
76 in the office of the Clerk of Council.
§ 413.10 No Right Turns on Red During Certain Hours
   (a)   Pursuant to RC 4511.13, Council does hereby prohibit right turns
against a steady red signal at various intersections in the City as listed in
schedules on file with the Clerk of Council, as File No. 106-76, pursuant to
this section.
   (b)   When signs have been erected giving notice thereof, no driver of any
vehicle facing a steady red signal shall make a right turn between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. Monday through Friday at any of the following
intersections:
      Almira Ave. and West Blvd., northbound;
      Almira Ave. and W. 98th St., all directions.;
      Bailey Ave. and W. 41st St., westbound;
      Barber Ave. and W. 25th St., northbound;
      Bellaire Rd., Jasper Ave. and W. 105th St., northeastbound Bellaire Rd.;
      Bellaire Rd., W. 117th St. and Memphis Ave., northeastbound Bellaire Rd.
and southbound W. 117th St.;
      Bosworth and Thrush, eastbound, northbound and westbound;
      Bridge Ave. and Fulton Rd., southbound and westbound;
      Bridge Ave. and W. 58th St., northbound and westbound;
      Broadway and Marble Ave., westbound;
      Broadview Rd. and Schaaf Rd., northbound and westbound;
      Broadview Rd., Searsdale Ave. and Valley Rd., northbound and westbound;
      Broadview Rd. and Oak Park Ave., southbound;
      Broadview Rd., Montclair Ave., and Spring Rd., northbound;
      Broadview Rd. and Cook Ave., northbound;
      Buckeye and E. 116th St., eastbound, southbound and westbound;
      Buckeye Rd., Steinway Ave. and E. 93rd St., northwestbound Buckeye Rd.,
westbound Steinway Ave. and southbound E. 93rd St.;
      Chester Ave. and E. 101st St., eastbound and southbound;
      Clark Ave. and W. 14th St., northbound and westbound;
      Clark Ave. and W. 56th St., westbound;
      Corlett Ave. and E. 131st St., eastbound;
      Denison Ave. and W. 54th St., westbound;
      Denison Ave. and W. 65th St., westbound;
      Detroit Ave. and W. 65th St., northbound;
      Detroit Ave. and Lake Ave., westbound;
      East Blvd., Farrington and E. 116th St., eastbound;
      Fleet Ave. and E. 65th St., westbound;
      Fulton Rd. and Biddulph, all directions.;
      Fulton Rd. and Memphis Ave., all directions.;
      Fulton Rd. and Walton Ave., northbound and westbound;
      Fulton Rd., Bush Ave. and W. 41st St., eastbound Bush Ave.;
      Fulton Rd. and Ira Ave., eastbound and northbound;
      Harvard Ave. and E. 71st St., eastbound, northbound and southbound;
      Holmes Ave. and E. 156th St., southbound and westbound;
      Hough Ave. and E. 71st St., all directions.;
      Hough Ave. and E. 79th St., all directions.;
      Hough Ave. and E. 82nd St., eastbound and westbound;
      Kinsman Rd. and E. 147th St., all directions.;
      Kinsman Rd. and Grand Ave., eastbound and northbound;
      Lee Rd. and Miles Ave., eastbound, southbound and westbound;
      Lexington Ave. and E. 66th St., all directions.;
      Lexington Ave. and E. 71st St., eastbound, northbound and southbound;
      Lorain Ave. and West Blvd., southbound;
      Lorain Ave. and W. 24th St., southbound;
      Lorain Ave. and W. 44th St., eastbound;
      Lorain Ave. and W. 130th St., eastbound, westbound and northbound;
      Lorain Ave. and Berea Rd., westbound;
      Lorain Ave. and W. 134th St., eastbound;
      Memphis Ave. and W. 41st St., eastbound;
      Memphis Ave. and W. 47th St., eastbound;
      Memphis Ave. and W. 60th St., eastbound;
      Puritas Ave. and CTS roadway (W. 154th St., to north), southbound;
      Puritas Ave. and Rocky River Dr., all directions.;
      Puritas Ave. and W. 140th St., westbound;
      Puritas Ave. and W. 150th St., southbound;
      Scranton Rd. and Castle Ave., northbound and westbound;
      Sprecher Ave. and W. 130th St., southbound;
      Spring Rd. and South Hills, eastbound and northbound;
      St. Clair Ave. and Lakeview Rd., eastbound;
      St. Clair Ave. and Eddy Rd., northbound, southbound and westbound;
      St. Clair Ave., Ivanhoe Rd. and E. 152nd St., southbound and westbound;
      St. Clair Ave. and E. 146th St., westbound;
      State Rd. and Dawning Ave., eastbound and southbound;
      State Rd. and Montclair Ave., northbound;
      Union Ave. and E. 93rd St., all directions.;
      Union Ave. and E. 116th St., all directions.;
      Waterloo Rd. and E. 156th St., southbound;
      West Ave. and W. 130th St., eastbound;
      West Blvd. and Western Ave., southbound and eastbound;
      Woodland Ave. and East Blvd., northbound, southbound and westbound.
   (c)   Violations of this section shall be punishable under the penalty
provided for violations of Section
413.01.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76; Ord. No. 1395-76. Passed 6-29-
76, eff. 7-6-76)
   Note: Pursuant to RC 4511.13 and Codified Ordinance Section
413.10, File 106-76 has been amended. The amendments are contained in File 106-
76 in the office of the Clerk of Council.
§ 413.11 Driver’s Duties Upon Approaching Ambiguous or Non-Working Traffic
Signal
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle, streetcar, or trackless trolley who
approaches an intersection where traffic is controlled by traffic control
signals shall do all of the following, if the signal facing the driver exhibits
no colored lights or colored lighted arrows, exhibits a combination of such
lights or arrows that fails to clearly indicate the assignment of right-of-way,
or the signals are otherwise malfunctioning, including the failure of a vehicle
detector to detect the vehicle:
      (1)   Stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, stop before
entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or, if none, stop
before entering the intersection;
      (2)   Yield the right-of-way to all vehicles, streetcars, or trackless
trolleys in the intersection or approaching on an intersecting road, if the
vehicle, streetcars, or trackless trolleys will constitute an immediate hazard
during the time the driver is moving across or within the intersection or
junction of roadways;
      (3)   Exercise ordinary care while proceeding through the intersection.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one (1) year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
(1) predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one (1) year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two (2) or more
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(RC 4511.132; Ord. No. 1278-15. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
TITLE V: VEHICLES
   Chapter
431   Operation Generally
   Chapter
433   Intoxication; Reckless Operation; Speed
   Chapter
435   Licensing and Accidents
   Chapter
437   Safety and Equipment
   Chapter
439   Commercial and Heavy Vehicles
   Chapter
441   Motor Buses – Repealed
   Chapter
443   Taxicabs
   Chapter
445   Sight-Seeing Cars
   Chapter
447   Carriages
   Chapter
449   Snowmobiles, Off-Highway Motorcycles, and All-Purpose Vehicles
   Chapter
450   Under-Speed Vehicles (Including Non-Modified Golf Carts)
CHAPTER 431 – OPERATION GENERALLY
431.01   Driving upon Right Side of Roadway; Exceptions
431.02   Passing to Right When Proceeding in Opposite Directions
431.03   Overtaking and Passing of Vehicles Proceeding in the Same Direction
431.04   Overtaking and Passing upon Right of Another Vehicle
431.05   Overtaking, Passing to Left of Center
431.06   Additional Restrictions on Driving upon Left Side of Roadway
431.07   Hazardous or No Passing Zones
431.08   Driving in Marked Lanes or Continuous Lines of Traffic
431.09   Space Between Moving Vehicles
431.10   Turning at Intersections
431.11   Turning into Private Driveway, Alley or Building
431.12   “U” Turns Restricted
431.13   Starting and Backing Vehicles
431.14   Signals Before Changing Course, Turning or Stopping
431.15   Hand and Arm Signals
431.16   Right-of-Way at Intersections
431.17   Right-of-Way When Turning Left
431.18   Operation of Vehicle at Yield Signs
431.19   Operation of Vehicle at Stop Signs
431.20   Emergency or Public Safety Vehicles at Stop Signals or Signs
431.21   Right-of-Way of Public Safety or Coroner's Vehicle
431.22   Right-of-Way at Highway from Any Place Other than Another Roadway;
Duty to Yield
431.23   Driving onto Roadway from Place Other Than Roadway; Stopping at
Sidewalk
431.24   Right-of-Way of Funeral Procession
431.25   Driver’s View and Control to be Unobstructed by Load or Persons
431.26   Driving upon Street Posted as Closed for Repair
431.27   Following and Parking Near Emergency or Safety Vehicles
431.28   Driving over Fire Hose
431.29   Driving Through Safety Zone
431.30   One-Way Streets and Rotary Traffic Islands
431.31   Driving upon Divided Roadways
431.32   Entering and Exiting Controlled-Access Highway
431.33   Obstructing Intersection, Crosswalk or Grade Crossing; Penalty
431.34   Failure to Control; Weaving; Full Time and Attention
431.35   Occupying a Moving Trailer or Manufactured Home
431.36   Squealing Tires, “Peeling,” Cracking Exhaust Noises
431.37   Driving upon Sidewalks, Street Lawns or Curbs
431.38   Stopping for School Bus; Discharging Children
431.39   Driving Across Grade Crossing
431.40   Stopping at Grade Crossing
431.41   Shortcutting at Intersections
431.42   Signs on Vehicles Selling Ice Cream and Frozen Desserts
431.43   Driving with Open Rear Hatch
431.44   Idle Reduction, Exemptions, Penalty
431.45   Operation of Low-Speed Vehicle
Cross-reference:
   Funeral processions on drawbridges, CO
577.11
   Intersections where right turns on red prohibited, CO
413.09,
413.10
   Motor vehicle operation at airports, CO
571.24 et seq.
   Obedience to traffic control devices, CO
413.01
   Operation of bicycles, motorcycles, and mobility devices, CO
Ch. 473
   Regulations for motor vehicle operation in parks, CO
559.59
Statutory reference:
   See sectional histories for similar State law
§ 431.01 Driving upon Right Side of Roadway; Exceptions
   (a)   Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driven upon
the right half of the roadway, except as follows:
      (1)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction, or when making a left turn under the rules governing those
movements;
      (2)   When an obstruction exists making it necessary to drive to the left
of the center of the highway; provided, any person so doing shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles traveling in the proper direction upon the
unobstructed portion of the highway within such distance as to constitute an
immediate hazard;
      (3)   When driving upon a roadway divided into three (3) or more marked
lanes for traffic under the rules applicable thereon;
      (4)   When driving upon a roadway designated and posted with signs for
one (1) way traffic;
      (5)   When otherwise directed by a police officer or traffic control
device.
   (b)   (1)   Upon all roadways any vehicle or trackless trolley proceeding at
less than the prevailing and lawful speed of traffic at the time and place and
under the conditions then existing shall be driven in the right-hand lane then
available for traffic, and far enough to the right to allow passing by faster
vehicles if the passing is safe and reasonable, except under any of the
following circumstances:
         A.   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction;
         B.   When preparing for a left turn;
         C.   When the driver must necessarily drive in a lane other than the
right-hand lane to continue on the driver's intended route.
      (2)   Nothing in division (b)(1) of this section requires a driver of a
slower vehicle to compromise the driver's safety to allow overtaking by a
faster vehicle.
   (c)   Upon any roadway having four (4) or more lanes for moving traffic and
providing for two (2) way movement of traffic, no vehicle or trackless trolley
shall be driven to the left of the centerline of the roadway, except when
authorized by official traffic-control devices designating certain lanes to the
left of the center of the roadway for use by traffic not otherwise permitted to
use the lanes, or except as permitted under division (a)(2) of this section.
This division shall not be construed as prohibiting the crossing of the
centerline in making a left turn into or from an alley, private road or
driveway.
(RC 4511.25; Ord. No. 1279-15. Passed 4-24-17, eff. 4-25-17)
§ 431.02 Passing to Right When Proceeding in Opposite Directions
   Operators of vehicles and trackless trolleys proceeding in opposite
directions shall pass each other to the right, and upon roadways having width
for not more than one (1) line of traffic in each direction, each operator
shall give to the other one-half (1/2) of the main traveled portion of the
roadway or as nearly one-half (1/2) as is reasonably possible.
(RC 4511.26; Ord. No. 1279-15. Passed 4-24-17, eff. 4-25-17)
§ 431.03 Overtaking and Passing of Vehicles Proceeding in the Same Direction
   (a)   The following rules govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles or
trackless trolleys proceeding in the same direction:
      (1)   The operator of a vehicle or trackless trolley overtaking another
vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall, except as provided in division
(a)(3) of this section, signal to the vehicle or trackless trolley to be
overtaken, shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance, and shall not
again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the
overtaken vehicle or trackless trolley. When a motor vehicle or trackless
trolley overtakes and passes a bicycle or mobility device, three (3) feet or
greater is considered a safe passing distance.
      (2)   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the
operator of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle at the latter's audible signal, and the operator shall not
increase the speed of the operator's vehicle until completely passed by the
overtaking vehicle.
      (3)   The operator of a vehicle or trackless trolley overtaking and
passing another vehicle or trackless trolley proceeding in the same direction
on a divided highway as defined in Section
431.31, a limited access highway as defined in RC 5511.02 or a highway with
four (4) or more traffic lanes, is not required to signal audibly to the
vehicle being overtaken and passed.
   (b)   The operator of a motor vehicle overtaking a bicycle or mobility
device proceeding in the same direction on a roadway shall leave a safe
distance, but not less than three (3) feet, when passing the bicycle or
mobility device and shall maintain that distance, and shall not increase the
speed of his or her vehicle, until safely past the overtaken bicycle or
mobility device. The same requirements shall apply to the operator of a
commercial motor vehicle, commercial truck, commercial unit, or bus, except
that the safe distance shall not be less than six (6) feet. However, in the
case of a bus operated by a transit authority that has implemented a training
program that promotes safe bus operation while overtaking a bicycle or mobility
device, that safe distance shall be not less than three (3) feet.
   (c)   The operator of a motor vehicle overtaking a bicycle or mobility
device proceeding in the same direction on a roadway shall vacate the lane in
which the bicycle user is located if the roadway has two (2) or more marked
lanes running in the same direction.
(Ord. No. 464-2019. Passed 6-3-19, eff. 7-5-19; Am. Ord. No. 396-2020. Passed
6-3-20, eff. 6-9-20)
Statutory reference:
   Similar State law, see RC 4511.27
§ 431.04 Overtaking and Passing upon Right of Another Vehicle
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle or trackless trolley may overtake and pass
upon the right of another vehicle or trackless trolley only under the following
conditions:
      (1)   When the vehicle or trackless trolley overtaken is making or about
to make a left turn;
      (2)   Upon a roadway with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width for
two (2) or more lines of vehicles moving lawfully in the direction being
traveled by the overtaking vehicle.
   (b)   The driver of a vehicle or trackless trolley may overtake and pass
another vehicle or trackless trolley only under conditions permitting such
movement in safety. The movement shall not be made by driving off the roadway.
(RC 4511.28; Ord. No. 1279-15. Passed 4-24-17, eff. 4-25-17)
§ 431.05 Overtaking, Passing to Left of Center
   No vehicle or trackless trolley shall be driven to the left of the center of
the roadway in overtaking and passing traffic proceeding in the same direction,
unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a
sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to be
completely made, without interfering with the safe operation of any traffic
approaching from the opposite direction or any traffic overtaken. In every
event the overtaking vehicle or trackless trolley must return to an authorized
lane of travel as soon as practicable, and in the event the passing movement
involves the use of a lane authorized for traffic approaching from the opposite
direction before coming within two hundred (200) feet of any approaching
vehicle.
(RC 4511.29; Ord. No. 1279-15. Passed 4-24-17, eff. 4-25-17)
§ 431.06 Additional Restrictions on Driving upon Left Side of Roadway
   (a)   No vehicle or trackless trolley shall be driven upon the left side of
the roadway under the following conditions:
      (1)   When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the
highway, where the operator's view is obstructed within such a distance as to
create a hazard in the event traffic might approach from the opposite
direction;
      (2)   When the view is obstructed upon approaching within one hundred
(100) feet of any bridge, viaduct or tunnel;
      (3)   When approaching within one hundred (100) feet of or traversing any
intersection or railroad grade crossing.
   (b)   This section does not apply to vehicles or trackless trolleys upon a
one (1) way roadway, upon a roadway where traffic is lawfully directed to be
driven to the left side or under the conditions described in RC 4511.25(A)(2)
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(RC 4511.30; Ord. No. 1279-15. Passed 4-24-17, eff. 4-25-17)
§ 431.07 Hazardous or No Passing Zones
   (a)   Hazardous zones, commonly called "no passing zones", shall consist of
an auxiliary yellow line marked on the roadway pavement and placed parallel to
the normal center line or marked lane line. When the auxiliary yellow line
appears on the left side in the driver's lane of travel and to the right of the
normal center line or marked lane line, no driver shall drive across the
auxiliary yellow line to overtake and pass another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction. When auxiliary yellow lines appear on both sides of the normal
center line or marked lane line, drivers proceeding in either direction shall
not drive across such auxiliary yellow lines to overtake and pass another
vehicle proceeding in the same direction. No driver shall, at any other time,
drive across the yellow auxiliary line when it appears in the driver's lane of
travel, except to make a lawfully permitted left-hand turn under the rules
governing such movement. No passing signs may also be erected facing traffic to
indicate the beginning and end of each no passing zone.
   (b)   The Department of Transportation may determine those portions of any
state highway where overtaking and passing other traffic or driving to the left
of the center or center line of the roadway would be especially hazardous and
may, by appropriate signs or markings on the highway, indicate the beginning
and end of such zones. When signs or markings are in place and clearly visible,
every operator of a vehicle or trackless trolley shall obey the directions of
the signs or markings, notwithstanding the distances set out in RC 4511.30 and
in Section
431.06.
   (c)   Divisions (a) and (b) of this section do not apply when all of the
following apply:
      (1)   The slower vehicle is proceeding at less than half the speed of the
speed limit applicable to that location.
      (2)   The faster vehicle is capable of overtaking and passing the slower
vehicle without exceeding the speed limit.
      (3)   There is sufficient clear sight distance to the left of the center
or centerline of the roadway to meet the overtaking and passing provisions of
Section
431.05 and RC 4511.29, considering the speed of the slower vehicle.
(RC 4511.31; Ord. No. 1279-15. Passed 4-24-17, eff. 4-25-17)
§ 431.08 Driving in Marked Lanes or Continuous Lines of Traffic
   (a)   Whenever any roadway has been divided into two (2) or more clearly
marked lanes for traffic or wherever within the municipality traffic is
lawfully moving in two (2) or more substantially continuous lines in the same
direction, the following rules apply:
      (1)   A vehicle or trackless trolley shall be driven, as nearly as is
practicable, entirely within a single lane or line of traffic and shall not be
moved from such lane or line until the driver has first ascertained that such
movement can be made with safety.
      (2)   Upon a roadway which is divided into three (3) lanes and provides
for two (2) way movement of traffic, a vehicle or trackless trolley shall not
be driven in the center lane except when overtaking and passing another vehicle
or trackless trolley where the roadway is clearly visible and such center lane
is clear of traffic within a safe distance, or when preparing for a left turn,
or where such center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic
moving in the direction the vehicle or trackless trolley is proceeding and is
posted with signs to give notice of such allocation.
      (3)   Official signs may be erected directing specified traffic to use a
designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a
particular direction, regardless of the center of the roadway, or restricting
the use of a particular lane to only buses during certain hours or during all
hours, and drivers of vehicles or trackless trolleys shall obey the directions
of such signs.
      (4)   Official traffic control devices may be installed prohibiting the
changing of lanes on sections of roadway, and drivers of vehicles or trackless
trolleys shall obey the directions of every such device.
(RC 4511.33)
   (b)   Except for the operator of a bus entering or exiting an authorized bus
stop, the driver of a motor vehicle shall not drive, upon any on-street path,
lane, trail or multi-purpose lane designated by official signs or markings for
the exclusive use of bicycles or other non-motorized transportation or
otherwise drive or place the vehicle in such a manner as to impede bicycle
traffic on such path, lane, trail, or multi-purpose lane unless entering or
exiting a legal parking space, alley, private road, driveway, or preparing to
make a turn.
(Ord. No. 1279-15. Passed 4-24-17, eff. 4-25-17)
§ 431.09 Space Between Moving Vehicles
   (a)   The operator of a motor vehicle, streetcar, or trackless trolley shall
not follow another vehicle, streetcar, or trackless trolley more closely than
is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such vehicle,
streetcar, or trackless trolley, and the traffic upon and the condition of the
highway.
   (b)   The driver of any truck, or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle,
when traveling upon a roadway outside a business or residence district shall
maintain a sufficient space, whenever conditions permit, between such vehicle
and another vehicle ahead so an overtaking motor vehicle may enter and occupy
such space without danger. This paragraph does not prevent overtaking and
passing nor does it apply to any lane specially designated for use by trucks.
   (c)   Outside a municipal corporation, the driver of any truck, or motor
vehicle when drawing another vehicle, while ascending to the crest of a grade
beyond which the driver's view of a roadway is obstructed, shall not follow
within three hundred (300) feet of another truck, or motor vehicle drawing
another vehicle. This paragraph shall not apply to any lane specially
designated for use by trucks.
   (d)   Motor vehicles being driven upon any roadway outside of a business or
residence district in a caravan or motorcade shall maintain a sufficient space
between such vehicles so an overtaking vehicle may enter and occupy such space
without danger. This paragraph shall not apply to funeral processions.
(RC 4511.34; Ord. No. 1279-15. Passed 4-24-17, eff. 4-25-17)
§ 431.10 Turning at Intersections
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall be
governed by the following rules:
      (1)   Approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close
as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
      (2)   At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both
directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for a left
turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the
center line thereof and by passing to the right of such center line where it
enters the intersection, and after entering the intersection the left turn
shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the center line
of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable the left turn shall be made
in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the
intersection.
      (3)   At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one (1)
direction on one (1) or more of the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending
to turn left at any such intersection shall approach the intersection in the
extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of
travel of such vehicle, and after entering the intersection the left turn shall
be made so as to leave the intersection, as nearly as practicable, in the left-
hand lane of the roadway being entered lawfully available to the traffic moving
in that lane.
   (b)   The operator of a trackless trolley shall comply with divisions (a)
(1), (a)(2), and (a)(3) of this section wherever practicable.
   (c)   The Ohio Department of Transportation and the City may cause markers,
buttons or signs to be placed within or adjacent to intersections and thereby
require and direct that a different course from that specified in this section
be traveled by vehicles, streetcars, or trackless trolleys, turning at an
intersection, and when such markers, buttons or signs are so placed, no
operator of a vehicle, streetcar, or trackless trolley shall turn such vehicle
at an intersection other than as directed and required by such markers, buttons
or signs.
   (d)   The operator of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to
the left shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle or bicycle approaching
from the opposite direction.
(RC 4511.36; Ord. No. 1279-15. Passed 4-24-17, eff. 4-25-17)
§ 431.11 Turning into Private Driveway, Alley or Building
   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn into a private road or driveway,
alley or building from a public street or highway shall be governed by the
following rules:
   (a)   Approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as
practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
   (b)   Upon a roadway where traffic is proceeding in opposite directions,
approach for a left turn and a left turn shall be made from that portion of the
right half of the roadway nearest the center line thereof.
   (c)   Upon a roadway where traffic is restricted to one (1) direction,
approach for a left turn and a left turn shall be made as close as practicable
to the left-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
   The driver of any vehicle entering a private road or driveway, alley or
building shall yield the right-of- way to pedestrians lawfully using the
sidewalk or sidewalk area extending across any alleyway.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 431.12 “U” Turns Restricted
   (a)   Except as provided in RC 4511.13 and division (b) of this section, no
vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any
curve, or upon the approach to or near the crest of a grade, if such vehicle
cannot be seen within five hundred (500) feet by the driver of any other
vehicle approaching from either direction.
   (b)   The driver of an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle, when
responding to an emergency call, may turn the vehicle so as to proceed in the
opposite direction. This division applies only when the emergency vehicle or
public safety vehicle is responding to an emergency call, is equipped with and
displaying at least one (1) flashing, rotating, or oscillating light visible
under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of five hundred (500) feet
to the front of the vehicle, and when the driver of the vehicle is giving an
audible signal by siren, exhaust whistle, or bell. This division does not
relieve the driver of an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the
duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons and property upon
the highway.
   (c)   Except as provided in division (b) of this section, no vehicle shall
be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction within an intersection, or
upon any street in a business district, or upon a freeway, expressway or
controlled-access highway, or where authorized signs are erected to prohibit
such movement, or at any other location unless such movement can be made with
reasonable safety to other users of the street and without interfering with the
safe operation of any traffic that may be affected by such movement.
(RC 4511.37; Ord. No. 1279-15. Passed 4-24-17, eff. 4-25-17)
§ 431.13 Starting and Backing Vehicles
   (a)   (1)   No person shall start a vehicle, streetcar, or trackless trolley
which is stopped, standing or parked until the movement can be made with
reasonable safety.
      (2)   Before backing, operators of vehicles, streetcars, or trackless
trolleys shall give ample warning, and while backing they shall exercise
vigilance not to injure person or property on the street or highway.
      (3)   No person shall back a motor vehicle on a freeway, except:
         A.   In a rest area;
         B.   In the performance of public works or official duties;
         C.   As a result of an emergency caused by an accident or breakdown of
a motor vehicle.
(RC 4511.38; Ord. No. 1279-15. Passed 4-24-17, eff. 4-25-17)
§ 431.14 Signals Before Changing Course, Turning or Stopping
   (a)   (1)   No person shall turn a vehicle or trackless trolley or move
right or left upon a highway unless and until such person has exercised due
care to ascertain that the movement can be made with reasonable safety, nor
without giving an appropriate signal in the manner hereinafter provided.
      (2)   When required, a signal of intention to turn or move right or left
shall be given continuously during not less than the last one hundred (100)
feet traveled by the vehicle or trackless trolley before turning except that in
the case of a person operating a bicycle, the signal shall be made not less
than one (1) time but is not required to be continuous. A bicycle operator is
not required to make a signal if the bicycle is in a designated turn lane, and
a signal shall not be given when the operator's hands are needed for the safe
operation of the bicycle.
      (3)   No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle or
trackless trolley without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner
provided herein to the driver of any vehicle or trackless trolley immediately
to the rear when there is opportunity to give a signal.
      (4)   Any stop or turn signal required by this section shall be given
either by means of the hand and arm, or by signal lights that clearly indicate
to both approaching and following traffic the intention to turn or move right
or left, except that any motor vehicle in use on a highway shall be equipped
with, and the required signal shall be given by, signal lights when the
distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the left outside
limit of the body, cab or load of such motor vehicle exceeds twenty-four (24)
inches, or when the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to
the rear limit of the body or load thereof exceeds fourteen (14) feet, whether
a single vehicle or a combination of vehicles.
      (5)   The signal lights required by this section shall not be flashed on
one (1) side only on a disabled vehicle or trackless trolley, flashed as a
courtesy or "do pass" signal to operators of other vehicles or trackless
trolleys approaching from the rear, nor be flashed on one (1) side only of a
parked vehicle or trackless trolley except as may be necessary for compliance
with this section.
(RC 4511.39; Ord. No. 1279-15. Passed 4-24-17, eff. 4-25-17)
§ 431.15 Hand and Arm Signals
   (a)   Except as provided in division (b) of this section, all signals
required by this Traffic Code and RC 4511.01 to 4511.78, when given by hand and
arm, shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner,
and such signals shall indicate as follows:
      (1)   Left turn, hand and arm extended horizontally;
      (2)   Right turn, hand and arm extended upward;
      (3)   Stop or decrease speed, hand and arm extended downward.
   (b)   As an alternative to division (a)(2) of this section, a person
operating a bicycle or mobility device may give a right turn signal by
extending the right hand and arm horizontally and to the right side of the
bicycle or mobility device.
(Ord. No. 464-2019. Passed 6-3-19, eff. 7-5-19; Am. Ord. No. 396-2020. Passed
6-3-20, eff. 6-9-20)
Statutory reference:
   Similar State law, see RC 4511.40
§ 431.16 Right-of-Way at Intersections
   (a)   When two (2) vehicles, including any trackless trolley or streetcar,
approach or enter an intersection from different streets or highways at
approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield
the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right.
   (b)   The right-of-way rule declared in division (a) of this section is
modified at through highways and otherwise as stated in this Traffic Code and
RC Chapter 4511.
(RC 4511.41; Ord. No. 1279-15. Passed 4-24-17, eff. 4-25-17)
§ 431.17 Right-of-Way When Turning Left
   The operator of a vehicle, streetcar, or trackless trolley intending to turn
to the left within an intersection or into an alley, private road, or driveway
shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle, streetcar, or trackless trolley
approaching from the opposite direction, whenever the approaching vehicle,
streetcar, or trackless trolley is within the intersection or so close to the
intersection, alley, private road, or driveway as to constitute an immediate
hazard.
(RC 4511.42; Ord. No. 1279-15. Passed 4-24-17, eff. 4-25-17)
§ 431.18 Operation of Vehicle at Yield Signs
   The driver of a vehicle or trackless trolley approaching a yield sign shall
slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions and, if required
for safety to stop, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none,
before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or, if
none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a
view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering it.
After slowing or stopping, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any
vehicle or trackless trolley in the intersection or approaching on another
roadway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time the
driver is moving across or within the intersection or junction of roadways.
Whenever a driver is involved in a collision with a vehicle or trackless
trolley in the intersection or junction of roadways, after driving past a yield
sign without stopping, the collision shall be prima facie evidence of the
driver's failure to yield the right-of-way.
(RC 4511.43(B); Ord. No. 1279-15. Passed 4-24-17, eff. 4-25-17)
§ 431.19 Operation of Vehicle at Stop Signs
   Except when directed to proceed by a law enforcement officer, every driver
of a vehicle or trackless trolley approaching a stop sign shall stop at a
clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the
near side of the intersection, or, if none, then at the point nearest the
intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the
intersecting roadway before entering it. After having stopped, the driver shall
yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on
another roadway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time
the driver is moving across or within the intersection or junction of roadways.
(RC 4511.43(A); Ord. No. 1279-15. Passed 4-24-17, eff. 4-25-17)
§ 431.20 Emergency or Public Safety Vehicles at Stop Signals or Signs
   The driver of any emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle, when
responding to an emergency call, upon approaching a red or stop signal or any
stop sign shall slow down as necessary for safety to traffic, but may proceed
cautiously past such red or stop sign or signal with due regard for the safety
of all persons using the street or highway.
(RC 4511.03; Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 431.21 Right-of-Way of Public Safety or Coroner's Vehicle
   (a)   (1)   Upon the approach of a public safety vehicle or coroner's
vehicle, equipped with at least one (1) flashing, rotating or oscillating light
visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of five hundred
(500) feet to the front of such vehicle and the driver is giving an audible
signal by siren, exhaust whistle, or bell, no driver of any other vehicle shall
fail to yield the right-of-way, immediately drive, if practical, to a position
parallel to, and as close as possible to, the right edge or curb of the highway
clear of any intersection, and stop and remain in that position until the
public safety vehicle or coroner's vehicle has passed, except when otherwise
directed by a police officer.
      (2)   Upon the approach of a public safety vehicle or coroner's vehicle,
as stated in division (a)(1) of this section, no operator of any streetcar or
trackless trolley shall fail to immediately stop the streetcar or trackless
trolley clear of any intersection and keep it in that position until the public
safety vehicle or coroner's vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed
by a police officer.
   (b)   This section does not relieve the driver of a public safety vehicle or
coroner's vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons and property upon the street.
   (c)   This section applies to a coroner's vehicle only when the vehicle is
operated in accordance with RC 4511.171, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance. As used in this section, "coroner's vehicle" means a
vehicle used by a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner's investigator that is
equipped with a flashing, oscillating or rotating red or blue light and a
siren, exhaust whistle or bell capable of giving an audible signal.
(RC 4511.45; Ord. No. 1279-15. Passed 4-24-17, eff. 4-25-17)
§ 431.22 Right-of-Way at Highway from Any Place Other than Another Roadway;
Duty to Yield
   The operator of a vehicle, streetcar, or trackless trolley about to enter or
cross a highway from any place other than another roadway shall yield the
right-of-way to all traffic approaching on the roadway to be entered or
crossed.
(RC 4511.44; Ord. No. 1279-15. Passed 4-24-17, eff. 4-25-17)
§ 431.23 Driving onto Roadway from Place Other Than Roadway; Stopping at
Sidewalk
   The driver of a vehicle or trackless trolley emerging from an alley,
building, private road, or driveway within a business or residence district
shall stop the vehicle or trackless trolley immediately prior to driving onto a
sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across the alley, building
entrance, road, or driveway, or in the event there is no sidewalk area, shall
stop at the point nearest the street to be entered where the driver has a view
of approaching traffic thereon.
(RC 4511.431; Ord. No. 1279-15. Passed 4-24-17, eff. 4-25-17)
§ 431.24 Right-of-Way of Funeral Procession
   (a)   As used in this section, "funeral procession" means two (2) or more
vehicles accompanying the cremated remains or the body of a deceased person in
the daytime when each of the vehicles has its headlights lighted and is
displaying a purple and white or an orange and white pennant attached to each
vehicle in such a manner as to be clearly visible to traffic approaching from
any direction.
   (b)   Excepting public safety vehicles proceeding in accordance with RC
4511.45 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or when directed
otherwise by a police officer, pedestrians and the operators of all vehicles
shall yield the right-of-way to each vehicle that is a part of a funeral
procession. Whenever the lead vehicle in a funeral procession lawfully enters
an intersection, the remainder of the vehicles in the procession may continue
to follow the lead vehicle through the intersection, notwithstanding any
traffic-control devices or right-of-way provisions of the Ohio Revised Code,
provided that the operator of each vehicle exercises due care to avoid
colliding with any other vehicle or pedestrian.
   (c)   No person shall operate any vehicle as a part of a funeral procession
without having the headlights of the vehicle lighted and without displaying a
purple and white or an orange and white pennant in such a manner as to be
clearly visible to traffic approaching from any direction.
(RC 4511.451; Ord. No. 1279-15. Passed 4-24-17, eff. 4-25-17)
§ 431.25 Driver’s View and Control to be Unobstructed by Load or Persons
   (a)   No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there is
in the front seat such number of persons, as to obstruct the view of the driver
to the front or sides of the vehicle or to interfere with the driver’s control
over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   (b)   No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in such position as to interfere
with the driver’s view ahead or to the sides, or to interfere with his or her
control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
(RC 4511.70(A), (B); Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 431.26 Driving upon Street Posted as Closed for Repair
   No person shall drive upon, along or across a street or highway, or any part
thereof, which has been closed in the process of its construction,
reconstruction or repair, and posted with appropriate signs by the authority
having jurisdiction to close such street or highway.
(RC 4511.71; Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 431.27 Following and Parking Near Emergency or Safety Vehicles
   The driver of any vehicle, other than an emergency vehicle or public safety
vehicle on official business, shall not follow any emergency vehicle or public
safety vehicle traveling in response to an alarm closer than five hundred (500)
feet, or drive into or park such vehicle within the block where fire apparatus
has stopped in answer to a fire alarm, unless directed to do so by a police
officer or a firefighter.
(RC 4511.72; Ord. No. 1279-15. Passed 4-24-17, eff. 4-25-17)
§ 431.28 Driving over Fire Hose
   No vehicle shall, without the consent of the Fire Division official in
command, be driven over any unprotected hose of the Fire Division, when such
hose is laid down on any street or private driveway to be used at any fire or
alarm of fire.
(RC 4511.73; Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 431.29 Driving Through Safety Zone
   No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within a safety zone.
(RC 4511.60; Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 431.30 One-Way Streets and Rotary Traffic Islands
   Upon a roadway designated and posted with signs for one (1) way traffic a
vehicle shall be driven only in the direction designated. A vehicle passing
around a rotary traffic island shall be driven only to the right of such
island.
(RC 4511.32; Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 431.31 Driving upon Divided Roadways
   Whenever any street has been divided into two (2) roadways by an intervening
space, or by a physical barrier, or clearly indicated dividing section so
constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle shall be driven only
upon the right-hand roadway, and no vehicle shall be driven over, across or
within any such dividing space, barrier or section, except through an opening,
crossover or intersection established by public authority. This section does
not prohibit the occupancy of such dividing space, barrier or section for the
purpose of an emergency stop or in compliance with an order of a police
officer.
(RC 4511.35; Ord. No. 1279-15. Passed 4-24-17, eff. 4-25-17)
§ 431.32 Entering and Exiting Controlled-Access Highway
   No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled-access highway
except at such entrances and exits as are established by public authority.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 431.33 Obstructing Intersection, Crosswalk or Grade Crossing; Penalty
   (a)   No driver shall enter an intersection or marked crosswalk or drive
onto any railroad grade crossing unless there is sufficient space on the other
side of the intersection, crosswalk or grade crossing to accommodate the
vehicle he or she is operating without obstructing the passage of other
vehicles, pedestrians, or railroad trains, notwithstanding any traffic control
signal indication to proceed.
   (b)   At any intersection, the Police Chief and Commissioner of Traffic
Engineering, in consultation with the Council member in whose ward the
intersection is located, may place "Don't Block the Box" signs, which signs
shall set forth the penalty for violation of this section.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section shall be guilty of a fourth degree
misdemeanor for the first offense and a third degree misdemeanor for each
subsequent offense within one (1) year of the first offense.
(RC 4511.712; Ord. No. 624-12. Passed 6-4-12, eff. 6-8-12)
§ 431.34 Failure to Control; Weaving; Full Time and Attention
   (a)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle or motorcycle upon any street
or highway without exercising reasonable and ordinary control over such
vehicle.
   (b)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle or motorcycle upon any street
or highway in a weaving or zigzag course unless such irregular course is
necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law.
   (c)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle or motorcycle without giving
his or her full time and attention to the operation of such vehicle.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 431.35 Occupying a Moving Trailer or Manufactured Home
   No person shall occupy any travel trailer or manufactured or mobile home
while it is being used as a conveyance upon a street or highway.
(RC 4511.701; Ord. No. 1279-15. Passed 4-24-17, eff. 4-25-17)
§ 431.36 Squealing Tires, “Peeling,” Cracking Exhaust Noises
   No person shall unnecessarily race the motor of any vehicle and no person
shall operate any motor vehicle, except in an emergency, in such a manner that
the vehicle is so rapidly accelerated or started from a stopped position that
the exhaust system emits a loud, cracking or chattering noise unusual to its
normal operation, or whereby the tires of such vehicle squeal or leave tire
marks on the roadway, commonly called “peeling.”
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 431.37 Driving upon Sidewalks, Street Lawns or Curbs
   (a)   (1)   No person shall drive any vehicle, other than a bicycle, upon a
sidewalk or sidewalk area except upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary
driveway or without first obtaining a permit from the Director of Public
Service.
      (2)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting local
authorities from regulating the operation of bicycles, except that no local
authority may require that bicycles be operated on sidewalks.
   (b)   No person shall drive a vehicle on a street lawn area or the curb of a
street, except upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary driveway or when
otherwise lawfully authorized.
(RC 4511.711; Ord. No. 1279-15. Passed 4-24-17, eff. 4-25-17)
§ 431.38 Stopping for School Bus; Discharging Children
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle, streetcar, or trackless trolley upon meeting
or overtaking from either direction any school bus stopped for the purpose of
receiving or discharging any school child, person attending programs offered by
community boards of mental health and county boards of developmental
disabilities, or child attending a program offered by a head start agency,
shall stop at least ten (10) feet from the front or rear of the school bus and
shall not proceed until the school bus resumes motion, or until signaled by the
school bus driver to proceed. It is no defense to a charge under this division
that the school bus involved failed to display or be equipped with an
automatically extended stop warning sign as required by division (b) of this
section.
   (b)   Every school bus shall be equipped with amber and red visual signals
meeting the requirements of RC 4511.771, and an automatically extended stop
warning sign of a type approved by the State Board of Education, which shall be
actuated by the driver of the bus whenever, but only whenever, the bus is
stopped or stopping on the roadway for the purpose of receiving or discharging
school children, persons attending programs offered by community boards of
mental health and county boards of developmental disabilities, or children
attending programs offered by head start agencies. A school bus driver shall
not actuate the visual signals or the stop warning sign in designated school
bus loading areas where the bus is entirely off the roadway or at school
buildings when children or persons attending programs offered by community
boards of mental health and county boards of developmental disabilities are
loading or unloading at curbside or at buildings when children attending
programs offered by head start agencies are loading or unloading at curbside.
The visual signals and stop warning sign shall be synchronized or otherwise
operated as required by rule of the Board.
   (c)   Where a highway has been divided into four (4) or more traffic lanes,
a driver of a vehicle need not stop for a school bus approaching from the
opposite direction which has stopped for the purpose of receiving or
discharging any school child, persons attending programs offered by community
boards of mental health and county boards of developmental disabilities, or
children attending programs offered by head start agencies. The driver of any
vehicle overtaking the school bus shall comply with division (a) above.
   (d)   School buses operating on divided highways or on highways with four
(4) or more traffic lanes shall receive and discharge all school children,
persons attending programs offered by community boards of mental health and
county boards of developmental disabilities, and children attending programs
offered by head start agencies on their residence side of the highway.
   (e)   No school bus driver shall start the driver's bus until after any
child, person attending programs offered by community boards of mental health
and county boards of developmental disabilities, or child attending a program
offered by a head start agency who may have alighted therefrom has reached a
place of safety on the child's or person's residence side of the road.
   (f)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section may be fined an
amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). A person who is issued a
citation for a violation of division (a) of this section is not permitted to
enter a written plea of guilty and waive the person's right to contest the
citation in a trial but instead must appear in person in the proper court to
answer the charge.
      (2)   In addition to and independent of any other penalty provided by
law, the court may impose upon an offender who violates this section a class
seven (7) suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in RC 4510.02(A)(7). When a
license is suspended under this section, the court shall cause the offender to
deliver the license to the court, and the court or Clerk of the Court
immediately shall forward the license to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles,
together with notice of the court's action.
   (g)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   "Head start agency" has the same meaning as in RC 3301.32.
      (2)   "School bus" means, as used in relation to children who attend a
program offered by a head start agency, means a bus that is owned and operated
by a head start agency, is equipped with an automatically extended stop warning
sign of a type approved by the State Board of Education, is painted the color
and displays the markings described in RC 4511.77, and is equipped with amber
and red visual signals meeting the requirements of RC 4511.77, irrespective of
whether or not the bus has fifteen (15) or more children aboard at any time.
The term does not include a van owned and operated by a head start agency,
irrespective of its color, lights or markings.
(RC 4511.75; Ord. No. 1279-15. Passed 4-24-17, eff. 4-25-17)
§ 431.39 Driving Across Grade Crossing
   (a)   (1)   Whenever any person driving a vehicle or trackless trolley
approaches a railroad grade crossing, the person shall stop within fifty (50)
feet but not less than fifteen (15) feet from the nearest rail of the railroad
if any of the following circumstances exist at the crossing:
         A.   A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives
warning of the immediate approach of a train.
         B.   A crossing gate is lowered.
         C.   A flagperson gives or continues to give a signal of the approach
or passage of a train.
         D.   There is insufficient space on the other side of the railroad
grade crossing to accommodate the vehicle or trackless trolley the person is
operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles, trackless
trolleys, pedestrians or railroad trains, notwithstanding any traffic-control
signal indication to proceed.
         E.   An approaching train is emitting an audible signal or is plainly
visible, and is in hazardous proximity to the crossing.
         F.   There is insufficient undercarriage clearance to safely negotiate
the crossing.
      (2)   A person who is driving a vehicle or trackless trolley and who
approaches a railroad grade crossing shall not proceed as long as any of the
circumstances described in divisions (a)(1)A. through (a)(1)F. of this section
exist at the crossing.
   (b)   No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any
crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while the gate or barrier is
closed, or is being opened or closed unless the person is signaled by a law
enforcement officer or flagperson that it is permissible to do so.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(RC 4511.62; Ord. No. 1279-15. Passed 4-24-17, eff. 4-25-17)
§ 431.40 Stopping at Grade Crossing
   (a)   (1)   Except as provided in division (a)(2) of this section, the
operator of any bus, any school vehicle, or any vehicle transporting material
required to be placarded under 49 C.F.R. Parts 100 to 185, before crossing at
grade any track of a railroad, shall stop the vehicle, and while so stopped,
shall listen through an open door or open window, and look in both directions
along the track for any approaching train and for signals indicating the
approach of a train, and shall proceed only upon exercising due care after
stopping, looking and listening as required by this section. Upon proceeding,
the operator of such a vehicle shall cross only in a gear that will ensure
there will be no necessity for changing gears while traversing the crossing,
and shall not shift gears while crossing the tracks.
      (2)   Division (a) of this section does not apply at grade crossings when
any local authority has filed an application with the Public Utilities
Commission requesting the approval of an exempt crossing, and the Public
Utilities Commission has authorized and approved an exempt crossing as provided
in RC 4511.63(B).
      (3)   As used in division (a) of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         A.   "Bus" means any vehicle originally designed by its manufacturer
to transport sixteen (16) or more passengers, including the driver, or carries
sixteen (16) or more passengers, including the driver.
         B.   "Exempt crossing" means a highway rail grade crossing authorized
and approved by the Public Utilities Commission under RC 4511.63(B) at which
vehicles may cross without making the stop otherwise required by this section.
         C.   "School vehicle" means any vehicle used for the transportation of
pupils to and from a school or school-related function if the vehicle is owned
or operated by, or operated under contract with, a public or nonpublic school.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one (1) or more
violations of division (a) of this section or RC 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.761,
4511.762, 4511.764, 4511.77 or 4511.79, or a municipal ordinance that is
substantially equivalent to any of those sections, whoever violates division
(a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(RC 4511.63)
   (b)   (1)   As used in this section, "active grade crossing warning device"
has the same meaning as in RC 5733.43.
      (2)   The Ohio Department of Transportation and local authorities, with
the approval of the Department, may designate dangerous highway crossings over
railroad tracks and erect stop signs thereat.
      (3)   A.   The Department and local authorities shall erect stop signs at
a railroad highway grade crossing in either of the following circumstances:
            1.   New warning devices that are not active grade crossing warning
devices are being installed at the grade crossing, and railroad crossbucks were
the only warning devices at the grade crossing prior to the installation of the
new warning devices.
            2.   The grade crossing is constructed after July 1, 2013 and only
warning devices that are not active grade crossing warning devices are
installed at the grade crossing.
         B.   Division (b)(3)A. of this section does not apply to a railroad
highway grade crossing that the Ohio Director of Transportation has exempted
from that division because of traffic flow or other considerations or factors.
      (4)   When stop signs are erected pursuant to division (b)(2) or (b)(3)
of this section, the operator of any vehicle shall stop within fifty (50), but
not less than fifteen (15), feet from the nearest rail of the railroad tracks
and shall exercise due care before proceeding across such grade crossing.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (b)(4) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within
one (1) year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to one (1) predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If,
within one (1) year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of two (2) or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(RC 4511.61; Ord. No. 1279-15. Passed 4-24-17, eff. 4-25-17)
§ 431.41 Shortcutting at Intersections
   No person shall operate a motor vehicle through a service station, parking
lot or any other place of business to pass from one (1) street to an
intersecting street without stopping for service provided by such service
station or place of business.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 431.42 Signs on Vehicles Selling Ice Cream and Frozen Desserts
   (a)   Every motor vehicle operating within the City of Cleveland for the
purpose of selling ice cream, frozen custards, sherbets or other frozen
desserts within the public streets shall be equipped with clearly visible and
illuminated brake lights and shall have “slow, children” regulations on said
vehicles. A vehicle meets the requirements of this section if it either:
      (1)   Has a retractable driver-operated yellow “slow, children” sign on
the left side of the vehicle, to be activated when stopped or standing for the
purpose of selling ice cream or frozen desserts; or
      (2)   Bears a yellow sign stating legibly in a contrasting color, “slow,
children” on both the front and rear of the vehicle and which can be
illuminated by the driver when stopped or standing for the purpose of selling
ice cream or frozen desserts. The sign shall be of sufficient size to be
clearly legible to one of normal vision from a distance of two hundred (200)
feet.
   (b)   The driver of any vehicle overtaking a motor vehicle selling ice cream
or frozen desserts shall heed the “slow, children” sign and exercise due
caution when passing said vehicle.
   (c)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle within the City of Cleveland
for the purpose of selling ice cream or other frozen desserts within the public
streets later than 8:15 p.m., during the months of May through August,
inclusive, and no later than 6:00 p.m., other times.
   (d)   The time limitation set forth in division (c) shall not apply to the
sale of ice cream or other frozen desserts by concessionaires under agreement
within City of Cleveland-owned parks.
   Also, notwithstanding and as an exception to the Codified Ordinances of
Cleveland, Ohio, 1976, vehicles selling ice cream and other frozen desserts in
the city streets shall park within six (6) inches of the curb. This provision
shall not apply to such vehicles within the city parks.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree for the first offense and for each violation thereafter, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(Ord. No. 2180-B-86. Passed 2-1-88, eff. 2-8-88)
§ 431.43 Driving with Open Rear Hatch
   No person shall operate a hatchback motor vehicle with the rear hatch open,
except when necessary to transport cargo. “Hatchback motor vehicle” shall mean
any motor vehicle equipped with a single hinged rear window panel in lieu of a
trunk lid, which may be opened to provide access to the vehicle. Whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 2998-89. Passed 6-18-90, eff. 6-27-90)
§ 431.44 Idle Reduction, Exemptions, Penalty
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect public health and
the environment by reducing emissions while conserving fuel, maintaining
adequate rest and safety of all drivers, and removing barriers to economic
development imposed by the region’s air quality status under the federal Clean
Air Act.
   (b)   Applicability. As used in this section, “vehicle” has the same meaning
as in RC 4511.01.
   (c)   General Requirement. Except as provided in division (d) of this
section:
      (1)   The owner or operator of a vehicle shall not cause or allow a
vehicle to idle for more than five (5) minutes in any sixty (60) minute period;
and
      (2)   The owner or operator of a vehicle that is loading or unloading at
a loading dock or loading/unloading area, and the owner or operator of the
loading dock or loading/unloading area, shall not cause or allow a vehicle to
idle in that loading/unloading area for more than ten (10) minutes in any sixty
(60) minute period.
   (d)   Exemptions. Division (c) of this section does not apply when:
      (1)   The outdoor temperature is below thirty- two degrees Fahrenheit
(32°F) or above eighty-five degrees Fahrenheit (85°F). However, idling is
limited to ten (10) minutes in any sixty (60) minute period;
      (2)   To prevent a safety or health emergency, a vehicle idles when
operating defrosters, heaters, air conditioners, or when installing equipment;
      (3)   A vehicle idles while forced to remain motionless because of on-
highway traffic, an official traffic control device or signal, or at the
direction of a law enforcement official;
      (4)   A police, fire, ambulance, public safety, military, other emergency
or law enforcement vehicle, or any vehicle being used in an emergency capacity,
idles while in an emergency or training mode, or to maintain communications,
and not solely for the convenience of the vehicle operator;
      (5)   The primary propulsion engine idles for maintenance, servicing,
repair, or diagnostic purposes if idling is required for such activity, or
idles as part of a state or federal inspection to verify that all equipment is
in good working order, provided idling is required as part of the inspection;
      (6)   Idling of the primary propulsion engine is necessary to power work-
related mechanical or electrical operations other than propulsion (e.g., mixing
or processing cargo or straight truck refrigeration). This exemption does not
apply when idling for cabin comfort or to operate non-essential on-board
equipment;
      (7)   An armored vehicle idles when a person remains inside the vehicle
to guard the contents, or while the vehicle is being loaded or unloaded;
      (8)   An occupied vehicle with a sleeper berth compartment idles for
purposes of air conditioning or heating during a required rest or sleep period;
      (9)   A vehicle idles due to mechanical difficulties over which the
driver has no control;
      (10)   A vehicle is only operating an auxiliary power unit, generator
set, or other mobile idle reduction technology as a means to heat, air
condition, or provide electrical power as an alternative to idling the main
engine;
      (11)   A vehicle is actively engaged in work upon the surface of a street
or highway, including construction, cleaning, and snow removal activities, and
the operator is in the vehicle.
   (e)   Penalty. Whoever violates this section shall receive a written warning
on the first offense; shall be fined one hundred dollars ($100.00) on the
second offense; and shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor on any third or
subsequent offense.
   (f)   Signage. The Director of Public Health shall make available signage
for posting regarding vehicle idle time prohibitions.
(Ord. No. 710-2025. Passed 7-9-25, eff. 7-14-25)
§ 431.45 Operation of Low-Speed Vehicle
   No person shall operate a low-speed vehicle upon any street or highway
having an established speed limit greater than thirty-five (35) miles per hour.
(Ord. No. 1279-15. Passed 4-24-17, eff. 4-25-17)
CHAPTER 433 – INTOXICATION; RECKLESS OPERATION; SPEED
433.01   Driving or Physical Control While Under the Influence of Alcohol or
Drugs; Tests; Presumptions; Penalties
433.011   Physical Control of Vehicle While Under the Influence; Testimony and
Evidence Regarding Field Sobriety Test – Repealed
433.02   Operation in Willful or Wanton Disregard of Safety
433.03   Maximum Speed Limits; Assured Clear Distance Ahead
433.04   Stopping or Slow Speed; Posted Minimum Speeds
433.05   Speed Limitations over Bridges
433.06   Speed Exceptions for Emergency or Safety Vehicles
433.07   Street Racing, Stunt Driving and Street Takeover Prohibited
433.08   Trick or Stunt Riding Prohibited
433.09   Text Messaging While Driving
Cross-reference:
   Entertainment distracting traffic, CO
629.04
   Failure to control vehicle, CO
431.34
   Speed limit in cemeteries, CO
557.05
   Speed limit in parks, CO
559.27
   Walking on highway while under the influence, CO
471.09
Statutory reference:
   See sectional histories for similar State law
   Alcohol defined, RC 4301.01
   Alteration of prima facie speed limits, RC 4511.21, 4511.22, 4511.23
   Drug of abuse defined, RC 3719.011
§ 433.01 Driving or Physical Control While Under the Influence of Alcohol or
Drugs; Tests; Presumptions; Penalties
   (a)   Driving under the influence.
      (1)   No person shall operate any vehicle, streetcar, or trackless
trolley within this City, if, at the time of the operation, any of the
following apply:
         A.   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or
a combination of them.
         B.   The person has a concentration of eight-hundredths of one percent
(0.08%) or more but less than seventeen-hundredths of one percent (0.17%) by
weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s whole blood.
         C.   The person has a concentration of ninety-six thousandths of one
percent (0.096%) or more but less than two hundred four- thousandths of one
percent (0.204%) by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s blood
serum or plasma.
         D.   The person has a concentration of 0.08 grams or more but less
than seventeen-hundredths of one (0.17) grams by weight of alcohol per two
hundred and ten (210) liters of the person’s breath.
         E.   The person has a concentration of eleven-hundredths of one (0.11)
grams or more but less than two hundred thirty-eight- thousandths of one
(0.238) grams by weight of alcohol per one hundred (100) milliliters of the
person’s urine.
         F.   The person has a concentration of seventeen-hundredths of one
percent (0.17%) or more by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s
whole blood.
         G.   The person has a concentration of two hundred four-thousandths of
one percent (0.204%) or more by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the
person’s blood serum or plasma.
         H   The person has a concentration of seventeen-hundredths of one
(0.17) grams or more by weight of alcohol per two hundred and ten (210) liters
of the person’s breath.
         I.   The person has a concentration of two hundred thirty-eight-
thousandths of one (0.238) grams or more by weight of alcohol per one hundred
(100) milliliters of the person’s urine.
         J.   Except as provided in division (l) of this section, the person
has a concentration of any of the following controlled substances or
metabolites of a controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum
or plasma, or urine that equals or exceeds any of the following:
            1.   The person has a concentration of amphetamine in the person’s
urine of at least five hundred (500) nanograms of amphetamine per milliliter of
the person’s urine or has a concentration of amphetamine in the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma of at least one hundred (100) nanograms of
amphetamine per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma.
            2.   The person has a concentration of cocaine in the person’s
urine of at least one hundred fifty (150) nanograms of cocaine per milliliter
of the person’s urine or has a concentration of cocaine in the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma of at least fifty (50) nanograms of cocaine per
milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
            3.   The person has a concentration of cocaine metabolite in the
person’s urine of at least one hundred fifty (150) nanograms of cocaine
metabolite per milliliter of the person’s urine or has a concentration of
cocaine metabolite in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at
least fifty (50) nanograms of cocaine metabolite per milliliter of the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
            4.   The person has a concentration of heroin in the person’s urine
of at least two thousand (2,000) nanograms of heroin per milliliter of the
person’s urine or has a concentration of heroin in the person’s whole blood or
blood serum or plasma of at least fifty (50) nanograms of heroin per milliliter
of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
            5.   The person has a concentration of heroin metabolite (6-
monoacetyl morphine) in the person’s urine of at least ten (10) nanograms of
heroin metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) per milliliter of the person’s urine
or has a concentration of heroin metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) in the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least ten (10) nanograms of
heroin metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) per milliliter of the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma.
            6.   The person has a concentration of L.S.D. in the person’s urine
of at least twenty-five (25) nanograms of L.S.D. per milliliter of the person’s
urine or a concentration of L.S.D. in the person’s whole blood or blood serum
or plasma of at least ten (10) nanograms of L.S.D. per milliliter of the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
            7.   The person has a concentration of marihuana in the person’s
urine of at least ten (10) nanograms of marihuana per milliliter of the
person’s urine or has a concentration of marihuana in the person’s whole blood
or blood serum or plasma of at least two (2) nanograms of marihuana per
milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
            8.   Either of the following applies:
               a.   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of
abuse, or a combination of them, and, as measured by gas chromatography mass
spectrometry, the person has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in the
person’s urine of at least fifteen (15) nanograms of marihuana metabolite per
milliliter of the person’s urine or has a concentration of marihuana metabolite
in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least five (5)
nanograms of marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or
blood serum or plasma.
               b.   As measured by gas chromatography mass spectrometry, the
person has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in the person’s urine of at
least thirty-five (35) nanograms of marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the
person’s urine or has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least fifty (50) nanograms of
marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum
or plasma.
            9.   The person has a concentration of methamphetamine in the
person’s urine of at least five hundred (500) nanograms of methamphetamine per
milliliter of the person’s urine or has a concentration of methamphetamine in
the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least one hundred (100)
nanograms of methamphetamine per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or
blood serum or plasma.
            10.   The person has a concentration of phencyclidine in the
person’s urine of at least twenty-five (25) nanograms of phencyclidine per
milliliter of the person’s urine or has a concentration of phencyclidine in the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least ten (10) nanograms of
phencyclidine per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma.
            11.   The State Board of Pharmacy has adopted a rule pursuant to RC
4729.041 that specifies the amount of salvia divinorum and the amount of
salvinorin A that constitute concentrations of salvia divinorum and salvinorin
A in a person’s urine, in a person’s whole blood, or in a person’s blood serum
or plasma at or above which the person is impaired for purposes of operating
any vehicle, streetcar, or trackless trolley within this state, the rule is in
effect, and the person has a concentration of salvia divinorum or salvinorin A
of at least that amount so specified by rule in the person’s urine, in the
person’s whole blood, or in the person’s blood serum or plasma.
      (2)   No person who, within twenty (20) years of the conduct described in
division (a)(2)A. of this section, previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of this division or a substantially equivalent State law
or municipal ordinance, division (a)(1) or (b) of this section or a
substantially equivalent State law or municipal ordinance, shall do both of the
following:
         A.   Operate any vehicle, streetcar, or trackless trolley within this
City while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of
them;
         B.   Subsequent to being arrested for operating the vehicle,
streetcar, or trackless trolley as described in division (a)(2)A. of this
section, being asked by a law enforcement officer to submit to a chemical test
or tests under RC 4511.191 or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
and being advised by the officer in accordance with RC 4511.192 or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance of the consequences of the
person’s refusal or submission to the test or tests, refuse to submit to the
test or tests.
   (b)   Underage alcohol consumption. No person under twenty-one (21) years of
age shall operate any vehicle, streetcar, or trackless trolley within this City
if, at the time of the operation, any of the following apply:
      (1)   The person has a concentration of at least two-hundredths of one
percent (0.02%) but less than eight-hundredths of one percent (0.08%) by weight
per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s whole blood;
      (2)   The person has a concentration of at least three-hundredths of one
percent (0.03%) but less than ninety-six thousandths of one percent (0.096%) by
weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s blood serum or plasma;
      (3)   The person has a concentration of at least two-hundredths of one
(0.02) grams but less than eight-hundredths of one (0.08) grams by weight of
alcohol per two hundred and ten (210) liters of the person’s breath;
      (4)   The person has a concentration of at least twenty-eight one-
thousandths of one (0.028) grams but less than eleven-hundredths of one (0.11)
grams by weight of alcohol per one hundred (100) milliliters of the person’s
urine.
   (c)   Prosecution; limitation on convictions. In any proceeding arising out
of one (1) incident, a person may be charged with a violation of division (a)
(1)A. or (a)(2) and a violation of division (b)(1), (b)(2) or (b)(3) of this
section, but the person may not be convicted of more than one (1) violation of
these divisions.
   (d)   Evidence; tests.
      (1)   A.   In any criminal prosecution for a violation of division (a)
(1)A. of this section or for an equivalent offense that is vehicle- related,
the result of any test of any blood or urine withdrawn and analyzed at any
health care provider, as defined in RC 2317.02, may be admitted with expert
testimony to be considered with any other relevant and competent evidence in
determining the guilt or innocence of the defendant.
         B.   In any criminal prosecution for a violation of division (a) or
(b) of this section or for an equivalent offense that is vehicle- related, the
court may admit evidence on the concentration of alcohol, drugs of abuse,
controlled substances, metabolites of a controlled substance, or a combination
of them in the defendant’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, urine or
other bodily substance at the time of the alleged violation as shown by
chemical analysis of the substance withdrawn within three (3) hours of the time
of the alleged violation. The three (3) hour time limit specified in this
division regarding the admission of evidence does not extend or affect the two
(2) hour time limit specified in RC 4511.192(A) as the maximum period of time
during which a person may consent to a chemical test or tests as described in
that section. The court may admit evidence on the concentration of alcohol,
drugs of abuse, or a combination of them as described in this division when a
person submits to a blood, breath, urine, or other bodily substance test at the
request of a law enforcement officer under RC 4511.191 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, or a blood or urine sample is obtained pursuant
to a search warrant. Only a physician, a registered nurse, an emergency medical
technician-intermediate, an emergency medical technician-paramedic, or a
qualified technician, chemist or phlebotomist shall withdraw a blood sample for
the purpose of determining the alcohol, drug, controlled substance, metabolite
of a controlled substance, or combination content of the whole blood, blood
serum or blood plasma. This limitation does not apply to the taking of breath
or urine specimens. A person authorized to withdraw blood under this division
may refuse to withdraw blood under this division, if in that person’s opinion,
the physical welfare of the person would be endangered by the withdrawing of
blood. The bodily substance withdrawn under this division (d)(1)B. shall be
analyzed in accordance with methods approved by the Ohio Director of Health by
an individual possessing a valid permit issued by the Director pursuant to RC
3701.143.
         C.   As used in division (d)(1)B. of this section, “emergency medical
technician-intermediate” and “emergency medical technician-paramedic” have the
same meanings as in RC 4765.01.
      (2)   In a criminal prosecution for a violation of division (a) of this
section or for an equivalent offense that is vehicle-related, if there was at
the time the bodily substance was withdrawn a concentration of less than the
applicable concentration of alcohol specified in divisions (a)(1)B., (a)(1)C.,
(a)(1)D. and (a)(1)E. of this section or less than the applicable concentration
of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled
substance specified for a violation of division (a)(1)J. of this section, that
fact may be considered with other competent evidence in determining the guilt
or innocence of the defendant. This division does not limit or affect a
criminal prosecution for a violation of division (b) of this section.
      (3)   Upon the request of the person who was tested, the results of the
chemical test shall be made available to the person or the person’s attorney,
immediately upon the completion of the chemical test analysis. If the chemical
test was obtained pursuant to division (d)(1)B. of this section, the person
tested may have a physician, a registered nurse or a qualified technician,
chemist or phlebotomist of the person’s own choosing administer a chemical test
or tests, at the person’s expense, in addition to any administered at the
request of a law enforcement officer. If the person was under arrest as
described in division (g)(5) of this section or RC 4511.191(A)(5), the
arresting officer shall advise the person at the time of the arrest that the
person may have an independent chemical test taken at the person’s own expense.
If the person was under arrest other than described in RC 4511.191(A)(5), the
form to be read to the person to be tested, as required under division (g) of
this section, shall state that the person may have an independent test
performed at the person’s expense. The failure or inability to obtain an
additional chemical test by a person shall not preclude the admission of
evidence relating to the chemical test or tests taken at the request of a law
enforcement officer.
      (4)   A.   As used in division (d)(4)B. and (d)(4)C. of this section,
“National Highway Traffic Safety Administration” means the National Highway
Traffic Safety Administration established as an administration of the United
States Department of Transportation under 96 Stat. 2415 (1983), 49 U.S.C. 105.
         B.   In any criminal prosecution for a violation of division (a) or
(b) of this section, of a municipal ordinance relating to operating a vehicle
while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or alcohol and a drug of
abuse, or of a municipal ordinance relating to operating a vehicle with a
prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of
a controlled substance in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or
urine, if a law enforcement officer has administered a field sobriety test to
the operator of the vehicle involved in the violation and if it is shown by
clear and convincing evidence that the officer administered the test in
substantial compliance with the testing standards for any reliable, credible
and generally accepted field sobriety tests that were in effect at the time the
tests were administered, including but not limited to any testing standards
then in effect that were set by the National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration, all of the following apply:
            1.   The officer may testify concerning the results of the field
sobriety test so administered.
            2.   The prosecution may introduce the results of the field
sobriety test so administered as evidence in any proceedings in the criminal
prosecution.
            3.   If testimony is presented or evidence is introduced under
division (d)(4)B.1. or (d)(4)B.2. of this section and if the testimony or
evidence is admissible under the Rules of Evidence, the court shall admit the
testimony or evidence and the trier of fact shall give it whatever weight the
trier of fact considers to be appropriate.
         C.   Division (d)(4)B. of this section does not limit or preclude a
court, in its determination of whether the arrest of a person was supported by
probable cause or its determination of any other matter in a criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding of a type described in that division,
from considering evidence or testimony that is not otherwise disallowed by
division (d)(4)B. of this section.
   (e)   Laboratory report.
      (1)   Subject to division (e)(3) of this section, in any criminal
prosecution for a violation of division (a)(1)B., (a)(1)C., (a)(1)D., (a)(1)E.,
(a)(1)F., (a)(1)G., (a)(1)H., (a)(1)I. or (a)(1)J. or (b)(1), (b)(2), (b)(3) or
(b)(4) of this section or for an equivalent offense that is substantially
equivalent to any of those divisions, a laboratory report from any laboratory
personnel issued a permit by the Department of Health authorizing an analysis
as described in this division that contains an analysis of the whole blood,
blood serum or plasma, breath, urine or other bodily substance tested and that
contains all of the information specified in this division shall be admitted as
prima facie evidence of the information and statements that the report
contains. The laboratory report shall contain all of the following:
         A.   The signature, under oath, of any person who performed the
analysis;
         B.   Any findings as to the identity and quantity of alcohol, a drug
of abuse, a controlled substance, a metabolite of a controlled substance, or a
combination of them that was found;
         C.   A copy of a notarized statement by the laboratory director or a
designee of the director that contains the name of each certified analyst or
test performer involved with the report, the analyst’s or test performer’s
employment relationship with the laboratory that issued the report, and a
notation that performing an analysis of the type involved is part of the
analyst’s or test performer’s regular duties;
         D.   An outline of the analyst’s or test performer’s education,
training and experience in performing the type of analysis involved and a
certification that the laboratory satisfies appropriate quality control
standards in general and, in this particular analysis, under rules of the Ohio
Department of Health.
      (2)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law regarding the admission
of evidence, a report of the type described in division (e)(1) of this section
is not admissible against the defendant to whom it pertains in any proceeding,
other than a preliminary hearing or a grand jury proceeding, unless the
prosecutor has served a copy of the report on the defendant’s attorney or, if
the defendant has no attorney, on the defendant.
      (3)   A report of the type described in division (e)(1) of this section
shall not be prima facie evidence of the contents, identity or amount of any
substance if, within seven (7) days after the defendant to whom the report
pertains or the defendant’s attorney receives a copy of the report, the
defendant or the defendant’s attorney demands the testimony of the person who
signed the report. The judge in the case may extend the seven (7) day time
limit in the interest of justice.
   (f)   Limitation of liability.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, any physician,
registered nurse, emergency medical technician-intermediate, emergency medical
technician-paramedic, or qualified technician, chemist or phlebotomist who
withdraws blood from a person pursuant to this section or RC 4511.19, 4511.191
or 4511.192, and any hospital, first-aid station or clinic at which blood is
withdrawn from a person pursuant to this section or RC 4511.19, 4511.191 or
4511.192, is immune from criminal liability and civil liability based upon a
claim of assault and battery or any other claim that is not a claim of
malpractice, for any act performed in withdrawing blood from the person. The
immunity provided in this division also extends to an emergency medical service
organization that employs an emergency medical technician-intermediate or
emergency medical technician-paramedic who withdraws blood under this section.
The immunity provided in this division is not available to a person who
withdraws blood if the person engages in willful or wanton misconduct.
      (2)   As used in division (f)(1), “emergency medical technician-
intermediate” and “emergency medical technician-paramedic” have the same
meanings as in RC 4765.01.
(RC 4511.19(A) - (F))
   (g)   Implied consent.
      (1)   Definitions. For the purpose of this division (g), the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         A.   “Alcohol monitoring device” means any device that provides for
continuous alcohol monitoring, any ignition interlock device, any immobilizing
or disabling device other than an ignition interlock device that is constantly
available to monitor the concentration of alcohol in a person’s system, or any
other device that provides for the automatic testing and periodic reporting of
alcohol consumption by a person and that a court orders a person to use as a
sanction imposed as a result of the person’s conviction of or plea of guilty to
an offense.
         B.   “Physical control” has the same meaning as in RC 4511.194.
         C.   “Community Addiction Services Provider” has the same meaning as
in RC 5119.01.
      (2)   Implied consent to chemical tests. Any person who operates a
vehicle, streetcar, or trackless trolley upon a highway or any public or
private property used by the public for vehicular travel or parking within this
municipality or who is in physical control of a vehicle, streetcar, or
trackless trolley shall be deemed to have given consent to a chemical test or
tests of the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine to
determine the alcohol, drug of abuse, controlled substance, metabolite of a
controlled substance, or combination content of the person’s whole blood, blood
serum or plasma, breath, or urine if arrested for a violation of division (a),
(b) or (o) of this section, RC 4511.19(A) or (B), 4511.194 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance or any other municipal O.V.I. ordinance.
      (3)   Tests at request of law enforcement agent. The chemical test or
tests under division (g)(2) of this section shall be administered at the
request of a law enforcement officer having reasonable grounds to believe the
person was operating or in physical control of a vehicle, streetcar, or
trackless trolley in violation of a division, section or ordinance identified
in division (g)(2) of this section. The law enforcement agency by which the
officer is employed shall designate which of the tests shall be administered.
      (4)   Effect of death or unconsciousness. Any person who is dead or
unconscious, or who otherwise is in a condition rendering the person incapable
of refusal, shall be deemed to have consented as provided in division (g)(2) of
this section and the test or tests may be administered, subject to RC 313.12 to
313.16.
      (5)   Chemical tests.
         A.   If a law enforcement officer arrests a person for a violation of
division (a) or (b) of this section, RC 4511.19(A) or (B), 4511.194 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or a municipal O.V.I. ordinance
and if the person if convicted would be required to be sentenced under division
(h)(1)(C), (h)(1)(D), or (h)(1)(E), or under RC 4511.19(G)(1)(c), (G)(1)(d) or
(G)(1)(e), the law enforcement officer shall request the person to submit, and
the person shall submit, to a chemical test or tests of the person’s whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine for the purpose of determining
the alcohol, drug of abuse, controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled
substance, or combination content of the person’s whole blood, blood serum or
plasma, breath, or urine. A law enforcement officer who makes a request
pursuant to this division that a person submit to a chemical test or tests is
not required to advise the person of the consequences of submitting to, or
refusing to submit to, the test or tests and is not required to give the person
the form described in division (g)(7) of this section, but the officer shall
advise the person at the time of the arrest that if the person refuses to take
a chemical test the officer may employ whatever reasonable means are necessary
to ensure that the person submits to a chemical test of the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma. The officer shall also advise the person at the
time of the arrest that the person may have an independent chemical test taken
at the person’s own expense. Divisions (g)(3) and (g)(4) of this section apply
to the administration of a chemical test or tests pursuant to this division.
         B.   If a person refuses to submit to a chemical test upon a request
made pursuant to division (g)(5)A. of this section, the law enforcement officer
who made the request may employ whatever reasonable means are necessary to
ensure that the person submits to a chemical test of the person’s whole blood
or blood serum or plasma. A law enforcement officer who acts pursuant to this
division to ensure that a person submits to a chemical test of the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma is immune from criminal and civil
liability based upon a claim for assault and battery or any other claim for the
acts, unless the officer so acted with malicious purpose, in bad faith, or in a
wanton or reckless manner.
(RC 4511.191(A))
      (6)   Advice required. Except as provided in division (g)(5) of this
section, the arresting law enforcement officer shall give advice in accordance
with this division to any person under arrest for a violation of division (a),
(b) or (o) of this section, RC 4511.19(A) or (B), 4511.194 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, or any other municipal O.V.I. ordinance. The
officer shall give that advice in a written form that contains the information
described in division (g)(7) of this section and shall read the advice to the
person. The form shall contain a statement that the form was shown to the
person under arrest and read to the person by the arresting officer. One (1) or
more persons shall witness the arresting officer’s reading of the form, and the
witnesses shall certify to this fact by signing the form. The person must
submit to the chemical test or tests, subsequent to the request of the
arresting officer, within two (2) hours of the time of the alleged violation
and, if the person does not submit to the test or tests within that two (2)
hour time limit, the failure to submit automatically constitutes a refusal to
submit to the test or tests.
      (7)   Certification of arrest. Except as provided in division (g)(5) of
this section, if a person is under arrest as described in division (g)(6) of
this section, before the person may be requested to submit to a chemical test
or tests to determine the alcohol, drug of abuse, controlled substance,
metabolite of a controlled substance or combination content of the person’s
whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine, the arresting officer
shall read the following form to the person:
   “You now are under arrest for (specifically state the offense under state
law or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance for which the person was
arrested – operating a vehicle under the influence of alcohol, a drug, or a
combination of them; operating a vehicle while under the influence of a listed
controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance;
operating a vehicle after underage alcohol consumption; or having physical
control of a vehicle while under the influence).
   “If you refuse to take any chemical test required by law, your Ohio driving
privileges will be suspended immediately, and you will have to pay a fee to
have the privileges reinstated. If you have a prior conviction of O.V.I.,
O.V.U.A.C., or operating a vehicle while under the influence of a listed
controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance under
state or municipal law within the preceding 20 years, you are now under arrest
for state O.V.I., and, if you refuse to take a chemical test, you will face
increased penalties if you subsequently are convicted of the state O.V.I.
   (Read this part unless the person is under arrest for solely having physical
control of a vehicle while under the influence.) “If you take any chemical test
required by law and are found to be at or over the prohibited amount of
alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in
your whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine as set by law, your
Ohio driving privileges will be suspended immediately, and you will have to pay
a fee to have the privileges reinstated.
   “If you take a chemical test, you may have an independent chemical test
taken at your own expense.”
      (8)   Actions required by arresting officer. If the arresting law
enforcement officer does not ask a person under arrest as described in division
(g)(5) of this section or division (g)(6) of this section to submit to a
chemical test or tests under RC 4511.191 or this section, the arresting officer
shall seize the Ohio or out-of-state driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit of the person and immediately forward it to the court in which the
arrested person is to appear on the charge. If the arrested person is not in
possession of the person’s license or permit or it is not in the person’s
vehicle, the officer shall order the person to surrender it to the law
enforcement agency that employs the officer within twenty-four (24) hours after
the arrest, and, upon the surrender, the agency immediately shall forward the
license or permit to the court in which the person is to appear on the charge.
Upon receipt of the license or permit, the court shall retain it pending the
arrested person’s initial appearance and any action taken under RC 4511.196.
      (9)   Duties of officer.
         A.   If a law enforcement officer asks a person under arrest as
described in division (g)(5) of this section to submit to a chemical test or
tests under that division and the test results indicate a prohibited
concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a
controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma,
breath, or urine at the time of the alleged offense, or if a law enforcement
officer asks a person under arrest as described in division (g)(6) of this
section to submit to a chemical test or tests under RC 4511.191 or this
section, the officer advises the person in accordance with this section of the
consequences of the person’s refusal or submission, and either the person
refuses to submit to the test or tests or, unless the arrest was for a
violation of division (o) of this section, RC 4511.194 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the person submits to the test or tests and the
test results indicate a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled
substance or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the person’s whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine at the time of the alleged
offense, the arresting officer shall do all of the following:
            1.   On behalf of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, notify the
person that, independent of any penalties or sanctions imposed upon the person,
the person’s Ohio driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or
nonresident operating privilege is suspended immediately, that the suspension
will last at least until the person’s initial appearance on the charge, which
will be held within five (5) days after the date of the person’s arrest or the
issuance of a citation to the person, and that the person may appeal the
suspension at the initial appearance or during the period of time ending thirty
(30) days after that initial appearance;
            2.   Seize the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit of
the person and immediately forward it to the Registrar. If the arrested person
is not in possession of the person’s license or permit or it is not in the
person’s vehicle, the officer shall order the person to surrender it to the law
enforcement agency that employs the officer within twenty-four (24) hours after
the person is given notice of the suspension, and, upon the surrender, the
officer’s employing agency immediately shall forward the license or permit to
the Registrar;
            3.   Verify the person’s current residence and, if it differs from
that on the person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit, notify
the Registrar of the change;
            4.   Send to the Registrar, within forty-eight (48) hours after the
arrest of the person, a sworn report that includes all of the following
statements:
               a.   That the officer had reasonable grounds to believe that, at
the time of the arrest, the arrested person was operating a vehicle, streetcar,
or trackless trolley in violation of RC 4511.19(A) or (B) or a municipal O.V.I.
ordinance or for being in physical control of a stationary vehicle, streetcar,
or trackless trolley in violation of RC 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance;
               b.   That the person was arrested and charged with a violation
of RC 4511.19(A) or (B), 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, or a municipal O.V.I. ordinance;
               c.   Unless division (g)(9)A.4.e. of this section applies, that
the officer asked the person to take the designated chemical test or tests,
advised the person in accordance with this section of the consequences of
submitting to, or refusing to take, the test or tests, and gave the person the
form described in division (g)(7) of this section;
               d.   Unless division (g)(9)A.4.e. of this section applies, that
either the person refused to submit to the chemical test or tests or, unless
the arrest was for a violation of RC 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, the person submitted to the chemical test or tests and the
test results indicate a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled
substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the person’s whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine at the time of the alleged
offense;
               e.   If the person was under arrest as described in division (g)
(5) of this section and the chemical test or tests were performed in accordance
with that division, that the person was under arrest as described in that
division, that the chemical test or tests were performed in accordance with
that division, and that test results indicated a prohibited concentration of
alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in
the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine at the time
of the alleged offense.
         B.   Division (g)(9)A. of this section does not apply to a person who
is arrested for a violation of division (o) of this section, RC 4511.194 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or any other substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, who is asked by a law enforcement officer to
submit to a chemical test or tests under this section, and who submits to the
test or tests, regardless of the amount of alcohol, a controlled substance, or
a metabolite of a controlled substance that the test results indicate is
present in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine.
      (10)   Sworn report of arresting officer.
         A.   The arresting officer shall give the officer’s sworn report that
is completed under this section to the arrested person at the time of the
arrest, or the Registrar of Motor Vehicles shall send the report to the person
by regular first-class mail as soon as possible after receipt of the report,
but not later than fourteen (14) days after receipt of it. An arresting officer
may give an unsworn report to the arrested person at the time of the arrest,
provided the report is complete when given to the arrested person and
subsequently is sworn to by the arresting officer. As soon as possible, but not
later than forty-eight (48) hours after the arrest of the person, the arresting
officer shall send a copy of the sworn report to the court in which the
arrested person is to appear on the charge for which the person was arrested.
         B.   The sworn report of an arresting officer completed under this
section is prima facie proof of the information and statements that it
contains. It shall be admitted and considered as prima facie proof of the
information and statements that it contains in any appeal under RC 4511.197
relative to any suspension of a person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or permit or nonresident operating privilege that results from the
arrest covered by the report.
(RC 4511.192)
      (11)   Suspension effective immediately. A suspension of a person’s
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating
privilege under this section for the time described in RC 4511.191(B) or (C) is
effective immediately from the time at which the arresting officer serves the
notice of suspension upon the arrested person. Any subsequent finding that the
person is not guilty of the charge that resulted in the person’s being
requested to take the chemical test or tests under division (g)(1) through (g)
(5) of this section does not affect the suspension.
      (12)   Initial appearance. If a person arrested for operating a vehicle,
streetcar, or trackless trolley in violation of division (a) or (b) of this
section, RC 4511.19(A) or (B), or any other municipal O.V.I. ordinance, or for
being in physical control of a vehicle in violation of division (o) of this
section or RC 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
regardless of whether the person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit or nonresident operating privilege is or is not suspended under RC
4511.191(B) or (C) or RC Chapter 4510, the person’s initial appearance on the
charge resulting from the arrest shall be held within five (5) days of the
person’s arrest or the issuance of the citation to him or her, subject to any
continuance granted by the court pursuant to RC 4511.197 regarding the issues
specified in that section.
(RC 4511.191(D))
   (h)   Penalty for driving under the influence.
      (1)   Whoever violates any provisions of divisions (a)(1)A. through (a)
(1)I. or (a)(2) of this section is guilty of operating a vehicle under the
influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them. Whoever
violates division (a)(1)J. of this section is guilty of operating a vehicle
while under the influence of a listed controlled substance or a listed
metabolite of a controlled substance. The court shall sentence the offender for
either offense under RC Chapter 2929, except as otherwise authorized or
required by divisions (h)(1)A. through (h)(1)E. of this section:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (h)(1)B., (h)(1)C., (h)
(1)D. or (h)(1)E. of this section, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree and the court shall sentence the offender to all of the
penalties and sanctions provided in RC 4511.19(G)(1)(a)(i) to (G)(1)(a)(iv).
         B.   Except as otherwise provided in division (h)(1)E. of this
section, an offender who, within ten (10) years of the offense previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one (1) violation of division (a) or (b)
of this section, or one (1) other equivalent offense is guilty of a misdemeanor
of the first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the
penalties and sanctions provided in RC 4511.19(G)(1)(b)(i) to (G)(1)(b)(v).
         C.   Except as otherwise provided in division (h)(1)E. of this
section, an offender who, within ten (10) years of the offense, previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two (2) violations of division (a) or
(b) of this section or other equivalent offenses is guilty of a misdemeanor.
The court shall sentence the offender to all of the penalties and sanctions
provided in RC 4511.19(G)(1)(c)(i) to (G)(1)(c)(vi).
         D.   Except as otherwise provided in division (h)(1)E. of this
section, an offender who, within ten (10) years of the offense, previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three (3) or more violations of division
(a) or (b) of this section or other equivalent offenses or an offender who,
within twenty (20) years of the offense, previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to five (5) or more violations of that nature is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         E.   An offender who previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of RC 4511.19(A) that was a felony, regardless of when
the violation and the conviction or guilty plea occurred, is guilty of a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   An offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (a) of this section and who subsequently seeks reinstatement of the
driver’s or occupational driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating
privilege suspended under this section or RC 4511.19 as a result of the
conviction or guilty plea shall pay a reinstatement fee as provided in RC
4511.191(F)(2).
      (3)   A.   If an offender is sentenced to a jail term under RC 4511.19(G)
(1)(b)(i) or (G)(1)(b)(ii) or (G)(1)(c)(i) or (G)(1)(c)(ii) and if, within
sixty (60) days of sentencing of the offender, the court issues a written
finding on the record that, due to the unavailability of space at the jail
where the offender is required to serve the term, the offender will not be able
to begin serving that term within the sixty (60) day period following the date
of sentencing, the court may impose an alternative sentence as specified in RC
4511.19(G)(3) that includes a term of house arrest with electronic monitoring,
with continuous alcohol monitoring, or with both electronic monitoring and
continuous alcohol monitoring.
         B.   As an alternative to the mandatory jail terms as required by RC
4511.19(G)(1), the court may sentence the offender as provided in RC 4511.19(G)
(3).
      (4)   If an offender’s driver’s or occupational driver’s license or
permit or nonresident operating privilege is suspended under division (h) of
this section or RC 4511.19(G) and if RC 4510.13 permits the court to grant
limited driving privileges, the court may grant the limited driving privileges
in accordance with that section. If division (A)(7) of that section requires
the court impose as a condition of the privileges that the offender must
display on the vehicle that is driven subject to the privileges restricted
license plates that are issued under RC 4503.231, except as provided in
division (B) of that section, the court shall impose that condition as one (1)
of the conditions of the limited driving privileges granted to the offender,
except as provided in RC 4503.231(B).
      (5)   Fines imposed under this section for a violation of division (a) of
this section shall be distributed as provided in RC 4511.19(G)(5).
      (6)   If title to a motor vehicle that is subject to an order of criminal
forfeiture under division (h)(1)C., (h)(1)D. or (h)(1)E. of this section is
assigned or transferred and RC 4503.234(B)(2) or (B)(3) applies, in addition to
or independent of any other penalty established by law, the court may fine the
offender the value of the vehicle as determined by publications of the National
Automobile Dealers Association. The proceeds of any fine so imposed shall be
distributed in accordance with division (C)(2) of that section.
      (7)   In all cases in which an offender is sentenced under division (h)
of this section, the offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in RC 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide that
proof of financial responsibility, the court, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, may order restitution pursuant to RC 2929.18 or
2929.28 in an amount not exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for any
economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and
proximate result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during, or
after committing the offense for which the offender is sentenced under division
(h) of this section.
      (8)   As used in division (h) of this section, “electronic monitoring”
has the same meaning as in RC 2929.01.
   (i)   Penalty for operating a vehicle after underage alcohol consumption.
Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of operating a motor
vehicle after underage alcohol consumption and shall be punished as follows:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (i)(2) of this section,
the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. In addition to
any other sanction imposed for the offense, the court shall impose a class six
(6) suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license or nonresident operating
privilege from the range specified in RC 4510.02(A)(6); The court may grant
limited driving privileges relative to the suspension under sections 4510.021
and 4510.13 of the Revised Code. The court may grant unlimited driving
privileges with an ignition interlock device relative to the suspension and may
reduce the period of suspension as authorized under section 4510.022 of the
Revised Code . If the court grants unlimited driving privileges under section
4510.022 of the Revised Code, the court shall suspend any jail term imposed
under division (h)(1) of this section as required under that section.
      (2)   If, within one (1) year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one (1) or more violations of division
(a) or (b) of this section or other equivalent offense or offenses, the
offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. In addition to any
other sanction imposed for the offense, the court shall impose a class four (4)
suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license or nonresident operating
privilege from the range specified in RC 4510.02(A)(4). The court may grant
limited driving privileges relative to the suspension under sections 4510.021
and 4510.13 of the Revised Code.
      (3)   If the offender also is convicted of or also pleads guilty to a
specification of the type described in RC 2941.1416 and if the court imposes a
jail term for the violation of division (b) of this section, the court shall
impose upon the offender an additional definite jail term pursuant to RC
2929.24(E).
      (4)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in RC 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide that
proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other penalties
provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to RC 2929.28 in an
amount not exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for any economic loss
arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result
of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during, or after committing
the violation of division (b) of this section.
   (j)   Treatment programs.
      (1)   No court shall sentence an offender to an alcohol treatment program
under this section unless the treatment program complies with the minimum
standards for alcohol treatment programs adopted under RC Chapter 5119 by the
Director of Mental Health and Addiction Services.
      (2)   An offender who stays in a drivers’ intervention program or in an
alcohol treatment program under an order issued under this section shall pay
the cost of the stay in the program. However, if the court determines that an
offender who stays in an alcohol treatment program under an order issued under
this section is unable to pay the cost of the stay in the program, the court
may order that the cost be paid from the court’s Indigent Drivers’ Alcohol
Treatment Fund.
   (k)   Appeal; effect on suspension. If a person whose driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege is suspended
under this section or RC 4511.19 files an appeal regarding any aspect of the
person’s trial or sentence, the appeal itself does not stay the operation of
the suspension.
   (l)   Exception; direction of health professional. Division (a)(1)J. of this
section does not apply to a person who operates a vehicle, streetcar, or
trackless trolley while the person has a concentration of a listed controlled
substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance in the person’s
whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or urine that equals or exceeds the amount
specified in that division, if both of the following apply:
`      (1)   The person obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs.
      (2)   The person injected, ingested or inhaled the controlled substance
in accordance with the health professional’s directions.
   (m)   Applicability to RC 2923.16(D). The prohibited concentrations of a
controlled substance or a metabolite of a controlled substance listed in
division (a)(1)J. of this section also apply in a prosecution of a violation of
RC 2923.16(D) in the same manner as if the offender is being prosecuted for a
prohibited concentration of alcohol.
   (n)   Applicability of terms. All terms defined in RC 4510.01 apply to this
section. If the meaning of a term defined in RC 4510.01 conflicts with the
meaning of the same term as defined in RC 4501.01 or 4511.01, the term as
defined in RC 4510.01 applies to this section.
(RC 4511.19(G) - (M))
   (o)   Physical control of vehicle while under the influence.
      (1)   Definition. As used in this division (o), “physical control” means
being in the driver’s position of the front seat of a vehicle or in the
driver’s position of a streetcar or trackless trolley and having possession of
the vehicle’s, streetcar’s, or trackless trolley’s ignition key or other
ignition device.
      (2)   Generally. No person shall be in physical control of a vehicle,
streetcar, or trackless trolley if, at the time of the physical control, any of
the following apply:
         A.   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or
a combination of them.
         B.   The person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine
contains at least the concentration of alcohol specified in divisions (a)(1)B.,
(a)(1)C., (a)(1)D. or (a)(1)E. of this section.
         C.   Except as provided in division (o)(5) of this section, the person
has a concentration of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of
a controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or
urine that equals or exceeds the concentration specified in division (a)(1)J.
of this section.
      (3)   Field sobriety test.
         A.   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a
violation of this section, if a law enforcement officer has administered a
field sobriety test to the person in physical control of the vehicle involved
in the violation and if it is shown by clear and convincing evidence that the
officer administered the test in substantial compliance with the testing
standards for any reliable, credible and generally acceptable field sobriety
tests that were in effect at the time the tests were administered, including
but not limited to any testing standards then in effect that were set by the
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, all of the following apply:
            1.   The officer may testify concerning the results of the field
sobriety test so administered.
            2.   The prosecution may introduce the results of the field
sobriety test so administered as evidence in any proceedings in the criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding.
            3.   If testimony is presented or evidence is introduced under
division (o)(3)A.1. or (o)(3)A.2. of this section and if the testimony or
evidence is admissible under the Rules of Evidence, the court shall admit the
testimony or evidence, and the trier of fact shall give it whatever weight the
trier of fact considers to be appropriate.
         B.   Division (o)(3)A. of this section does not limit or preclude a
court, in its determination of whether the arrest of a person was supported by
probable cause or its determination of any other matter in a criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding of a type described in that division,
from considering evidence or testimony that is not otherwise disallowed by
division (o)(3)A. of this section.
      (4)   Penalty. Whoever violates this division (o) is guilty of having
physical control of a vehicle while under the influence, a misdemeanor of the
first degree. In addition to other sanctions imposed, the court may impose on
the offender a class seven (7) suspension of the offender’s driver’s license,
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license
or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in RC 4510.02(A)
(7).
      (5)   Exception. Division (o)(2)C. of this section does not apply to a
person who is in physical control of a vehicle, streetcar, or trackless trolley
while the person has a concentration of a listed controlled substance or a
listed metabolite of a controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood
serum or plasma, or urine that equals or exceeds the amount specified in
division (a)(1)J. of this section if both of the following apply:
         A.   The person obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs.
         B.   The person injected, ingested or inhaled the controlled substance
in accordance with the health professional’s directions.
(RC 4511.194)
   (p)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      (1)   “Community residential sanction”, “continuous alcohol monitoring”,
“jail”, “mandatory prison term”, “mandatory term of local incarceration”,
“prison term” and “sanction” have the same meanings as in RC 2929.01.
      (2)   “Drug of abuse” has the same meaning as in RC 4506.01.
      (3)   “Equivalent offense” means any of the following:
         A.   A violation of RC 4511.19(A) or (B);
         B.   A violation of a municipal O.V.I. ordinance;
         C.   A violation of RC 2903.04 in a case in which the offender was
subject to the sanctions described in division (D) of that section;
         D.   A violation of RC 2903.06(A)(1) or 2903.08 or a municipal
ordinance that is substantially equivalent to either of those divisions;
         E.   A violation of RC 2903.06(A)(2), (A)(3) or (A)(4), 2903.08(A)(2),
or former RC 2903.07, or a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent
to any of those divisions or that former section, in a case in which a judge or
jury as the trier of fact found that the offender was under the influence of
alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them;
         F.   A violation of RC 1547.11(A) or (B);
         G.   A violation of a municipal ordinance prohibiting a person from
operating or being in physical control of any vessel underway or from
manipulating any water skis, aquaplane or similar device on the waters of this
state while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination
of them or prohibiting a person from operating or being in physical control of
any vessel underway or from manipulating any water skis, aquaplane or similar
device on the waters of this state with a prohibited concentration of alcohol,
a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine;
         H.   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance, law of
another state, or law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to
RC 4511.19(A) or (B) or 1547.11(A) or (B);
         I.   A violation of a former law of this state that was substantially
equivalent to RC 4511.19(A) or (B) or 1547.11(A) or (B).
      (4)   “Equivalent offense that is vehicle-related” means an equivalent
offense that is any of the following:
         A.   A violation described in division A., B., C., D. or E. of the
definition for “equivalent offense” provided in this division (p);
         B.   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance, law of
another state, or law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to
RC 4511.19(A) or (B);
         C.   A violation of a former law of this state that was substantially
equivalent to RC 4511.19(A) or (B).
      (5)   “Mandatory jail term” means the mandatory term in jail of three
(3), six (6), ten (10), twenty (20), thirty (30) or sixty (60) days that must
be imposed under RC 4511.19(G)(1)(a), (G)(1)(b), or (G)(1)(c) upon an offender
convicted of a violation of division (A) of that section and in relation to
which all of the following apply:
         A.   Except as specifically authorized under RC 4511.19, the term must
be served in a jail.
         B.   Except as specifically authorized under RC 4511.19, the term
cannot be suspended, reduced or otherwise modified pursuant to RC 2929.21
through 2929.28 or any other provision of the Ohio Revised Code.
      (6)   “Municipal O.V.I. ordinance” and “municipal O.V.I. offense” mean
any municipal ordinance prohibiting a person from operating a vehicle while
under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them or
prohibiting a person from operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration
of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance
in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine.
(RC 4511.181; Ord. No. 625-17. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 433.011 Physical Control of Vehicle While Under the Influence; Testimony and
Evidence Regarding Field Sobriety Test – Repealed
(Ord. No. 625-17. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 433.02 Operation in Willful or Wanton Disregard of Safety
   (a)   No person shall operate a vehicle, trackless trolley or streetcar on
any street or highway in willful or wanton disregard of the safety of persons
or property.
   (b)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle, trackless trolley or
streetcar on any public or private property other than streets or highways in
willful or wanton disregard of the safety of persons or property.
      (2)   Division (b)(1) of this section does not apply to the competitive
operation of vehicles on public or private property when the owner of the
property knowingly permits such operation thereon.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates any
provision of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one (1)
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one (1) predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
any provision of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
If, within one (1) year of the offense, the offender previously has been
convicted of two (2) or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses,
whoever violates any provision of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the third degree.
(RC 4511.20, 4511.201; Ord. No. 1279-15. Passed 4-24-17, eff. 4-25-17)
§ 433.03 Maximum Speed Limits; Assured Clear Distance Ahead
   (a)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle, trackless trolley, or
streetcar at a speed greater or less than is reasonable or proper, having due
regard for the traffic, surface and width of the street or highway and any
other conditions, and no person shall drive any motor vehicle in and upon any
street or highway at a greater speed than will permit him or her to bring it to
a stop within the assured clear distance ahead.
   (b)   It is prima facie lawful, in the absence of a lower limit declared or
established pursuant to this section by the Ohio Director of Transportation or
local authorities, for the operator of a motor vehicle, trackless trolley, or
streetcar to operate the same at a speed not exceeding the following:
      (1)   A.   Twenty (20) miles per hour in school zones during school
recess and while children are going to or leaving school during the opening or
closing hours, and when twenty (20) miles per hour school speed limit signs are
erected, except that on controlled-access highways and expressways, if the
right-of-way line fence has been erected without pedestrian opening, the speed
shall be governed by division (b)(4) of this section, and on freeways, if the
right-of-way line fence has been erected without pedestrian opening, the speed
shall be governed by divisions (b)(9) and (b)(10) of this section. The end of
every school zone may be marked by a sign indicating the end of the zone.
Nothing in this section or in the Manual and Specifications for a Uniform
System of Traffic-Control Devices shall be construed to require school zones to
be indicated by signs equipped with flashing or other lights, or giving other
special notice of the hours in which the school zone speed limit is in effect.
         B.   As used in this section, "school" means any school chartered
under RC 3301.16 and any nonchartered school that during the preceding year
filed with the Department of Education in compliance with OAC 3301-35-08, a
copy of the school's report for the parents of the school's pupils certifying
that the school meets state minimum standards for nonchartered, nontax-
supported schools and presents evidence of this filing to the jurisdiction from
which it is requesting the establishment of a school zone. "School" also
includes a special elementary school that in writing requests the County
Engineer to create a school zone at the location of the school. Upon receipt of
the written request, the County Engineer shall create a school zone at that
location by erecting appropriate signs.
         C.   As used in this section, "school zone" means that portion of a
street or highway passing a school fronting upon the street or highway that is
encompassed by projecting the school property lines to the fronting street or
highway, and also includes that portion of a state highway. Upon request from
local authorities for streets and highways under their jurisdiction and that
portion of a state highway under the jurisdiction of the Ohio Director of
Transportation or a request from a County Engineer in the case of a school zone
for a special elementary school, the Director may extend the traditional school
zone boundaries. The distances in divisions (b)(1)C.1. through (b)(1)C.3. below
shall not exceed three hundred (300) feet per approach per direction, and are
bounded by whichever of the following distances or combination thereof the
Director approves as most appropriate:
            1.   The distance encompassed by projecting the school building
lines normal to the fronting highway and extending a distance of three hundred
(300) feet on each approach direction;
            2.   The distance encompassed by projecting the school property
lines intersecting the fronting highway and extending a distance of three
hundred (300) feet on each approach direction;
            3.   The distance encompassed by the special marking of the
pavement for a principal school pupil crosswalk plus a distance of three
hundred (300) feet on each approach direction of the highway.
         D.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to invalidate the
Director's initial action on August 9, 1976, establishing all school zones at
the traditional school zone boundaries defined by projecting school property
lines, except when those boundaries are extended as provided in divisions (b)
(1)A. and (b)(1)C. of this section.
         E.   As used in this division, "crosswalk" has the meaning given that
term in RC 4511.01(LL)(2).
         F.   The Director may, upon request by resolution of the legislative
authority and upon submission by the municipality of such engineering, traffic
and other information as the Director considers necessary, designate a school
zone on any portion of a state route lying within the municipality that
includes a crosswalk customarily used by children going to or leaving a school
during recess and opening and closing hours, whenever the distance, as measured
in a straight line, from the school property line nearest the crosswalk to the
nearest point of a crosswalk is no more than one thousand three hundred twenty
(1,320) feet. Such a school zone shall include the distance encompassed by the
crosswalk and extending three hundred (300) feet in each appropriate direction
of the state route.
         G.   As used in this section, "special elementary school" means a
school that meets all of the following:
            1.   It is not chartered and does not receive tax revenue from any
source.
            2.   It does not educate children beyond the eighth grade.
            3.   It is located outside the limits of a municipal corporation.
            4.   A majority of the total number of students enrolled at the
school are not related by blood.
            5.   The principal or other person in charge of the special
elementary school annually sends a report to the superintendent of the school
district in which the special elementary school is located indicating the total
number of students enrolled at the school, but otherwise the principal or other
person in charge does not report any other information or data to the
superintendent.
      (2)   Twenty-five (25) miles per hour in all other portions of the
municipality, except on state routes outside business districts, through
highways outside business districts and alleys;
      (3)   Thirty-five (35) miles per hour on all state routes or through
highways within the municipality outside business districts, except as provided
in divisions (b)(4) and (b)(6) of this section;
      (4)   Fifty (50) miles per hour on controlled-access highways and
expressways within the municipality;
      (5)   Fifty-five (55) miles per hour on highways outside the
municipality, other than highways within island jurisdictions as provided in
division (b)(8) of this section, highways as provided in division (b)(9) of
this section, and highways, expressways and freeways as provided in divisions
(b)(12), (b)(13), (b)(14) and (b)(16) of this section;
      (6)   Fifty (50) miles per hour on state routes within the municipality
outside urban districts unless a lower prima facie speed is established as
further provided in this section;
      (7)   Fifteen (15) miles per hour on all alleys within the municipality;
      (8)   Thirty-five (35) miles per hour on highways outside the
municipality that are within an island jurisdiction;
      (9)   Sixty (60) miles per hour on two (2) lane state routes outside
municipal corporations as established by the Director under RC 4511.21(H)(2);
      (10)   Fifty-five (55) miles per hour at all times on freeways with paved
shoulders inside the municipality, other than freeways as provided in divisions
(b)(14) and (b)(16) of this section;
      (11)   Fifty-five (55) miles per hour at all times on freeways outside
the municipality, other than freeways as provided in divisions (b)(14) and (b)
(16) of this section;
      (12)   Sixty (60) miles per hour for operators of any motor vehicle at
all times on all portions of rural divided highways;
      (13)   Sixty-five (65) miles per hour for operators of any motor vehicle
at all times on all rural expressways without traffic control signals;
      (14)   Seventy (70) miles per hour for operators of any motor vehicle at
all times on all rural freeways;
      (15)   Fifty-five (55) miles per hour for operators of any motor vehicle
at all times on all portions of freeways in congested areas as determined by
the Director and that are part of the interstate system and are located within
a municipal corporation or within an interstate freeway outerbelt;
      (16)   Sixty-five (65) miles per hour for operators of any motor vehicle
at all times on all portions of freeways in urban areas as determined by the
Director and that are part of the interstate system and are part of an
interstate freeway outerbelt.
   (c)   It is prima facie unlawful for any person to exceed any of the speed
limitations in divisions (b)(1)A., (b)(2), (b)(3), (b)(4), (b)(6), (b)(7) and
(b)(8) of this section or any declared or established pursuant to this section
by the Director or local authorities and it is unlawful for any person to
exceed any of the speed limitations in division (d) of this section. No person
shall be convicted of more than one (1) violation of this section for the same
conduct, although violations of more than one (1) provision of this section may
be charged in the alternative in a single affidavit.
   (d)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle, trackless trolley, or
streetcar upon a street or highway as follows:
      (1)   At a speed exceeding fifty-five (55) miles per hour, except upon a
two (2) lane state route as provided in division (b)(9) of this section and
upon a highway, expressway or freeway as provided in divisions (b)(12), (b)
(13), (b)(14) and (b)(16) of this section;
      (2)   At a speed exceeding sixty (60) miles per hour upon a two (2) lane
state route as provided in division (b)(9) of this section and upon a highway
as provided in division (b)(12) of this section;
      (3)   At a speed exceeding sixty-five (65) miles per hour upon an
expressway as provided in division (b)(13) of this section or upon a freeway as
provided in division (b)(16) of this section, except upon a freeway as provided
in division (b)(14) of this section;
      (4)   At a speed exceeding seventy (70) miles per hour upon a freeway as
provided in division (b)(14) of this section;
      (5)   At a speed exceeding the posted speed limit upon a highway,
expressway or freeway for which the Director has determined and declared a
speed limit pursuant to RC 4511.21(I)(2) or (L)(2).
   (e)   Pursuant to RC 4511.21(E), in every charge of violating this section,
the affidavit and warrant shall specify the time, place and speed at which the
defendant is alleged to have driven, and in charges made in reliance upon
division (c) of this section also the speed which division (b)(1)A., (b)(2),
(b)(3), (b)(4), (b)(6), (b)(7) or (b)(8) of, or a limit declared or established
pursuant to, this section or RC 4511.21 declares is prima facie lawful at the
time and place of the alleged violation, except that in affidavits where a
person is alleged to have driven at a greater speed than will permit the person
to bring the vehicle to stop within the assured clear distance ahead, the
affidavit and warrant need not specify the speed at which the defendant is
alleged to have driven.
   (f)   Pursuant to RC 4511.21(F), when a speed in excess of both a prima
facie limitation and a limitation in division (d) of this section is alleged,
the defendant shall be charged in a single affidavit, alleging a single act,
with a violation indicated of both division (b)(1)A., (b)(2), (b)(3), (b)(4),
(b)(6), (b)(7) or (b)(8) of this section, or of a limit declared or established
pursuant to this section or RC 4511.21 by the Director or local authorities,
and of the limitation in division (d) of this section. If the court finds a
violation of division (b)(1)A., (b)(2), (b)(3), (b)(4), (b)(6), (b)(7) or (b)
(8) of, or a limit declared or established pursuant to, this section or RC
4511.21 has occurred, it shall enter a judgment of conviction under that
division and dismiss the charge under division (d) of this section. If it finds
no violation of division (b)(1)A., (b)(2), (b)(3), (b)(4), (b)(6), (b)(7) or
(b)(8) of, or a limit declared or established pursuant to, this section or RC
4511.21, it shall then consider whether the evidence supports a conviction
under division (d) of this section.
   (g)   Pursuant to RC 4511.21(G), points shall be assessed for a violation of
a limitation under division (d) of this section in accordance with RC 4510.036.
(RC 4511.21(A) - (G))
   (h)   Whenever, in accordance with RC 4511.21(H) through (N), the maximum
prima facie speed limitations as established herein have been altered, either
higher or lower, and the appropriate signs giving notice have been erected as
required, operators of motor vehicles shall be governed by the speed
limitations set forth on those signs. It is prima facie unlawful for any person
to exceed the speed limits posted upon the signs.
   (i)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   "Commercial bus" means a motor vehicle designed for carrying more
than nine (9) passengers and used for the transportation of persons for
compensation.
      (2)   "Interstate system" has the same meaning as in 23 U.S.C. 101.
      (3)   "Noncommercial bus" includes but is not limited to a school bus, or
a motor vehicle operated solely for the transportation of persons associated
with a charitable or nonprofit organization.
      (4)   "Outerbelt" means a portion of a freeway that is part of the
interstate system and is located in the outer vicinity of a major municipal
corporation or group of municipal corporations, as designated by the Director.
      (5)   "Rural" means, outside urbanized areas, as designated in accordance
with 23 U.S.C. 101, and outside of a business or urban district.
(RC 4511.21(O))
   (j)   Penalty means:
      (1)   A violation of any provision of this section is one (1) of the
following:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (j)(1)B., (j)(1)C., and
(j)(2) and (j)(3) of this section, a minor misdemeanor;
         B.   If, within one (1) year of the offense, the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two (2) violations of any provision
of this section, RC 4511.21, or any provision of any other municipal ordinance
that is substantially equivalent to any provision of that section, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree;
         C.   If, within one (1) year of the offense, the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three (3) or more violations of any
provision of this section, RC 4511.21, or any provision of any other municipal
ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any provision of that section, a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   If the offender has not previously been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of any provision of this section, RC 4511.21, or any
other municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any provision of
that section, and operated a motor vehicle faster than thirty-five (35) miles
per hour in a business district of the municipality, faster than fifty (50)
miles per hour in other portions of the municipality, or faster than thirty-
five (35) miles per hour in a school zone during recess or while children are
going to or leaving school during the school's opening or closing hours, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (3)   Notwithstanding division (j)(1) of this section, if the offender
operated a motor vehicle in a construction zone where a sign was then posted in
accordance with RC 4511.98, the court, in addition to all other penalties
provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a fine of two (2) times the
usual amount imposed for the violation. No court shall impose a fine of two (2)
times the usual amount imposed for the violation upon an offender if the
offender alleges, in an affidavit filed with the court prior to the offender's
sentencing, that the offender is indigent and is unable to pay the fine imposed
pursuant to this division and if the court determines that the offender is an
indigent person and unable to pay the fine.
(RC 4511.21(P); Ord. No. 1279-15. Passed 4-24-17, eff. 4-25-17)
§ 433.04 Stopping or Slow Speed; Posted Minimum Speeds
   (a)   No person shall stop or operate a vehicle trackless trolley, or
streetcar at such an unreasonably slow speed as to impede or block the normal
and reasonable movement of traffic, except when stopping or reduced speed is
necessary for safe operation or to comply with law.
   (b)   Whenever the Ohio Director of Transportation or the Council determine
on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that slow speeds on
any part of a controlled-access highway, expressway, or freeway consistently
impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, the Director or such
local authority may declare a minimum speed limit below which no person shall
operate a motor vehicle, trackless trolley, or streetcar except when necessary
for safe operation or in compliance with law. No minimum speed limit
established hereunder shall be less than thirty (30) miles per hour, greater
than fifty (50) miles per hour, nor effective until the provisions of RC
4511.21 and Section 433.03, relating to appropriate signs, have been fulfilled
and the City has obtained the approval of the Director.
   (c)   In a case involving a violation of this section, the trier of fact, in
determining whether the vehicle was being operated at an unreasonably slow
speed, shall consider the capabilities of the vehicle and its operator.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one (1) year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
(1) predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one (1) year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two (2) or more
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(RC 4511.22)
   (e)   (1)   It is prima facie unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to
operate such vehicle on any portion of a controlled-access highway at a speed
less than thirty-five (35) miles per hour where the speed limit is fifty (50)
miles per hour and at a speed less than forty (40) miles per hour where the
speed limit is fifty-five (55) miles per hour.
      (2)   This limit shall not apply to any operation on a ramp nor to any
person while engaged in maintenance or construction work on such highway or to
any employee of a public agency while engaged in the performance of his or her
official duties.
(Ord. No. 1279-15. Passed 4-24-17, eff. 4-25-17)
§ 433.05 Speed Limitations over Bridges
   (a)   No person shall operate a vehicle, trackless trolley, or streetcar
over any bridge or other elevated structure constituting a part of a highway at
a speed which is greater than the maximum speed that can be maintained with
safety to the bridge or structure, when the structure is posted with signs as
provided in this section.
   (b)   The Ohio Department of Transportation upon request from any local
authority shall, or upon its own initiative may, conduct an investigation of
any bridge or other elevated structure constituting a part of a highway, and if
it finds that the structure cannot with safety withstand traffic traveling at
the speed otherwise permissible under RC 4511.01 to 4511.85 and 4511.98, the
Department shall determine and declare the maximum speed of traffic which the
structure can withstand, and shall cause or permit suitable signs stating the
maximum speed to be erected and maintained at a distance of a least one hundred
(100) feet before each end of the structure.
   (c)   Upon the trial of any person charged with a violation of this section,
proof of such determination of the maximum speed by the Department and the
existence of the signs shall constitute prima facie evidence of the maximum
speed which can be maintained with safety to the bridge or structure.
(RC 4511.23; Ord. No. 1279-15. Passed 4-24-17, eff. 4-25-17)
§ 433.06 Speed Exceptions for Emergency or Safety Vehicles
   The prima facie speed limitations set forth in Section
433.03 do not apply to emergency vehicles or public safety vehicles when they
are responding to emergency calls and are equipped with and displaying at least
one (1) flashing, rotating or oscillating light visible under normal
atmospheric conditions from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the front
of the vehicle and when the drivers thereof sound audible signals by bell,
siren or exhaust whistle. This section does not relieve the driver of an
emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the duty to drive with due
regard for the safety of all persons using the street or highway.
(RC 4511.24; Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 433.07 Street Racing, Stunt Driving and Street Takeover Prohibited
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Street racing” means the operation of two (2) or more vehicles
from a point side by side at accelerating speeds in a competitive attempt to
outdistance each other, or the operation of one (1) or more vehicles over a
common selected course, from the same point to the same point, wherein timing
is made of the participating vehicles involving competitive accelerations or
speeds. The operation of two (2) or more vehicles side by side either at speeds
in excess of prima facie lawful speeds established by Section
433.03 of these Codified Ordinances or RC 4511.21 as applicable, or rapidly
accelerating from a common starting point to a speed in excess of the prima
facie lawful speeds shall be prima facie evidence of street racing.
      (2)   “Burnout” means a maneuver performed while operating a vehicle
whereby the vehicle is kept in a stationary position, but the wheels of the
vehicle are spun, which may cause the tires of the vehicle to become heated and
emit smoke from the friction.
      (3)   “Doughnut” means a maneuver performed while operating a vehicle
whereby the front or rear of the vehicle is rotated around the opposite set of
wheels in a continuous motion, which may cause a circular skid-mark pattern of
rubber on the driving surface, or the tires of the vehicle to become heated and
emit smoke from the friction, or both.
      (4)   “Drifting” means a maneuver performed while operating a vehicle
whereby the vehicle is driven in a manner that causes a controlled, sideways
skid during a turn, with the front wheels pointing in a direction that is the
opposite of the direction of the turn.
      (5)   “Wheelie” means a maneuver performed while operating a vehicle
whereby the front wheel or wheels of the vehicle are raised off of the ground
or whereby two wheels that are on the same side of the vehicle are raised off
of the ground.
      (6)   “Stunt driving” means performing or engaging in burnouts,
doughnuts, drifting, or wheelies, or allowing a passenger to ride either
partially or fully outside of the vehicle while operating that vehicle.
      (7)   “Street takeover” means blocking or impeding the regular flow of
vehicle or pedestrian traffic on a public road, street, or highway or on
private property that is open to the general public for the purpose of street
racing or stunt driving.
   (b)   No person shall participate in street racing, stunt driving, or street
takeover upon any public road, street or highway, or on private property that
is open to the general public in this City.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of street racing, stunt
driving, or street takeover, a misdemeanor of the first degree. In addition to
any other sanctions, the court shall suspend the offender’s driver’s license,
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license
or nonresident operating privileges for not less than thirty (30) days or more
than three (3) years. No judge shall suspend the first thirty (30) days of any
suspension of an offender’s license, permit or privilege imposed under this
division.
   (d)   Persons rendering assistance in any manner to street racing, stunt
driving, or street takeover shall be equally charged as the participants.
   (e)   This section does not apply to the competitive operation of vehicles
on public or private property in accordance with a Special Event permit issued
pursuant to these Codified Ordinances or when otherwise authorized by ordinance
of Council.
(RC 4511.251)
   (f)   In addition to any other penalties imposed by law, any vehicle
component used in a violation of division (b) of this section is an
instrumentality, shall be subject to seizure as contraband, and is subject to
forfeiture under RC Chapter 2981. “Instrumentality” has the same meaning as in
RC 2981.01. “Vehicle component” means any motor vehicle part or accessory
specifically adapted for use in street racing, stunt driving or street
takeover. Vehicle components include, but are not limited to, steering wheels,
wheels and tires, and mufflers.
(Ord. No. 1080-2024. Passed 11-25-24, eff. 12-3-24)
§ 433.08 Trick or Stunt Riding Prohibited
   (a)   No person shall knowingly engage in trick or stunt riding or driving
of any vehicle upon any part of a sidewalk, street, or other public property of
the City.
   (b)   No person shall act or engage in behavior with purpose to facilitate
the commission of a violation of division (a) of this section. Persons
rendering assistance in any manner to such trick or stunt riding shall be
equally charged as the participants.
   (c)   For purposes of this section, “trick or stunt riding” includes, but is
not limited to, any activity where one (1) or more persons engages in any of
the following behavior:
      (1)   Operating a vehicle in a manner that indicates an intention to lift
some or all of its tires from the surface of the road or ground;
      (2)   Operating a vehicle while a driver is not sitting in the driver’s
seat;
      (3)   Operating a vehicle while a passenger is not sitting in a passenger
seat;
      (4)   Operating two (2) or more vehicles side by side or in proximity to
each other, where one (1) of the motor vehicles occupies a lane of traffic or
other portion of the highway intended for use by oncoming traffic for a period
of time that is longer than is reasonably required to pass another motor
vehicle;
      (5)   Operating a vehicle in a manner that indicates an intention to
block or interfere with the movement of another vehicle by cutting off its
passage on the street or highway or to cause another vehicle to stop or slow
down in circumstances where the other vehicle would not ordinarily do so;
      (6)   Operating a vehicle in a manner that indicates an intention to
drive, without justification, as close as possible to another vehicle,
pedestrian or fixed object on or near the highway;
      (7)   Weaving in and out of vehicular or pedestrian traffic;
      (8)   Operating a vehicle at excessive speeds;
   (d)   This section does not apply to the operation of vehicles on public or
private property when the owner of such property knowingly permits such
operation.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second
degree on a first offense and of a misdemeanor of the first degree on each
subsequent offense.
(Ord. No. 726-17. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 433.09 Text Messaging While Driving
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Text message” means a message sent or received via a process using
wireless handsets. For the purposes of this section, an e-mail shall be
considered a “text message.”
      (2)   “Wireless handset” means a portable electronic device capable of
transmitting or receiving data in the form of a text message.
   (b)   No person shall use a wireless handset to compose, send or read text
messages while driving a motor vehicle in the City of Cleveland.
   (c)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (b), this section shall not
be construed to prohibit the use of a wireless handset inside a motor vehicle
to compose, send or read a text message by:
      (1)   A driver using a wireless handset to contact any law enforcement,
police officers, emergency services personnel, emergency medical technicians,
or fire safety officials to report an emergency situation; or
      (2)   A driver using a wireless handset inside a motor vehicle while such
vehicle is parked, standing or stopped and is removed from the flow of traffic,
in accordance with applicable laws or rules, or is stopped due to the
inoperability of such vehicle.
   (d)   Penalty. Whoever violates this section shall be fined one hundred
dollars ($100.00) for the first offense, two hundred and fifty dollars
($250.00) for a second offense, and no more than five hundred dollars ($500.00)
for each subsequent offense.
(Ord. No. 105-09. Passed 4-13-09, eff. 7-13-09)
CHAPTER 435 – LICENSING AND ACCIDENTS
435.01   Driver’s or Commercial Driver’s License Required; Restriction
Violation
435.02   Possession of More Than One License Prohibited
435.03   Driving with Temporary Instruction Permit Without Licensed Driver
435.04   Certain Acts Prohibited
435.05   Owner or Operator Allowing Another to Drive
435.06   Display of License
435.07   Driver Under Suspension or Revocation
435.08   Operation or Sale Without Certificate of Title
435.09   Display of License Plates; Expired or Unlawful Plates
435.10   License Plates to Be Unobstructed
435.11   Use of Illegal License Plates; Transfer of Registration
435.12   License Plate Loan or Sale
435.13   Reporting Motor Vehicle Repossession
435.14   Reporting Unclaimed Motor Vehicles
435.15   Stopping After Accident upon Streets; Collision with Unattended
Vehicle
435.16   Stopping After Accident upon Property Other Than Streets
435.17   Vehicle Accident Resulting in Damage to Realty
Cross-reference:
   Glass removal from street after accident, CO
411.01
   Impounding vehicle with illegal license plates, CO
405.02
   Reports of accidents at airports, CO
571.11
   Sight-seeing car driver’s license, CO
445.06 et seq.
   Sight-seeing car license required, CO
445.01
   Taxicab driver’s license, CO
443.13 et seq.
   Tow truck licensing, CO
405.10
   Vehicular homicide, CO
621.02
Statutory reference:
   See sectional histories for similar State law
   Deposit of driver’s license as bond, RC 2937.221
   Driver’s license law, RC Ch. 4507
   Motor vehicle licensing law, RC Ch. 4503
   Power of trial court of record to suspend or revoke license for certain
violations, RC 4507.16
   State accident reports, RC 4509.01, 4509.06, 4509.74, 5502.11
§ 435.01 Driver’s or Commercial Driver’s License Required; Restriction
Violation
   (a)   No person shall permit the operation of a motor vehicle upon any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking, knowing the operator does not have a valid driver's license issued
to the operator by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles under RC Chapter 4507 or a
valid commercial driver's license issued under RC Chapter 4506. Except as
otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this division is guilty
of an unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an unclassified
misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced pursuant to RC 2929.21 to 2929.28,
except that the offender shall not be sentenced to a jail term; the offender
shall not be sentenced to a community residential sanction pursuant to RC
2929.26; notwithstanding RC 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00); and, notwithstanding RC 2929.27(A)(3), the
offender may be ordered pursuant to RC 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community
service of up to five hundred (500) hours. The failure of an offender to
complete a term of community service imposed by the court may be punished as
indirect criminal contempt under RC 2705.02(A) that may be filed in the
underlying case. If, within three (3) years of the offense, the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two (2) or more
violations of this section or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
the offense is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(RC 4507.02(A)(1))
   (b)   Nonresidents, permitted to drive upon the highways of their own state,
may operate any motor vehicle upon any highway in this state without
examination or license under RC 4507.01 to 4507.39, inclusive, upon condition
that the nonresident may be required at any time or place to prove lawful
possession or their right to operate the motor vehicle, and to establish proper
identity.
(RC 4507.04)
   (c)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle in violation of any
restriction imposed on his or her driver's or commercial driver's license by
the Ohio Registrar of Motor Vehicles pursuant to RC 4507.14.
(Ord. No. 1280-15. Passed 4-24-17, eff. 4-25-17)
§ 435.02 Possession of More Than One License Prohibited
   (a)   No person shall receive a driver's license, or a motorcycle operator's
endorsement of a driver's or commercial driver's license, unless and until the
person surrenders to the Registrar all valid licenses issued to the person by
another jurisdiction recognized by this state. The Registrar shall report the
surrender of a license to the issuing authority, together with information that
a license is now issued in this state. The Registrar shall destroy any such
license that is not returned to the issuing authority. No person shall be
permitted to have more than one (1) valid license at any time.
(RC 4507.02(A)(2))
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(RC 4507.99; Ord. No. 1280-15. Passed 4-24-17, eff. 4-25-17)
§ 435.03 Driving with Temporary Instruction Permit Without Licensed Driver
   (a)   No holder of a temporary instruction permit issued under RC 4507.05(A)
shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property
used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking in violation of
the conditions established under RC 4507.05(A).
   (b)   Except as provided in division (c) of this section, no holder of a
temporary instruction permit that is issued under RC 4507.05(A) and that is
issued on or after July 1, 1998, and who has not attained the age of eighteen
(18) years, shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or
private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking
between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m.
   (c)   The holder of a temporary instruction permit issued under RC 4507.05
(A) on or after July 1, 1998, who has not attained the age of eighteen (18)
years, may operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private
property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking between
the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m. if, at the time of the operation, the
holder is accompanied by the holder's parent, guardian or custodian, and the
parent, guardian or custodian holds a current valid driver's or commercial
driver's license issued by this state, is actually occupying a seat beside the
permit holder, and does not have a prohibited concentration of alcohol in the
whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine as provided in RC 4511.19
(A).
      (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(RC 4507.05(F), (I); Ord. No. 1280-15. Passed 4-24-17, eff. 4-25-17)
§ 435.04 Certain Acts Prohibited
   (a)   No person shall:
      (1)   Display, or cause or permit to be displayed, or possess any
identification card, driver's or commercial driver's license, temporary
instruction permit, or commercial driver's license temporary instruction permit
knowing the same to be fictitious, or to have been canceled, suspended or
altered;
      (2)   Lend to a person not entitled thereto, or knowingly permit a person
not entitled thereto to use any identification card, driver's or commercial
driver's license, temporary instruction permit, or commercial driver's license
temporary instruction permit issued to the person so lending or permitting the
use thereof;
      (3)   Display or represent as one's own, any identification card,
driver's or commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, or
commercial driver's license temporary instruction permit not issued to the
person so displaying the same;
      (4)   Fail to surrender to the Ohio Registrar of Motor Vehicles, upon the
Registrar's demand, any identification card, driver's or commercial driver's
license, temporary instruction permit, or commercial driver's license temporary
instruction permit that has been suspended or canceled;
      (5)   In any application for an identification card, driver's or
commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, or commercial
driver's license temporary instruction permit, or any renewal or duplicate
thereof, knowingly conceal a material fact, or present any physician's
statement required under RC 4507.08 or 4507.081 when knowing the same to be
false or fictitious.
   (b)   Whoever violates any division of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(RC 4507.30; Ord. No. 1280-15. Passed 4-24-17, eff. 4-25-17)
§ 435.05 Owner or Operator Allowing Another to Drive
   (a)   No person shall permit a motor vehicle owned by the person or under
the person's control to be driven by another if any of the following apply:
      (1)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person does not have a valid driver's or commercial driver's license or
permit or valid nonresident driving privileges.
      (2)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident
operating privileges have been suspended or canceled under RC Chapter 4510 or
any other provision of the Ohio Revised Code.
      (3)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person's act of driving the motor vehicle would violate any prohibition
contained in RC Chapter 4509.
      (4)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person's act of driving would violate RC 4511.19 or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (5)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
vehicle is the subject of an immobilization waiver order issued under RC
4503.235 and the other person is prohibited from operating the vehicle under
that order.
   (b)   Without limiting or precluding the consideration of any other evidence
in determining whether a violation of division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4)
or (a)(5) of this section has occurred, it shall be prima facie evidence that
the offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the operator of the
motor vehicle owned by the offender or under the offender's control is in a
category described in division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4) or (a)(5) of this
section if any of the following applies:
      (1)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in
division (a)(1), (a)(3) or (a)(5) of this section, the offender and the
operator of the motor vehicle reside in the same household and are related by
consanguinity or affinity.
      (2)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in
division (a)(2) of this section, the offender and the operator of the motor
vehicle reside in the same household, and the offender knows or has reasonable
cause to believe that the operator has been charged with or convicted of any
violation of law or ordinance, or has committed any other act or omission, that
would or could result in the suspension or cancellation of the operator's
license, permit, or privilege.
      (3)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in
division (a)(4) of this section, the offender and the operator of the motor
vehicle occupied the motor vehicle together at the time of the offense.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of wrongful entrustment of a
motor vehicle, and shall be punished as provided in divisions (c) to (h) of
this section.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (c)(2) of this section, whoever
violates division (a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) of this section is guilty of an
unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the
offender shall be sentenced pursuant to RC 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the
offender shall not be sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be
sentenced to a community residential sanction pursuant to RC 2929.26;
notwithstanding RC 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00); and, notwithstanding RC 2929.27(A)(3), the
offender may be ordered pursuant to RC 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community
service of up to five hundred (500) hours. The failure of an offender to
complete a term of community service imposed by the court may be punished as
indirect criminal contempt under RC 2705.02(A) that may be filed in the
underlying case.
      (2)   A.   If, within three (3) years of a violation of division (a)(1),
(a)(2), or (a)(3) of this section, the offender previously has pleaded guilty
to or been convicted of two (2) or more violations of division (a)(1), (a)(2),
or (a)(3) of this section, RC 4511.203(A)(1), (A)(2), or (A)(3), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
         B.   Whoever violates division (a)(4) or (a)(5) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   For any violation of this section, in addition to the penalties
imposed under this Code or RC Chapter 2929, the court may impose a class seven
(7) suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating
privilege from the range specified in RC 4510.02(A)(7), and, if the vehicle
involved in the offense is registered in the name of the offender, the court
may order one (1) of the following:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(3)B. or (c)(3)C. of
this section, the court may order, for thirty (30) days, the immobilization of
the vehicle involved in the offense and the impoundment of that vehicle's
license plates. If issued, the order shall be issued and enforced under RC
4503.233.
         B.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one (1) violation of this section, RC 4511.203, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the court may order, for sixty (60) days, the
immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense and the impoundment of
that vehicle's license plates. If issued, the order shall be issued and
enforced under RC 4503.233.
         C.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two (2) or more violations of this section, RC 4511.203, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court may order the criminal
forfeiture to the state of the vehicle involved in the offense. If issued, the
order shall be issued and enforced under RC 4503.234.
      (4)   If title to a motor vehicle that is subject to an order for
criminal forfeiture under division (c)(3)C. of this section is assigned or
transferred and RC 4503.234(B)(2) or (B)(3) applies, in addition to or
independent of any other penalty established by law, the court may fine the
offender the value of the vehicle as determined by publications of the National
Automobile Dealers Association. The proceeds from any fine imposed under this
division shall be distributed in accordance with RC 4503.234(C)(2).
   (d)   If a court orders the criminal forfeiture of a vehicle under division
(c)(3)A. or (c)(3)B. of this section, the court shall not release the vehicle
from the immobilization before the termination of the period of immobilization
ordered unless the court is presented with current proof of financial
responsibility with respect to that vehicle.
   (e)   If a court orders the criminal forfeiture of a vehicle under division
(c)(3)C. of this section, upon receipt of the order from the court, neither the
Registrar of Motor Vehicles nor any deputy registrar shall accept any
application for the registration or transfer of registration of any motor
vehicle owned or leased by the person named in the order. The period of denial
shall be five (5) years after the date the order is issued, unless, during that
five (5) year period, the court with jurisdiction of the offense that resulted
in the order terminates the forfeiture and notifies the Registrar of the
termination. If the court terminates the forfeiture and notifies the Registrar,
the Registrar shall take all necessary measures to permit the person to
register a vehicle owned or leased by the person or to transfer the
registration of the vehicle.
   (f)   This section does not apply to motor vehicle rental dealers or motor
vehicle leasing dealers, as defined in RC 4549.65.
   (g)   Evidence of a conviction of, plea of guilty to, or adjudication as a
delinquent child for a violation of this section shall not be admissible as
evidence in any civil action that involves the offender or delinquent child who
is the subject of the conviction, plea or adjudication and that arises from the
wrongful entrustment of a motor vehicle.
   (h)   For purposes of this section, a vehicle is owned by a person if, at
the time of a violation of this section, the vehicle is registered in the
person's name.
(RC 4511.203; Ord. No. 1280-15. Passed 4-24-17, eff. 4-25-17)
§ 435.06 Display of License
   (a)   The operator of a motor vehicle shall display the operator's driver's
license, or furnish satisfactory proof that the operator has a driver's
license, upon demand of any peace officer or of any person damaged or injured
in any collision in which the licensee may be involved. When a demand is
properly made, and the operator has the operator's driver's license on or about
the operator's person, the operator shall not refuse to display the license. A
person's failure to furnish satisfactory evidence that the person is licensed
under RC Chapter 4507 when the person does not have the person's license on or
about the person's person shall be prima facie evidence of the person's not
having obtained a driver's license.
   (b)   (1)   Except as provided in division (b)(2) of this section, whoever
violates this section is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor. When the
offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced
pursuant to RC 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to RC 2929.26; notwithstanding RC 2929.28(A)(2)
(a), the offender may be fined up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00); and
notwithstanding RC 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant to RC
2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to five hundred (500)
hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under RC
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
      (2)   If, within three (3) years of the offense, the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two (2) or more violations of this
section, RC 4507.35, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the
offense is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(RC 4507.35; Ord. No. 1280-15. Passed 4-24-17, eff. 4-25-17)
§ 435.07 Driver Under Suspension or Revocation
   (a)   Driving under Suspension or in Violation of License Restriction.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (a)(2) of this section, division (b)
of this section, and in RC 4510.111 and 4510.16, no person whose driver's or
commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privilege has
been suspended under any provision of the Revised Code, other than RC Chapter
4509, or under any applicable law in any other jurisdiction in which the
person's license or permit was issued shall operate any motor vehicle upon the
public roads and highways or upon any public or private property used by the
public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking within this municipality
during the period of suspension unless the person is granted limited driving
privileges and is operating the vehicle in accordance with the terms of the
limited driving privileges.
      (2)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking in this municipality in violation of any restriction of the person's
driver's or commercial driver's license or permit imposed under RC 4506.10(D)
or 4507.14.
      (3)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section may be admitted into
evidence as prima facie evidence that the license of the person was under
suspension at the time of the alleged violation of division (a)(1) of this
section or the person operated a motor vehicle in violation of a restriction at
the time of the alleged violation of division (a)(2) of this section. The
person charged with a violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section
may offer evidence to rebut this prima facie evidence.
      (4)   A.   Whoever violates division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. The court may impose upon the
offender a class seven (7) suspension of the offender's driver's license,
commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary
license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in RC
4510.02(A)(7).
         B.   1.   Except as provided in division (a)(4)B.2. or (a)(4)B.3. of
this section, the court, in addition to any other penalty that it imposes on
the offender and if the vehicle is registered in the offender's name and if,
within three (3) years of the offense, the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one (1) violation of this section, RC
4510.11, 4510.111 or 4510.16, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, the court, in addition to or independent of any other sentence that
it imposes upon the offender, may order the immobilization of the vehicle
involved in the offense for thirty (30) days and the impoundment of that
vehicle's license plates for thirty (30) days in accordance with RC 4503.233.
            2.   If the vehicle is registered in the offender's name and if,
within three (3) years of the offense, the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to two (2) violations of this section, or any
combination of two (2) violations of this section, RC 4510.11, 4510.111 or
4510.16, or of a substantially similar municipal ordinance, the court, in
addition to any other sentence that it imposes on the offender, may order the
immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense for sixty (60) days and
the impoundment of that vehicle's license plates for sixty (60) days in
accordance with RC 4503.233.
            3.   If the vehicle is registered in the offender's name and if,
within three (3) years of the offense, the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to three (3) or more violations of this section,
or any combination of three (3) or more violations of this section or RC
4510.11, 4510.111 or 4510.16, or of a substantially similar municipal
ordinance, the court, in addition to any other sentence that it imposes on the
offender, may order the criminal forfeiture of the vehicle involved in the
offense to the state.
      (5)   Any order for immobilization and impoundment under this section
shall be issued and enforced under RC 4503.233 and 4507.02, as applicable. The
court shall not release a vehicle from immobilization ordered under this
section unless the court is presented with current proof of financial
responsibility with respect to that vehicle.
      (6)   Any order of criminal forfeiture under this section shall be issued
and enforced under RC 4503.234. Upon receipt of the copy of the order from the
court, neither the Registrar of Motor Vehicles nor a deputy registrar shall
accept any application for the registration or transfer of registration of any
motor vehicle owned or leased by the person named in the declaration of
forfeiture. The period of registration denial shall be five (5) years after the
date of the order, unless, during that period, the court having jurisdiction of
the offense that led to the order terminates the forfeiture and notifies the
registrar of the termination. The Registrar then shall take necessary measures
to permit the person to register a vehicle owned or leased by the person or to
transfer registration of the vehicle.
      (7)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in RC 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide that
proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other penalties
provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to RC 2929.28 in an
amount not exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for any economic loss
arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result
of the offender's operation of the vehicle before, during, or after committing
the offense for which the offender is sentenced under this section.
(RC 4510.11)
   (b)   Driving under Suspension in Violation of Other Provisions.
      (1)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking in this municipality whose driver's or commercial driver's license
has been suspended pursuant to RC 2151.354, 2151.87, 2935.27, 3123.58, 4301.99,
4510.032, 4510.22, or 4510.33, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
      (2)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (b)(1) of this section may be admitted into evidence as
prima facie evidence that the license of the person was under suspension at the
time of the alleged violation of division (b)(1) of this section. The person
charged with a violation of division (b)(1) of this section may offer evidence
to rebut this prima facie evidence.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (b)(1) of this section is guilty of
driving under suspension and shall be punished as provided in division (b)(3)A.
or division (b)(3)B. of this section.
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (b)(3)B. of this
section, the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor. The offender shall be
sentenced pursuant to RC 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not
be sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to RC 2929.26; notwithstanding RC 2929.28(A)(2)
(a), the offender may be fined up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00); and,
notwithstanding RC 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant to RC
2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to five hundred (500)
hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under RC
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
         B.   If, within three (3) years of the offense, the offender
previously was convicted of or pleaded guilty to two (2) or more violations of
division (b)(1) of this section, or any combination of two (2) or more
violations of division (b)(1) of this section, RC 4510.11, 4510.111 or 4510.16,
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor
of the fourth degree, and the offender shall provide the court with proof of
financial responsibility as defined in RC 4509.01. If the offender fails to
provide that proof of financial responsibility, then in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to RC
2929.28 in an amount not exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for any
economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and
proximate result of the offender's operation of the vehicle before, during, or
after committing the offense for which the offender is sentenced under this
section.
(RC 4510.111)
   (c)   Repeat Traffic Offender; Point System Suspension. Any person whose
driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident operating
privileges are suspended as a repeat traffic offender under RC 4510.037 and
who, during the suspension, operates any motor vehicle upon any public roads
and highways is guilty of driving under a twelve (12) point suspension, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to a
minimum term of three (3) days in jail. No court shall suspend the first three
(3) days of jail time imposed pursuant to this division.
(RC 4510.037(J))
   (d)   Affirmative Defense. It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution
brought under division (a) of this section that the alleged offender drove
under suspension, without a valid permit or driver's or commercial driver's
license, or in violation of a restriction because of a substantial emergency,
and because no other person was reasonably available to drive in response to
the emergency.
(RC 4510.04; Ord. No. 1280-15. Passed 4-24-17, eff. 4-25-17)
§ 435.08 Operation or Sale Without Certificate of Title
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Operate in this municipality a motor vehicle for which a
certificate of title is required without having that certificate in accordance
with RC Chapter 4505 or, if a physical certificate of title has not been issued
for a motor vehicle, operate the motor vehicle in this state knowing that the
ownership information relating to the vehicle has not been entered into the
automated title processing system by a Clerk of a Court of Common Pleas;
      (2)   Display or display for sale or sell as a dealer or acting on behalf
of a dealer, a motor vehicle without having obtained a manufacturer's or
importer's certificate, a certificate of title or an assignment of a
certificate of title for it as provided in RC Chapter 4505;
      (3)   Fail to surrender any certificate of title or any certificate of
registration or license plates upon cancellation of the same by the Registrar
of Motor Vehicles and notice of the cancellation as prescribed in RC Chapter
4505;
      (4)   Fail to surrender the certificate of title to a Clerk of a Court of
Common Pleas as provided in RC Chapter 4505 in case of the destruction or
dismantling or change of a motor vehicle in such respect that it is not the
motor vehicle described in the certificate of title;
      (5)   Violate any rules adopted pursuant to RC Chapter 4505;
      (6)   Except as otherwise provided in RC Chapters 4505 and 4517, sell at
wholesale a motor vehicle ownership of which is not evidenced by an Ohio
certificate of title, or the current certificate of title issued for the motor
vehicle, or the manufacturer's certificate of origin, and all title assignments
that evidence the seller's ownership of the motor vehicle, and an odometer
disclosure statement that complies with RC 4505.06 and subchapter IV of the
"Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act", 86 Stat. 961 (1972), 15
U.S.C. 1981;
      (7)   Operate in this state a motor vehicle knowing that the certificate
of title to the vehicle or ownership of the vehicle as otherwise reflected in
the automated title processing system has been canceled.
   (b)   This section does not apply to persons engaged in the business of
warehousing or transporting motor vehicles for the purpose of salvage
disposition.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than two hundred
dollars ($200.00), imprisoned not more than ninety (90) days, or both.
(RC 4505.18; Ord. No. 1280-15. Passed 4-24-17, eff. 4-25-17)
§ 435.09 Display of License Plates; Expired or Unlawful Plates
   (a)   (1)   No person who is the owner or operator of a motor vehicle shall
fail to display in plain view on the front and rear of the motor vehicle the
distinctive number and registration mark, including any county identification
sticker and any validation sticker issued under RC 4503.19 and 4503.191,
furnished by the Director of Public Safety, except that a manufacturer of motor
vehicles or dealer therein, the holder of an in-transit permit, and the owner
or operator of a motorcycle, motorized bicycle or moped, motor-driven cycle or
motor scooter, cab-enclosed motorcycle, manufactured home, mobile home, trailer
or semitrailer shall display on the rear only. A motor vehicle that is issued
two (2) license plates shall display the validation sticker only on the rear
license plate, except that a commercial tractor that does not receive an
apportioned license plate under the international registration plan shall
display the validation sticker on the front of the commercial tractor. An
apportioned vehicle receiving an apportioned license plate under the
international registration plan shall display the license plate only on the
front of a commercial tractor and on the rear of all other vehicles. All
license plates shall be securely fastened so as not to swing, and shall not be
covered by any material that obstructs their visibility.
      (2)   No person to whom a temporary license placard or windshield sticker
has been issued for the use of a motor vehicle under RC 4503.182, and no
operator of that motor vehicle shall fail to display the temporary license
placard in plain view from the rear of the vehicle either in the rear window or
on an external rear surface of the motor vehicle, or fail to display the
windshield sticker in plain view on the rear window of the motor vehicle. No
temporary license placard or windshield sticker shall be covered by any
material that obstructs its visibility.
(RC 4503.21(A))
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided by RC 4503.103, 4503.173, 4503.41,
4503.43 and 4503.46, no person who is the owner or chauffeur of a motor vehicle
operated or driven upon the public roads or highways shall fail to file
annually the application for registration or to pay the tax therefor.
(RC 4503.11(A))
   (c)   No person shall operate or drive upon the highways of this City a
motor vehicle acquired from a former owner who has registered the motor
vehicle, while the motor vehicle displays the distinctive number or
identification mark assigned to it upon its original registration.
(RC 4549.11(A))
   (d)   No person who is the owner of a motor vehicle and a resident of this
state shall operate or drive the motor vehicle upon the highways of this
municipality while it displays a distinctive number or identification mark
issued by or under the authority of another state, without complying with the
laws of this state relating to the registration and identification of motor
vehicles.
(RC 4549.12(A))
   (e)   No person shall park or operate any vehicle upon any public street or
highway upon which are displayed any license plates for any period of time
which has expired, or any license plates issued in another state for which the
period of reciprocal agreement with the state of issue has expired.
   (f)   No person shall park or operate any vehicle upon any public street or
highway upon which are displayed any license plates not legally registered and
issued for the vehicle, or upon which are displayed any license plates that
were issued on an application for registration that contains any false
statement by the applicant.
   (g)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(RC 4503.21(B))
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(RC 4503.11(D))
      (3)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of
operation of a motor vehicle bearing license plates or an identification mark
issued to another, a minor misdemeanor on a first offense and a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree on each subsequent offense.
(RC 4549.11(B))
      (4)   Whoever violates division (d) of this section is guilty of illegal
operation by a resident of this state of a motor vehicle bearing the
distinctive number or identification mark issued by a foreign jurisdiction, a
minor misdemeanor.
(RC 4549.12(B); Ord. No. 1280-15. Passed 4-24-17, eff. 4-25-17)
§ 435.10 License Plates to Be Unobstructed
   No person shall operate a motor vehicle, upon which license plates are
required by law to be displayed, unless the license plates legally registered
and issued for such vehicle shall be fastened in such a manner, and not
covered, obscured or concealed by any part or accessory of such vehicle or by
any foreign substance or material, to be readable in its entirety from left to
right.
(Ord. No. 835-03. Passed 6-10-03, eff. 6-12-03)
§ 435.11 Use of Illegal License Plates; Transfer of Registration
   (a)   No person shall operate or drive a motor vehicle upon the public roads
and highways in this municipality if it displays a license plate or a
distinctive number or identification mark that meets any of the following
criteria:
      (1)   It is fictitious;
      (2)   It is a counterfeit or an unlawfully made copy of any distinctive
number or identification mark;
      (3)   It belongs to another motor vehicle, provided that this section
does not apply to a motor vehicle that is operated on the public roads and
highways in this municipality when the motor vehicle displays license plates
that originally were issued for a motor vehicle that previously was owned by
the same person who owns the motor vehicle that is operated on the public roads
and highways in this municipality during the thirty (30) day period described
in RC 4503.12(A)(4).
   (b)   A person who fails to comply with the transfer of registration
provisions of RC 4503.12 and is charged with a violation of that section shall
not be charged with a violation of this section.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a)(1), (a)(2) or (a)(3) of this section is
guilty of operating a motor vehicle bearing an invalid license plate or
identification mark, this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the third degree on each
subsequent offense.
(RC 4549.08)
   (d)   Upon the transfer of ownership of a motor vehicle, the registration of
the motor vehicle expires, and the original owner immediately shall remove the
license plates from the motor vehicle, except as otherwise provided in RC
4503.12(A).
   (e)   Whoever violates division (d) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree
(RC 4503.12(A), (D); Ord. No. 1280-15. Passed 4-24-17, eff. 4-25-17)
§ 435.12 License Plate Loan or Sale
   No person shall loan, sell, give away or otherwise traffic in any number or
license plate or plates issued by any state or other duly authorized
governmental agency in connection with the registration of a motor vehicle.
However, nothing herein shall be deemed to apply to the issuance of license
plates pursuant to law.
(Ord. No. 835-03. Passed 6-10-03, eff. 6-12-03)
§ 435.13 Reporting Motor Vehicle Repossession
   No person engaged in the business of making loans, purchasing notes secured
by mortgages, conditional sales agreements or any other liens upon motor
vehicles, or engaged in any other business involving the repossession of motor
vehicles shall fail to notify the Police Division of any repossession of motor
vehicles and to give such additional information as may be required within one
(1) hour after repossession of any motor vehicle, when the same is taken
without the owner’s consent or knowledge.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 435.14 Reporting Unclaimed Motor Vehicles
   No person engaged in the business of operating a garage or parking space or
lot, or renting space for the parking or storing of four (4) or more motor
vehicles, or engaged in the business of repairing motor vehicles, parts and
accessories shall fail to report to the Police Division when any motor vehicle
has remained in his, her or its possession and is unclaimed for more than
fifteen (15) days, except where the same has been parked or placed in storage
by police order. However, nothing herein shall apply where arrangements have
been made for continuous storage or parking and where the owner of the motor
vehicle so parked or stored is personally known to the owner or operator of
such garage, parking lot or space, so that the name and address of such owner
can be furnished upon request of any member of the Police Division.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 435.15 Stopping After Accident upon Streets; Collision with Unattended
Vehicle
   (a)   (1)   In case of accident to or collision with persons or property
upon any of the public roads or highways, due to the driving or operation
thereon of any motor vehicle, the person driving or operating the motor
vehicle, having knowledge of the accident or collision, immediately shall stop
the driver's or operator's motor vehicle at the scene of the accident or
collision and shall remain at the scene of the accident or collision until the
driver or operator has given the driver's or operator's name and address and,
if the driver or operator is not the owner, the name and address of the owner
of that motor vehicle, together with the registered number of that motor
vehicle, to any person injured in the accident or collision or to the operator,
occupant, owner or attendant of any motor vehicle damaged in the accident or
collision, or to any police officer at the scene of the accident or collision.
      (2)   In the event the injured person is unable to comprehend and record
the information required to be given by this section, the other driver involved
in the accident or collision forthwith shall notify the nearest police
authority concerning the location of the accident or collision, and the
driver's name, address and the registered number of the motor vehicle the
driver was operating, and then remain at the scene of the accident or collision
until a police officer arrives, unless removed from the scene by an emergency
vehicle operated by a political subdivision or an ambulance.
      (3)   If the accident or collision is with an unoccupied or unattended
motor vehicle, the operator who collides with the motor vehicle shall securely
attach the information required to be given in this section, in writing, to a
conspicuous place in or on the unoccupied or unattended motor vehicle.
   (b)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
failure to stop after an accident, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
accident or collision results in serious physical harm or death to a person,
failure to stop after an accident is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. The court, in addition to any other penalties provided
by law, shall impose upon the offender a class five (5) suspension of the
offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in RC 4510.02(A)(5). No judge shall suspend the first six (6) months
of suspension of an offender's license, permit or privilege required by this
division.
      (2)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in RC 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide that
proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other penalties
provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to RC 2929.18 or
2929.28 in an amount not exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for any
economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and
proximate result of the offender's operation of the motor vehicle before,
during, or after committing the offense charged under this section.
(RC 4549.02; Ord. No. 1280-15. Passed 4-24-17, eff. 4-25-17)
§ 435.16 Stopping After Accident upon Property Other Than Streets
   (a)   (1)   In case of accident or collision resulting in injury or damage
to persons or property upon any public or private property other than public
roads or highways, due to the driving or operation thereon of any motor
vehicle, the person driving or operating the motor vehicle, having knowledge of
the accident or collision, shall stop, and, upon request of the person injured
or damaged, or any other person, shall give that person the driver's or
operator's name and address, and, if the driver or operator is not the owner,
the name and address of the owner of that motor vehicle, together with the
registered number of that motor vehicle, and, if available, exhibit the
driver's or operator's driver's or commercial driver's license.
      (2)   If the owner or person in charge of such damaged property is not
furnished this information, the driver of the motor vehicle involved in the
accident or collision, within twenty-four (24) hours after the accident or
collision, shall forward to the Police Division the same information required
to be given to the owner or person in control of the damaged property and give
the date, time and location of the accident or collision.
      (3)   If such accident or collision is with an unoccupied or unattended
motor vehicle, the operator who collides with the motor vehicle shall securely
attach the information required to be given in this section, in writing, to a
conspicuous place in or on the unoccupied or unattended motor vehicle.
   (b)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident, a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the accident or collision results in serious physical harm or death
to a person, failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. The court, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a class five (5)
suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license or nonresident operating
privilege from the range specified in RC 4510.02(A)(5). No judge shall suspend
the first six (6) months of suspension of an offender's license, permit or
privilege required by this division.
      (2)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in RC 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide that
proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other penalties
provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to RC 2929.18 or
2929.28 in an amount not exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for any
economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and
proximate result of the offender's operation of the motor vehicle before,
during, or after committing the offense charged under this section.
(RC 4549.021; Ord. No. 1280-15. Passed 4-24-17, eff. 4-25-17)
§ 435.17 Vehicle Accident Resulting in Damage to Realty
   (a)   (1)   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in
damage to real property, or personal property attached to such real property,
legally upon or adjacent to a public road or highway immediately shall stop and
take reasonable steps to locate and notify the owner or person in charge of
such property of that fact, of the driver's name and address, and of the
registration number of the vehicle the driver is driving and, upon request and
if available, shall exhibit the driver's driver's or commercial driver's
license.
      (2)   If the owner or person in charge of the property cannot be located
after reasonable search, the driver of the vehicle involved in the accident
resulting in damage to the property within twenty-four (24) hours after such
accident, shall forward to the Police Division the same information required to
be given to the owner or person in control of the property and give the
location of the accident and a description of the damage insofar as it is
known.
   (b)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
failure to stop after an accident involving the property of others, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in RC 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide that
proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other penalties
provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to RC 2929.28 in an
amount not exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for any economic loss
arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result
of the offender's operation of the motor vehicle before, during, or after
committing the offense charged under this section.
(RC 4549.03; Ord. No. 1280-15. Passed 4-24-17, eff. 4-25-17)
CHAPTER 437 – SAFETY AND EQUIPMENT
437.01   Unsafe Vehicles
437.02   Time for Lighted Lights on Motor Vehicles
437.03   Headlights on Motor Vehicles and Motorcycles
437.04   Tail Light; Illumination of Rear License Plate
437.05   Rear Red Reflectors
437.06   Safety Lighting on Commercial Vehicles
437.07   Obscured Lights on Vehicles in Combination
437.08   Red Light or Red Flag on Extended Loads
437.09   Lights on Parked or Stopped Vehicles
437.10   Animal-Drawn or Slow-Moving Vehicles; Lamps; Reflectors and Emblems
437.11   Spotlight and Auxiliary Lights
437.12   Cowl, Fender and Back-Up Lights
437.13   Display of Lighted Lights
437.14   Use of Headlight Beams
437.15   Lights of Less Intensity on Slow-Moving Vehicles
437.16   Number of Lights; Limitations on Flashing, Oscillating or Rotating
Lights
437.17   Regulations for Focus, Aim and Color of Headlights
437.18   Motor Vehicle and Motorcycle Brakes
437.19   Horn, Sirens, and Warning Devices
437.20   Muffler; Muffler Cutout; Excessive Smoke, Gas or Noise
437.21   Rear-View Mirror
437.22   Windshield and Windshield Wipers
437.23   Limited Load Extension on Left Side of Passenger Vehicle
437.24   Motor Vehicle Stop Lights
437.25   Air Cleaner Required
437.26   Child Restraint System Usage; Exceptions
437.27   Occupant Restraining Devices
437.28   Using Tinted Glass and Other Vision Obscuring Materials
437.29   Bumper Heights
437.30   Passenger Facial Coverings in Vehicles for Hire During the COVID-19
Pandemic
437.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Bicycle and mobility device signal devices, lights, reflectors, and brakes,
CO
473.05
   Litter thrown by persons in vehicles, CO
613.06
   Mufflers required for engines, CO
605.12
   Noise produced by motor vehicles that are out of repair, CO
605.10
   Sounding motor vehicle horns unnecessarily, CO
605.10
   Towing requirements, CO
439.10
   Use of stop and turn signals, CO
431.14
   Use of studded tires and chains, CO
439.14
   Wheel protectors for commercial vehicles, CO
439.09
Statutory reference:
   See sectional histories for similar State law
   Warning devices for commercial vehicles disabled upon freeways, RC 4513.28
§ 437.01 Unsafe Vehicles
   (a)   No person shall drive or move, or cause or knowingly permit to be
driven or moved, on any highway any vehicle or combination of vehicles which is
in such unsafe condition as to endanger any person.
   (b)   This chapter, with respect to equipment on vehicles, does not apply to
implements of husbandry, road machinery, road rollers, or agricultural tractors
except as made applicable to such articles of machinery.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(RC 4513.02(A), (G) & (H); Ord. No. 655-17. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 437.02 Time for Lighted Lights on Motor Vehicles
   (a)   Every vehicle, other than a motorized bicycle, operated upon a street
or highway within this state shall display lighted lights and illuminating
devices as required by Sections
437.03 to
437.17 during all of the following times:
      (1)   The time from sunset to sunrise;
      (2)   At any other time when, due to insufficient natural light or
unfavorable atmospheric conditions, persons, vehicles, and substantial objects
on the highway are not discernible at a distance of one thousand (1,000) feet
ahead;
      (3)   At any time when the windshield wipers of the vehicle are in use
because of precipitation on the windshield.
   Every motorized bicycle shall display at such times lighted lights meeting
the rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety under RC 4511.521. No
motor vehicle, during any time specified in this section, shall be operated
upon a street or highway within this state using only parking lights as
illumination.
   Whenever in such sections a requirement is declared as to the distance from
which certain lamps and devices shall render objects visible, or within which
such lamps or devices shall be visible, such distance shall be measured upon a
straight level unlighted highway under normal atmospheric conditions unless a
different condition is expressly stated.
   Whenever in such sections a requirement is declared as to the mounted height
of lights or devices, it shall mean from the center of such light or device to
the level ground upon which the vehicle stands.
   (b)    Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a vehicle being operated upon a
street or highway within this state to stop the vehicle solely because the
officer observes that a violation of division (a)(3) of this section has been
or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation, or
summons for a violation of that division, or causing the arrest of or
commencing a prosecution of a person for a violation of that division.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(RC 4513.03; Ord. No. 655-17. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 437.03 Headlights on Motor Vehicles and Motorcycles
   (a)   (1)   Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, and every
trackless trolley, shall be equipped with at least two (2) headlights with at
least one (1) near each side of the front of the motor vehicle or trackless
trolley.
      (2)   Every motorcycle shall be equipped with at least one (1) and not
more than two (2) headlights.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(RC 4513.04; Ord. No. 655-17. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 437.04 Tail Light; Illumination of Rear License Plate
   (a)   (1)   Every motor vehicle, trackless trolley, trailer, semitrailer,
pole trailer or vehicle which is being drawn at the end of a train of vehicles
shall be equipped with at least one (1) tail light mounted on the rear which,
when lighted, shall emit a red light visible from a distance of five hundred
(500) feet to the rear, provided that in the case of a train of vehicles only
the tail light on the rear-most vehicle need be visible from the distance
specified.
      (2)   Either a tail light or a separate light shall be so constructed and
placed as to illuminate with a white light the rear registration plate, when
such registration plate is required, and render it legible from a distance of
fifty (50) feet to the rear. Any tail light, together with any separate light
for illuminating the rear registration plate, shall be so wired as to be
lighted whenever the headlights or auxiliary driving lights are lighted, except
where separate lighting systems are provided for trailers for the purpose of
illuminating such registration plate.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(RC 4513.05; Ord. No. 655-17. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 437.05 Rear Red Reflectors
   (a)   (1)   Every new motor vehicle sold after September 6, 1941, and
operated on a highway, other than a commercial tractor to which a trailer or
semitrailer is attached, shall carry at the rear, either as a part of the tail
lamps or separately, two (2) red reflectors meeting the requirements of this
section, except that vehicles of the type mentioned in Section
437.06 shall be equipped with reflectors as required by the regulations
provided for in that section.
      (2)   Every such reflector shall be of a size and characteristics and so
maintained as to be visible at night from all distances within three hundred
(300) feet to fifty (50) feet from the vehicle.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(RC 4513.06; Ord. No. 655-17. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 437.06 Safety Lighting on Commercial Vehicles
   (a)   (1)   The Ohio Director of Public Safety shall prescribe and
promulgate regulations relating to clearance lights, marker lights, reflectors,
and stop lights on buses, trackless trolleys, trucks, commercial tractors,
trailers, semitrailers, and pole trailers, when operated upon any highway, and
such vehicles shall be equipped as required by such regulations, and such
equipment shall be lighted at all times mentioned in Section
437.02, except that clearance lights and side marker lights need not be lighted
on a vehicle when it is operated where there is sufficient light to reveal any
person or substantial object on the street at a distance of five hundred (500)
feet.
      (2)   Such equipment shall be in addition to all other lights
specifically required by Sections
437.02 to
437.15. Vehicles operated under the jurisdiction of the Ohio Public Utilities
Commission are not subject to this section.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(RC 4513.07; Ord. No. 655-17. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 437.07 Obscured Lights on Vehicles in Combination
   Whenever motor and other vehicles are operated in combination during the
time that lights are required, any light, except tail lights, which by reason
of its location on a vehicle of the combination would be obscured by another
vehicle of the combination need not be lighted, but this section does not
affect the requirement that lighted clearance lights be displayed on the front
of the foremost vehicle required to have clearance lights or that all lights
required on the rear of the rearmost vehicle of any combination shall be
lighted.
(RC 4513.08; Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 437.08 Red Light or Red Flag on Extended Loads
   Whenever the load upon any vehicle extends to the rear four (4) feet or more
beyond the bed or body of such vehicle, there shall be displayed at the extreme
rear end of the load, at the times specified in Section
437.02, a red light or lantern plainly visible from a distance of at least five
hundred (500) feet to the sides and rear. The red light or lantern required by
this section is in addition to the red rear light required upon every vehicle.
At any other time there shall be displayed at the extreme rear end of such load
a red flag or cloth not less than sixteen (16) inches square.
(RC 4513.09; Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 437.09 Lights on Parked or Stopped Vehicles
   Except in case of an emergency, whenever a vehicle is parked or stopped upon
a roadway open to traffic or shoulder adjacent thereto, whether attended or
unattended during the times mentioned in Section
437.02, such vehicle shall be equipped with one (1) or more lights which shall
exhibit a white or amber light on the roadway side visible from a distance of
five hundred (500) feet to the front of such vehicle, and a red light visible
from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the rear. No lights need be
displayed upon any such vehicle when it is stopped or parked where there is
sufficient light to reveal any person or substantial object within a distance
of five hundred (500) feet upon such street. Any lighted headlights upon a
parked vehicle shall be depressed or dimmed.
(RC 4513.10; Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 437.10 Animal-Drawn or Slow-Moving Vehicles; Lamps; Reflectors and Emblems
   (a)   All vehicles other than bicycles, including animal-drawn vehicles and
vehicles referred to in division (b) of Section
437.01, not specifically required to be equipped with lamps or other lighting
devices by Sections
437.02 to
437.09, shall, at the times specified in Section
437.02, be equipped with at least one (1) lamp displaying a white light visible
from a distance of not less than one thousand (1,000) feet to the front of the
vehicle and also shall be equipped with two (2) lamps displaying red light
visible from a distance of not less than one thousand (1,000) feet to the rear
of the vehicle, or as an alternative, one (1) lamp displaying a red light
visible from a distance of not less than one thousand (1,000) feet to the rear
and two (2) red reflectors visible from all distances of six hundred (600) feet
to one hundred (100) feet to the rear when illuminated by the lawful lower
beams of headlamps.
   Lamps and reflectors required by this section shall meet standards adopted
by the Ohio Director of Public Safety.
   (b)   All boat trailers, farm machinery and other machinery, including all
road construction machinery, upon a street or highway, except when being used
in actual construction and maintenance work in an area guarded by a flagperson,
or where flares are used, or when operating or traveling within the limits of a
construction area designated by the Ohio Director of Transportation, a city or
village engineer, or the county engineer of the several counties, when the
construction area is marked in accordance with requirements of the Director and
the Manual of Uniform Traffic-Control Devices, as set forth in RC 4511.09,
which is designed for operation at a speed of twenty-five (25) miles per hour
or less, shall be operated at a speed not exceeding twenty-five (25) miles per
hour, and shall display a triangular slow- moving vehicle (SMV) emblem. The
emblem shall be mounted so as to be visible from a distance of not less than
five hundred (500) feet to the rear. The Ohio Director of Public Safety shall
adopt standards and specifications for the design and position of mounting the
SMV emblem. The standards and specifications for SMV emblems referred to in
this section shall correlate with and, so far as possible, conform with those
approved by the American Society of Agricultural Engineers.
   A unit of farm machinery that is designed by its manufacturer to operate at
a speed greater than twenty- five (25) miles per hour may be operated on a
street or highway at a speed greater than twenty-five (25) miles per hour
provided it is operated in accordance with this section.
   As used in this division, “machinery” does not include any vehicle designed
to be drawn by an animal.
   (c)   The use of the SMV emblem shall be restricted to animal-drawn vehicles
and to the slow- moving vehicles specified in division (b) of this section
operating or traveling within the limits of the highway. Its use on slow-moving
vehicles being transported upon other types of vehicles or on any other type of
vehicle or stationary object on the highway is prohibited.
   (d)   (1)   No person shall sell, lease, rent or operate any boat trailer,
farm machinery or other machinery defined as a slow-moving vehicle in division
(b) of this section, except those units designed to be completely mounted on a
primary power unit, which is manufactured or assembled on or after April 1,
1966, unless the vehicle is equipped with a slow-moving vehicle emblem mounting
device as specified in division (b) of this section.
      (2)   No person shall sell, lease, rent, or operate on a street or
highway any unit of farm machinery that is designed by its manufacturer to
operate at a speed greater than twenty-five (25) miles per hour unless the unit
displays a slow-moving vehicle emblem as specified in division (b) of this
section and a speed identification symbol that meets the specifications
contained in the American Society of Agricultural Engineers Standard ANSI/ASAE
S584 JAN2005, Agricultural Equipment: Speed Identification Symbol (SIS).
   (e)   Any boat trailer, farm machinery, or other machinery defined as a
slow-moving vehicle in division (b) of this section, in addition to the use of
the slow-moving vehicle emblem, and any unit of farm machinery that is designed
by its manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than twenty-five (25) miles
per hour, in addition to the display of a speed identification symbol, may be
equipped with a red flashing light that shall be visible from a distance of not
less than one thousand (1,000) feet to the rear at all times specified in
Section
437.02. When a double-faced light is used, it shall display amber light to the
front and red light to the rear.
   In addition to the lights described in this division, farm machinery and
motor vehicles escorting farm machinery may display a flashing, oscillating, or
rotating amber light, as permitted by Section
437.16, and also may display simultaneously flashing turn signals or warning
lights, as permitted by that section.
   (f)   Every animal-drawn vehicle upon a street or highway shall at all times
be equipped in one of the following ways:
      (1)   With a slow-moving vehicle emblem complying with division (b) of
this section;
      (2)   With alternate reflective material complying with rules adopted
under this division;
      (3)   With both a slow-moving vehicle emblem and alternate reflective
material as specified in this division.
   The Ohio Director of Public Safety, subject to RC Chapter 119, shall adopt
rules establishing standards and specifications for the position of mounting of
the alternate reflective material authorized by this division. The rules shall
permit, as a minimum, the alternate reflective material to be black, gray or
silver in color. The alternate reflective material shall be mounted on the
animal-drawn vehicle so as to be visible, at all times specified in Section
437.02, from a distance of not less than five hundred (500) feet to the rear
when illuminated by the lawful lower beams of headlamps.
   (g)   Every unit of farm machinery that is designed by its manufacturer to
operate at a speed greater than twenty-five (25) miles per hour shall display a
slow-moving vehicle emblem and a speed identification symbol that meets the
specifications contained in the American Society of Agricultural Engineers
Standard ANSI/ASAE S584 JAN2005, Agricultural Equipment: Speed Identification
Symbol (SIS) when the unit is operated upon a street or highway, irrespective
of the speed at which the unit is operated on the street or highway. The speed
identification symbol shall indicate the maximum speed in miles per hour at
which the unit of farm machinery is designed by its manufacturer to operate.
The display of the speed identification symbol shall be in accordance with the
standard prescribed in this division.
   If an agricultural tractor that is designed by its manufacturer to operate
at a speed greater than twenty- five (25) miles per hour is being operated on a
street or highway at a speed greater than twenty-five (25) miles per hour and
is towing, pulling, or otherwise drawing a unit of farm machinery, the unit of
farm machinery shall display a slow-moving vehicle emblem and a speed
identification symbol that is the same as the speed identification symbol that
is displayed on the agricultural tractor.
   (h)   When an agricultural tractor that is designed by its manufacturer to
operate at a speed greater than twenty-five (25) miles per hour is being
operated on a street or highway at a speed greater than twenty-five (25) miles
per hour, the operator shall possess some documentation published or provided
by the manufacturer indicating the maximum speed in miles per hour at which the
manufacturer designed the agricultural tractor to operate.
   (i)   As used in this section, “boat trailer” means any vehicle designed and
used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of storage and a marina,
or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a street or highway for a
distance of no more than ten (10) miles and at a speed of twenty-five (25)
miles per hour or less.
   (j)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(RC 4513.11; Ord. No. 655-17. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 437.11 Spotlight and Auxiliary Lights
   (a)   (1)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than one (1)
spotlight and every lighted spotlight shall be so aimed and used upon
approaching another vehicle that no part of the high- intensity portion of the
beam will be directed to the left of the prolongation of the extreme left side
of the vehicle, nor more than one hundred (100) feet ahead of the vehicle.
      (2)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than three (3)
auxiliary driving lights mounted on the front of the vehicle. The Ohio Director
of Public Safety shall prescribe specifications for auxiliary driving lights
and regulations for their use, and any such lights which do not conform to said
specifications and regulations shall not be used.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(RC 4513.12; Ord. No. 655-17. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 437.12 Cowl, Fender and Back-Up Lights
   (a)   (1)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with side cowl or fender
lights which shall emit a white or amber light without glare.
      (2)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with lights on each side thereof
which shall emit a white or amber light without glare.
      (3)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with back-up lights, either
separately or in combination with another light. No back-up lights shall be
continuously lighted when the motor vehicle is in forward motion.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(RC 4513.13; Ord. No. 655-17. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 437.13 Display of Lighted Lights
   (a)   At all times mentioned in Section
437.02, at least two (2) lighted lights shall be displayed, one (1) near each
side of the front of every motor vehicle and trackless trolley, except when the
vehicle or trackless trolley is parked subject to the regulations governing
lights on parked vehicles or trackless trolleys. The Ohio Director of Public
Safety shall prescribe and promulgate regulations relating to the design and
use of such lights and such regulations shall be in accordance with currently
recognized standards.
(RC 4513.14)
   (b)   However, on a motorcycle there shall be displayed at least one (1) and
not more than two (2) lighted lights as required herein.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 655-17. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 437.14 Use of Headlight Beams
   (a)   Whenever a motor vehicle is being operated on a roadway or shoulder
adjacent thereto during the times specified in Section
437.02, the driver shall use a distribution of light, or composite beam,
directed high enough and of sufficient intensity to reveal persons, vehicles,
and substantial objects at a safe distance in advance of the vehicle, subject
to the following requirements:
      (1)   Whenever the driver of a vehicle approaches an oncoming vehicle,
the driver shall use a distribution of light, or composite beam, so aimed that
the glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of the oncoming driver.
      (2)   Every new motor vehicle registered in this state which has
multiple-beam road lighting equipment shall be equipped with a beam indicator,
which shall be lighted whenever the uppermost distribution of light from the
headlights is in use, and shall not otherwise be lighted. This indicator shall
be so designed and located that, when lighted, it will be readily visible
without glare to the driver of the vehicle.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(RC 4513.15; Ord. No. 655-17. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 437.15 Lights of Less Intensity on Slow-Moving Vehicles
   Any motor vehicle may be operated under the conditions specified in Section
437.02 when it is equipped with two (2) lighted lights upon the front thereof
capable of revealing persons and substantial objects seventy-five (75) feet
ahead in lieu of lights required in Section
437.13, provided that such vehicle shall not be operated at a speed in excess
of twenty (20) miles per hour.
(RC 4513.16; Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 437.16 Number of Lights; Limitations on Flashing, Oscillating or Rotating
Lights
   (a)   Whenever a motor vehicle equipped with headlights is also equipped
with any auxiliary lights or spotlight or any other light on the front thereof
projecting a beam of an intensity greater than three hundred (300) candle
power, not more than a total of five (5) of any such lights on the front of a
vehicle shall be lighted at any one time when such vehicle is upon a highway.
   (b)   Any lighted light or illuminating device upon a motor vehicle, other
than headlights, spotlights, signal lights or auxiliary driving lights, that
projects a beam of light of an intensity greater than three hundred (300)
candle power shall be so directed that no part of the beam will strike the
level of the roadway on which the vehicle stands at a distance of more than
seventy-five (75) feet from the vehicle.
   (c)   (1)   Flashing lights are prohibited on motor vehicles, except as a
means for indicating a right or a left turn, or in the presence of a vehicular
traffic hazard requiring unusual care in approaching, or overtaking or passing.
This prohibition does not apply to emergency vehicles, road service vehicles
servicing or towing a disabled vehicle, rural mail delivery vehicles, vehicles
transporting schoolchildren as provided in RC 4513.182, highway maintenance
vehicles, funeral hearses, funeral escort vehicles, and similar equipment
operated by State or local authorities, which shall be equipped with and
display, when used on a street or highway for the special purpose necessitating
those lights, a flashing, oscillating, or rotating amber light, but shall not
display a flashing, oscillating, or rotating light of any other color, nor to
vehicles or machinery permitted by Section
437.10 to have a flashing red light.
      (2)   When used on a street or highway, farm machinery and vehicles
escorting farm machinery may be equipped with and display a flashing,
oscillating, or rotating amber light, and the prohibition contained in division
(c)(1) of this section does not apply to such machinery or vehicles. Farm
machinery may also display the lights described in Section
437.10.
   (d)   Except a person operating a public safety vehicle, as defined in RC
4511.01(E), or a school bus, no person shall operate, move, or park upon, or
permit to stand within the right-of-way of any public street or highway any
vehicle or equipment that is equipped with and displaying a flashing red or a
flashing combination red and white light, or an oscillating or rotating red
light, or a combination red and white oscillating or rotating light; and except
a public law enforcement officer, or other person sworn to enforce the criminal
and traffic laws of the state, operating a public safety vehicle when on duty,
no person shall operate, move, or park upon, or permit to stand within the
right-of-way of any street or highway any vehicle or equipment that is equipped
with, or upon which is mounted, and displaying a flashing blue or a flashing
combination blue and white light, or an oscillating or rotating blue light, or
a combination blue and white oscillating or rotating light.
   (e)   This section does not prohibit the use of warning lights required by
law or the simultaneous flashing of turn signals on disabled vehicles or on
vehicles being operated in unfavorable atmospheric conditions in order to
enhance their visibility. This section also does not prohibit the simultaneous
flashing of turn signals or warning lights either on farm machinery or vehicles
escorting farm machinery when used on a street or highway.
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(RC 4513.17; Ord. No. 655-17. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 437.17 Regulations for Focus, Aim and Color of Headlights
   (a)   No person shall use any lights mentioned in Sections
437.02 to
437.16, upon any motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer unless these lights are
equipped, mounted, and adjusted as to focus and aim in accordance with
regulations which are prescribed by the Ohio Director of Public Safety.
   (b)   The headlights on any motor vehicle shall comply with the headlamp
color requirements contained in Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number
108, 49 C.F.R. § 571.108. No person shall operate a motor vehicle in violation
of this division.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(RC 4513.19; Ord. No. 655-17. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 437.18 Motor Vehicle and Motorcycle Brakes
   (a)   The following requirements govern as to brake equipment on vehicles:
      (1)   Every trackless trolley and motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle,
when operated upon a highway shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control
the movement of and to stop and hold the trackless trolley or motor vehicle,
including two (2) separate means of applying the brakes, each of which means
shall be effective to apply the brakes to at least two (2) wheels. If these two
(2) separate means of applying the brakes are connected in any way, then on
those trackless trolleys or motor vehicles, manufactured or assembled after
January 1, 1942, they shall be so constructed that failure of any one (1) part
of the operating mechanism shall not leave the trackless trolley or motor
vehicle without brakes on at least two (2) wheels.
      (2)   Every motorcycle, when operated upon a highway shall be equipped
with at least one (1) adequate brake, which may be operated by hand or by foot.
      (3)   Every motorized bicycle shall be equipped with brakes meeting the
rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety under RC 4511.521.
      (4)   When operated upon the highways of this state, the following
vehicles shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and
to stop and to hold the vehicle, designed to be applied by the driver of the
towing motor vehicle from its cab, and also designed and connected so that, in
case of a breakaway of the towed vehicle, the brakes shall be automatically
applied:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in this section, every trailer or
semitrailer, except a pole trailer, with an empty weight of two thousand
(2,000) pounds or more, manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 1942;
         B.   Every manufactured home or travel trailer with an empty weight of
two thousand (2,000) pounds or more, manufactured or assembled on or after
January 1, 2001.
      (5)   Every watercraft trailer with a gross weight or manufacturer’s
gross vehicle weight rating of three thousand (3,000) pounds or more that is
manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 2008, shall have separate
brakes equipped with hydraulic surge or electrically operated brakes on two (2)
wheels.
      (6)   In any combination of motor- drawn trailers or semitrailers
equipped with brakes, means shall be provided for applying the rearmost brakes
in approximate synchronism with the brakes on the towing vehicle, and
developing the required braking effort on the rearmost wheels at the fastest
rate; or means shall be provided for applying braking effort first on the
rearmost brakes; or both of the above means, capable of being used
alternatively, may be employed.
      (7)   Every vehicle and combination of vehicles, except motorcycles and
motorized bicycles, and except trailers and semitrailers of a gross weight of
less than two thousand (2,000) pounds, and pole trailers, shall be equipped
with parking brakes adequate to hold the vehicle on any grade on which it is
operated, under all conditions of loading, on a surface free from snow, ice or
loose material. The parking brakes shall be capable of being applied in
conformance with the foregoing requirements by the driver’s muscular effort or
by spring action or by equivalent means. Their operation may be assisted by the
service brakes or other source of power provided that failure of the service
brake actuation system or other power assisting mechanism will not prevent the
parking brakes from being applied in conformance with the foregoing
requirements. The parking brakes shall be so designed that when once applied
they shall remain applied with the required effectiveness despite exhaustion of
any source of energy or leakage of any kind.
      (8)   The same brake drums, brake shoes and lining assemblies, brake shoe
anchors, and mechanical brake shoe actuation mechanism normally associated with
the wheel brake assemblies may be used for both the service brakes and the
parking brakes. If the means of applying the parking brakes and the service
brakes are connected in any way, they shall be so constructed that failure of
any one (1) part shall not leave the vehicle without operative brakes.
      (9)   Every trackless trolley, motor vehicle, or combination of motor-
drawn vehicles shall be capable at all times and under all conditions of
loading of being stopped on a dry, smooth, level road free from loose material,
upon application of the service or foot brake, within the following specified
distances, or shall be capable of being decelerated at a sustained rate
corresponding to these distances:
         A.   Trackless trolleys, vehicles, or combinations of vehicles having
brakes on all wheels shall come to a stop in thirty (30) feet or less from a
speed of twenty (20) miles per hour.
         B.   Vehicles or combinations of vehicles not having brakes on all
wheels shall come to a stop in forty (40) feet or less from a speed of twenty
(20) miles per hour.
      (10)   All brakes shall be maintained in good working order and shall be
so adjusted as to operate as equally as practicable with respect to the wheels
on opposite sides of the trackless trolley or vehicle.
(RC 4513.20)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(RC 4513.99; Ord. No. 655-17. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 437.19 Horn, Sirens, and Warning Devices
   (a)   Every motor vehicle or trackless trolley when operated upon a street
shall be equipped with a horn which is in good working order and capable of
emitting sound audible, under normal conditions, from a distance of not less
than two hundred (200) feet.
   (b)   No motor vehicle or trackless trolley shall be equipped with, nor
shall any person use upon a vehicle, any siren, whistle, or bell. Any vehicle
may be equipped with a theft alarm signal device which shall be so arranged
that it cannot be used as an ordinary warning signal. Every emergency vehicle
shall be equipped with a siren, whistle, or bell capable of emitting sound
audible under normal conditions from a distance of not less than five hundred
(500) feet and of a type approved by the Ohio Director of Public Safety. Such
equipment shall not be used except when such vehicle is operated in response to
an emergency call or is in the immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected
violator of the law, in which case the driver of the emergency vehicle shall
sound the equipment when it is necessary to warn pedestrians and other drivers
of the approach thereof.
   (c)   No person shall use the horn of a motor vehicle except to give
warnings to other drivers or pedestrians.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(RC 4513.21; Ord. No. 655-17. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 437.20 Muffler; Muffler Cutout; Excessive Smoke, Gas or Noise
   (a)   No person shall own, operate or have in his or her possession any
motor vehicle or motorcycle equipped with a device for producing excessive
smoke or gas, or so equipped as to permit oil or any other chemical to flow
into or upon the exhaust pipe or muffler of such vehicle or in any other way to
produce or emit smoke or dangerous or annoying gases from any portion of such
vehicle other than the ordinary gases emitted by the exhaust of an internal
combustion engine under normal operation.
   (b)   No person shall own, operate or have in his or her possession any
motor vehicle or motorcycle which emits a flame generated by the ignition of
any flammable substance in a muffler or any other device.
   (c)   No person shall own, operate or have in his or her possession any
motor vehicle with an internal combustion engine which is not equipped with an
adequate muffler or a motorcycle which is not equipped with a compound muffler,
in constant operation and properly maintained to prevent any excessive or
unusual noise or sound, and no muffler or exhaust system shall be equipped with
a cutout, by-pass or similar device. No person shall modify the exhaust system
of a motor vehicle in a manner which will amplify or increase the noise or
sound emitted by the motor of the vehicle in excess of that emitted by the
muffler originally installed on the vehicle, and the original muffler shall
comply with all of the requirements of this section.
   (d)   For the purpose of this section “muffler” means a device consisting of
a series of chambers or baffle plates, or other mechanical design for the
purpose of receiving exhaust gas from an internal combustion engine, and
effective in reducing noise. Exhaust pipes shall be parallel to the ground and
vehicle, or vertical, and if vertical, the exhaust from the pipes shall not be
directed to the side of the vehicle.
   (e)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle which produces a sound or
noise in excess of ninety- five (95) decibels as measured not less than five
(5) feet from the source of such sound or noise. The term “decibel” means a
unit for measurement of relative sound levels as indicated by a sound level
meter having those properties essential for the purpose of administration and
enforcement of this section of a nature defined by the current American
Standard Association Specification (Z 24.3-1944).
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 437.21 Rear-View Mirror
   (a)   Every motor vehicle, motorcycle, and trackless trolley shall be
equipped with a mirror so located as to reflect to the operator a view of the
highway to the rear of such vehicle, motorcycle or trackless trolley. Operators
of vehicles, motorcycles, streetcars, and trackless trolleys shall have a clear
and unobstructed view to the front and to both sides of their vehicles,
motorcycles, streetcars, or trackless trolleys and shall have a clear view to
the rear of their vehicles, motorcycles, streetcars, or trackless trolleys by
mirror.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(RC 4513.23; Ord. No. 655-17. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 437.22 Windshield and Windshield Wipers
   (a)   No person shall drive any motor vehicle on a street or highway in this
state, other than a motorcycle or motorized bicycle, that is not equipped with
a windshield.
   (b)   (1)   No person shall drive any motor vehicle, other than a bus, with
any sign, poster, or other nontransparent material upon the front windshield,
sidewings, side, or rear windows of the vehicle other than a certificate or
other paper required to be displayed by law, except that there may be in the
lower left-hand or right-hand corner of the windshield a sign, poster, or decal
not to exceed four (4) inches in height by six (6) inches in width. No sign,
poster, or decal shall be displayed in the front windshield in such a manner as
to conceal the vehicle identification number for the motor vehicle when, in
accordance with federal law, that number is located inside the vehicle
passenger compartment and so placed as to be readable through the vehicle
glazing without moving any part of the vehicle.
      (2)   Division (b)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is
driving a passenger car with an electronic device, including an antenna,
electronic tolling or other transponder, camera, directional navigation device,
or other similar electronic device located in the front windshield if the
device meets both of the following:
         A.   It does not restrict the vehicle operator’s sight lines to the
road and highway signs and signals.
         B.   It does not conceal the vehicle identification number.
      (3)   Division (b)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is
driving a commercial car with an electronic device, including an antenna,
electronic tolling or other transponder, camera, directional navigation device,
or other similar electronic device located in the front windshield if the
device meets both of the following:
         A.   It does not restrict the vehicle operator’s sight lines to the
road and highway signs and signals.
         B.   It is mounted not more than six (6) inches below the upper edge
of the windshield and is outside the area swept by the vehicle’s windshield
wipers.
   (c)   The windshield on every motor vehicle, streetcar, and trackless
trolley shall be equipped with a device for cleaning rain, snow, or other
moisture from the windshield. The device shall be maintained in good working
order and so constructed as to be controlled or operated by the operator of the
vehicle, streetcar, or trackless trolley.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(RC 4513.24; Ord. No. 655-17. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 437.23 Limited Load Extension on Left Side of Passenger Vehicle
   No passenger-type vehicle shall be operated on a street with any load
carried on such vehicle which extends more than six (6) inches beyond the line
of the fenders on the vehicle’s left side.
(RC 4513.30; Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 437.24 Motor Vehicle Stop Lights
   (a)   (1)   Every motor vehicle, trailer, semi-trailer, and pole trailer
when operated upon a highway shall be equipped with two (2) or more stop
lights, except that passenger cars manufactured or assembled prior to January
1, 1967, motorcycles, and motor-driven cycles shall be equipped with at least
one (1) stop light. Stop lights shall be mounted on the rear of the vehicle,
actuated upon application of the service brake, and may be incorporated with
other rear lights. These stop lights when actuated shall emit a red light
visible from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the rear, provided that
in the case of a train of vehicles only the stop lights on the rear-most
vehicle need be visible from the distance specified.
      (2)   These stop lights when actuated shall give a steady warning light
to the rear of a vehicle or train of vehicles to indicate the intention of the
operator to diminish the speed of or stop a vehicle or train of vehicles.
      (3)   When stop lights are used as required by this section, they shall
be constructed or installed so as to provide adequate and reliable illumination
and shall conform to the appropriate rules and regulations established under RC
4513.19.
      (4)   Historical motor vehicles as defined in RC 4503.181, not originally
manufactured with stop lights, are not subject to this section.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(RC 4513.071; Ord. No. 655-17. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 437.25 Air Cleaner Required
   No person shall operate upon any street, alley or other public place any
motor vehicle which is not equipped with a functioning air cleaner.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 437.26 Child Restraint System Usage; Exceptions
   (a)   When any child who is in either or both of the following categories is
being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety
vehicle as defined in Chapter
401, that is required by the United States Department of Transportation to be
equipped with seat belts at the time of manufacture or assembly, the operator
of the motor vehicle shall have the child properly secured in accordance with
the manufacturer’s instructions in a child restraint system that meets federal
motor vehicle safety standards:
      (1)   A child who is less than four (4) years of age;
      (2)   A child who weighs less than forty (40) pounds.
   (b)   When any child who is in either or both of the following categories is
being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab, that is owned,
leased, or otherwise under the control of a nursery school or day-care center,
the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child properly secured in
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions in a child restraint system
that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards:
      (1)   A child who is less than four (4) years of age;
      (2)   A child who weighs less than forty (40) pounds.
   (c)   When any child who is less than eight (8) years of age and less than
four feet nine inches (4' 9") in height, who is not required by division (a) or
(b) of this section to be secured in a child restraint system, is being
transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety vehicle
as defined in Chapter
401 or a vehicle that is regulated under RC 5104.015, that is required by the
United States Department of Transportation to be equipped with seat belts at
the time of manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor vehicle shall
have the child properly secured in accordance with the manufacturer’s
instructions on a booster seat that meets federal motor vehicle safety
standards.
   (d)   When any child who is at least eight (8) years of age but not older
than fifteen (15) years of age, and who is not otherwise required by division
(a), (b), or (c) of this section to be secured in a child restraint system or
booster seat, is being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or
public safety vehicle as defined in Chapter
401, that is required by the United States Department of Transportation to be
equipped with seat belts at the time of manufacture or assembly, the operator
of the motor vehicle shall have the child properly restrained either in
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions in a child restraint system
that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards or in an occupant restraining
device as defined in RC 4513.263.
   (e)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause an operator of a motor vehicle being operated
on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of
determining whether a violation of division (c) or (d) of this section has been
or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation, or
summons for a violation of division (c) or (d) of this section or causing the
arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for a violation of division
(c) or (d) of this section, and absent another violation of law, a law
enforcement officer’s view of the interior or visual inspection of a motor
vehicle being operated on any street or highway may not be used for the purpose
of determining whether a violation of division (c) or (d) of this section has
been or is being committed.
   (f)   The Ohio Director of Public Safety shall adopt such rules as are
necessary to carry out this section.
   (g)   The failure of an operator of a motor vehicle to secure a child in a
child restraint system, a booster seat, or in an occupant restraining device as
required in this section is not negligence imputable to the child, is not
admissible as evidence in any civil action involving the rights of the child
against any other person allegedly liable for injuries to the child, is not to
be used as a basis for a criminal prosecution of the operator of the motor
vehicle other than a prosecution for a violation of this section, and is not
admissible as evidence in any criminal action involving the operator of the
motor vehicle other than a prosecution for a violation of this section.
   (h)   This section does not apply when an emergency exists that threatens
the life of any person operating or occupying a motor vehicle that is being
used to transport a child who otherwise would be required to be restrained
under this section. This section does not apply to a person operating a motor
vehicle who has an affidavit signed by a physician licensed to practice in this
state under RC Chapter 4731 or a chiropractor licensed to practice in this
state under RC Chapter 4734 that states that the child who otherwise would be
required to be restrained under this section has a physical impairment that
makes use of a child restraint system, booster seat, or an occupant restraining
device impossible or impractical, provided that the person operating the
vehicle has safely and appropriately restrained the child in accordance with
any recommendations of the physician or chiropractor as noted on the affidavit.
   (i)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require any person to
carry with the person the birth certificate of a child to prove the age of the
child, but the production of a valid birth certificate for a child showing that
the child was not of an age to which this section applies is a defense against
any ticket, citation, or summons issued for violating this section.
   (j)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a), (b), (c), or (d) of this section
shall be punished as follows, provided that the failure of an operator of a
motor vehicle to secure more than one (1) child in a child restraint system,
booster seat, or occupant restraining device as required by this section that
occurred at the same time, on the same day and at the same location is deemed
to be a single violation of this section:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (j)(1)B. of this
section, the offender is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not
less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than seventy-five dollars
($75.00).
         B.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (a), (b),(c) or (d) of this section or of a
state law that is substantially equivalent any of those divisions, the offender
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   All fines imposed pursuant to division (j)(1) of this section shall
be forwarded to the State Treasurer for deposit in the Child Highway Safety
Fund created by RC 4511.81(I).
(RC 4511.81(A) - (H), (K), (L); Ord. No. 655-17. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-
17)
§ 437.27 Occupant Restraining Devices
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Automobile” means any commercial tractor, passenger car,
commercial car or truck that is required to be factory-equipped with an
occupant restraining device for the operator or any passenger by regulations
adopted by the United States Secretary of Transportation pursuant to the
“National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1966", 80 Stat. 719, 15
U.S.C. 1392.
      (2)   “Occupant restraining device” means a seat safety belt, shoulder
belt, harness, or other safety device for restraining a person who is an
operator of or passenger in an automobile and that satisfies the minimum
federal vehicle safety standards established by the United States Department of
Transportation.
      (3)   “Passenger” means any person in an automobile, other than its
operator, who is occupying a seating position for which an occupant restraining
device is provided.
      (4)   “Commercial tractor”, “passenger car”, and “commercial car” have
the same meanings as in Chapter
401 of this Traffic Code.
      (5)   “Vehicle” and “motor vehicle”, as used in the definitions of the
terms set forth in division (a)(4) of this section, have the same meanings as
in Chapter
401 of this Traffic Code.
      (6)   “Tort action” means a civil action for damages for injury, death,
or loss to person or property. “Tort action” includes a product liability
claim, as defined in RC 2307.71, and an asbestos claim, as defined in RC
2307.91, but does not include a civil action for damages for breach of contract
or another agreement between persons.
   (b)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Operate an automobile on any street or highway unless that person
is wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant
restraining device, or operate a school bus that has an occupant restraining
device installed for use in its operator’s seat unless that person is wearing
all of the available elements of the device, as properly adjusted;
      (2)   Operate an automobile on any street or highway unless each
passenger in the automobile who is subject to the requirement set forth in
division (b)(3) of this section is wearing all of the available elements of a
properly adjusted occupant restraining device;
      (3)   Occupy, as a passenger, a seating position on the front seat of an
automobile being operated on any street or highway unless that person is
wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant
restraining device;
      (4)   Operate a taxicab on any street or highway unless all factory-
equipped occupant restraining devices in the taxicab are maintained in usable
form.
   (c)   Division (b)(3) of this section does not apply to a person who is
required by Section 437.26 to be secured in a child restraint device or booster
seat. Division (b)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is an
employee of the United States Postal Service or of a newspaper home delivery
service, during any period in which the person is engaged in the operation of
an automobile to deliver mail or newspapers to addressees. Divisions (b)(1) and
(b)(3) of this section do not apply to a person who has an affidavit signed by
a physician licensed to practice in this state under RC Chapter 4731 or a
chiropractor licensed to practice in this state under RC Chapter 4734 that
states that the person has a physical impairment that makes use of an occupant
restraining device impossible or impractical.
   (d)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause an operator of an automobile being operated on
any street or highway to stop the automobile for the sole purpose of
determining whether a violation of division (b) of this section has been or is
being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation, or
summons for a violation of that nature or causing the arrest of or commencing a
prosecution of a person for a violation of that nature, and no law enforcement
officer shall view the interior or visually inspect any automobile being
operated on any street or highway for the sole purpose of determining whether a
violation of that nature has been or is being committed.
   (e)   All fines collected for violations of division (b) of this section
shall be forwarded to the Treasurer of State for deposit into the state
treasury to the credit of the trauma and emergency medical services fund, in
accordance with RC 4513.263(E).
   (f)   (1)   Subject to division (f)(2) of this section, the failure of a
person to wear all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant
restraining device in violation of division (b)(1) or (b)(3) of this section or
the failure of a person to ensure that each minor who is a passenger of an
automobile being operated by that person is wearing all of the available
elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device in violation of
division (b)(2) of this section shall not be considered or used by the trier of
fact in a tort action as evidence of negligence or contributory negligence.
But, the trier of fact may determine based on evidence admitted consistent with
the Ohio Rules of Evidence that the failure contributed to the harm alleged in
the tort action and may diminish a recovery of compensatory damages that
represents non- economic loss, as defined in RC 2307.011, in a tort action that
could have been recovered but for the plaintiff’s failure to wear all of the
available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device. Evidence
of that failure shall not be used as a basis for a criminal prosecution of the
person other than a prosecution for a violation of this section; and shall not
be admissible as evidence in a criminal action involving the person other than
a prosecution for a violation of this section.
      (2)   If, at the time of an accident involving a passenger car equipped
with occupant restraining devices, any occupant of the passenger car who
sustained injury or death was not wearing an available occupant restraining
device, was not wearing all of the available elements of such a device, or was
not wearing such a device as properly adjusted, then, consistent with the Rules
of Evidence, the fact that the occupant was not wearing the available occupant
restraining device, was not wearing all of the available elements of such a
device, or was not wearing such a device as properly adjusted is admissible in
evidence in relation to any claim for relief in a tort action to the extent
that the claim for relief satisfies all of the following:
         A.   It seeks to recover damages for injury or death to the occupant.
         B.   The defendant in question is the manufacturer, designer,
distributor, or seller of the passenger car.
         C.   The claim for relief against the defendant in question is that
the injury or death sustained by the occupant was enhanced or aggravated by
some design defect in the passenger car or that the passenger car was not
crashworthy.
   (g)   (1)   Whoever violates division (b)(1) of this section shall be fined
thirty dollars ($30.00).
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b)(3) of this section shall be fined
twenty dollars ($20.00).
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (b)(4) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of
division (b)(4) of this section, whoever violates division (b)(4) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(RC 4513.263; Ord. No. 655-17. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 437.28 Using Tinted Glass and Other Vision Obscuring Materials
   (a)   the Ohio Director of Public Safety, in accordance with RC Chapter 119,
shall adopt rules governing the use of tinted glass, and the use of
transparent, nontransparent, translucent, and reflectorized materials in or on
motor vehicle windshields, side windows, sidewings, and rear windows that
prevent a person of normal vision looking into the motor vehicle from seeing or
identifying persons or objects inside the motor vehicle.
   (b)   The rules adopted under this section may provide for persons who meet
either of the following qualifications:
      (1)   On November 11, 1994, or the effective date of any rule adopted
under this section, own a motor vehicle that does not conform to the
requirements of this section or of any rule adopted under this section;
      (2)   Establish residency in this state and are required to register a
motor vehicle that does not conform to the requirements of RC 4513.241 or of
any rule adopted under that section.
   (c)   No person shall operate, on any highway or other public or private
property open to the public for vehicular travel or parking, lease or rent any
motor vehicle that is registered in this state unless the motor vehicle
conforms to the requirements of RC 4513.241 and of any applicable rule adopted
under that section.
   (d)   No person shall install in or on any motor vehicle any glass or other
material that fails to conform to the requirements of RC 4513.241 or of any
rule adopted under that section.
   (e)   (1)   No used motor vehicle dealer or new motor vehicle dealer, as
defined in RC 4517.01, shall sell any motor vehicle that fails to conform to
the requirements of RC 4513.241 or of any rule adopted under that section.
      (2)   No manufacturer, remanufacturer, or distributor, as defined in RC
4517.01, shall provide to a motor vehicle dealer licensed under RC Chapter 4517
or to any other person, a motor vehicle that fails to conform to the
requirements of RC 4513.241 or of any rule adopted under that section.
   (f)   No reflectorized materials shall be permitted upon or in any front
windshield, side windows, sidewings, or rear window.
   (g)   This section does not apply to the manufacturer’s tinting or glazing
of motor vehicle windows or windshields that is otherwise in compliance with or
permitted by Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 205.
   (h)   With regard to any side window behind a driver’s seat or any rear
window other than any window on an emergency door, this section does not apply
to any school bus used to transport a child with disabilities pursuant to RC
Chapter 3323, whom it is impossible or impractical to transport by regular
school bus in the course of regular route transportation provided by a school
district. As used in this division, “child with disabilities” has the same
meaning as in RC 3323.01.
   (i)   This section does not apply to any school bus that is to be sold and
operated outside this state.
   (j)   (1)   This section and the rules adopted under it do not apply to a
motor vehicle used by a law enforcement agency under either of the following
circumstances:
         A.   The vehicle does not have distinctive markings of a law
enforcement vehicle but is operated by or on behalf of the law enforcement
agency in an authorized investigation or other activity requiring that the
presence and identity of the vehicle occupants be undisclosed.
         B.   The vehicle primarily is used by the law enforcement canine unit
for transporting a police dog.
      (2)   As used in this division, “law enforcement agency” means a police
department, the office of a sheriff, the State Highway Patrol, a county
prosecuting attorney, or a federal, state, or local governmental body that
enforces criminal laws and that has employees who have a statutory power of
arrest.
   (k)   (1)   Whoever violates division (c), (e)(2) or (f) of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (e)(1) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor if the dealer or the dealer’s agent knew of the nonconformity
at the time of sale.
      (3)   A.   Whoever violates division (d) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree, except that an organization may not be
convicted unless the act of installation was authorized by the board of
directors, trustees, partners, or by a high managerial officer acting on behalf
of the organization, and installation was performed by an employee of the
organization acting within the scope of the person’s employment.
         B.   In addition to any other penalty imposed under this section,
whoever violates division (d) of this section is liable in a civil action to
the owner of a motor vehicle on which was installed the nonconforming glass or
material for any damages incurred by that person as a result of the
installation of the nonconforming glass or material, costs of maintaining the
civil action, and attorney fees.
         C.   In addition to any other penalty imposed under this section, if
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation
of division (d) of this section and the offender is a motor vehicle repair
operator registered under RC Chapter 4775 or a motor vehicle dealer licensed
under RC Chapter 4517, whoever violates division (d) of this section is subject
to a registration or license suspension, as applicable, for a period of not
more than one hundred and eighty (180) days.
   (l)   (1)   Every county court judge, mayor of a mayor’s court, and clerk of
a court of record shall keep a full record of every case in which a person is
charged with any violation of this section. If a person is convicted of or
forfeits bail in relation to a violation of division (d) of this section, the
county court judge, mayor of a mayor’s court, or clerk, within ten (10) days
after the conviction or bail forfeiture, shall prepare and immediately forward
to the motor vehicle repair board and the motor vehicle dealers board, an
abstract, certified by the preparer to be true and correct, of the court record
covering the case in which the person was convicted or forfeited bail.
      (2)   The motor vehicle repair board and the motor vehicle dealers board
each shall keep and maintain all abstracts received under this section. Within
ten (10) days after receipt of an abstract, each board, respectively, shall
determine whether the person named in the abstract is registered or licensed
with the board and, if the person is so registered or licensed, shall proceed
in accordance with RC 4775.09 or 4517.33, as applicable, and determine whether
the person’s registration or license is to be suspended for a period of not
more than one hundred eighty (180) days.
(RC 4513.241; Ord. No. 655-17. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 437.29 Bumper Heights
   (a)   Definitions.
      (1)   “Passenger car” means any motor vehicle with motive power, designed
for carrying ten (10) persons or less, except a multipurpose passenger vehicle
or motorcycle.
      (2)   “Multipurpose passenger vehicle” means a motor vehicle with motive
power, except a motorcycle, designed to carry ten (10) persons or less, that is
constructed either on a truck chassis or with special features for occasional
off-road operation.
      (3)   “Truck” means every motor vehicle, except trailers and
semitrailers, designed and used to carry property and having a gross vehicle
weight rating of ten thousand (10,000) pounds or less.
      (4)   “Manufacturer” has the same meaning as in RC 4501.01.
      (5)   “Gross vehicle weight rating” means the manufacturer’s gross
vehicle weight rating established for the vehicle.
      (6)   “Body floor height” means the vertical distance between top of the
frame rail and the bottom of the passenger compartment (cab) floor. In the
event that the vehicle is a truck body floor height will be measured by the
vertical distance between the passenger compartment (cab) floor and the floor
of the truck bed.
      (7)   “Bumper height” means the vertical distance between the ground and
the highest point of the bottom of the bumper, measured when the vehicle is
laden on a level surface with the vehicle tires inflated to the manufacturer’s
recommended pressure.
      (8)   “Frame” means the main longitudinal structural members of the
chassis of the vehicle or, for vehicles with unitized body construction, the
lowest main longitudinal structural members of the body of the vehicle.
(OAC 4501-43-02)
   (b)   Prohibitions; Application.
      (1)   No person shall operate upon a street or highway any passenger car,
multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck registered in this State that does not
conform to the requirements of this section.
      (2)   No person shall modify any motor vehicle registered in this State
in such a manner as to cause the vehicle body or chassis to come in contact
with the ground, expose the fuel tank to damage from collision, or cause the
wheels to come in contact with the body under normal operation, and no person
shall disconnect any part of the original suspension system of the vehicle to
defeat the safe operation of that system including the installation of
inverted, altered or modified suspension system component parts which results
in elevation of the height of the vehicle bumper or frame unit which is not in
compliance with this section.
      (3)   No person shall operate upon a street or highway any passenger car,
multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck registered in this State without a
bumper on the front and rear of the vehicle if such vehicle was equipped with
bumpers as standard equipment by the manufacturer.
      (4)   No person shall operate upon a street or highway any passenger car,
multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck registered in this state if the
difference in height between the body floor and the top of the frame exceeds
four (4) inches.
      (5)   Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit
either of the following:
         A.   The installation upon a passenger car, multipurpose passenger
vehicle or truck registered in this State of heavy duty equipment, including
shock absorbers and overload springs as long as such equipment does not cause
the vehicle to be in violation of this section;
         B.   The operation on a street or highway of a passenger car,
multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck registered in this State with normal
wear to the suspension system if the normal wear does not adversely affect the
control of the vehicle.
      (6)   This section does not apply to any specially designed or modified
passenger car, multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck when operated off a
street or highway in races and similar events.
      (7)   A specially designed or modified passenger car, multipurpose
passenger vehicle or truck which does not conform to this section shall not be
operated on a street or highway.
(OAC 4501-43-03)
   (c)   Specifications.
      (1)   The horizontal bumper shall be at least four and one-half (4.5)
inches in vertical height, centered on the vehicle’s centerline, and extend no
less than the width of the respective wheel track distances. Bumpers shall be
horizontal load bearing bumpers and attached to the vehicle frame to
effectively transfer impact when engaged.
      (2)   Maximum bumper heights shall be determined by weight category of
gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) measured in terms of the vertical distance
between the ground and the bottom of the frame rail or bumper. Maximum bumper
heights are as follows:
 
                               Front (inches) Rear (inches)
Passenger Vehicles             22             22
4,500 lbs. and under GVWR      24             26
4,501 lbs. to 7,500 lbs. GVWR  27             29
7,501 lbs. to 10,000 lbs. GVWR 28             31
 
      (3)   If the body and/or truck bed height is altered the difference in
height between the body floor and/or the truck bed floor to the top of the
frame rail shall not exceed four (4) inches.
      (4)   For any vehicle with bumpers or attaching components which have
been modified or altered from the original manufacturer’s design in order to
conform with the maximum bumper requirements of this section, the bumper height
shall be measured from a level surface to the bottom of the vehicle frame rail
at the most forward and rearward points of the frame rail.
      (5)   The height restriction in this division (c) applies to the distance
from the ground to the bottom of the frame rail under any one (1) or more of
the following conditions:
         A.   A motor vehicle is not equipped with a front and rear bumper;
         B.   The bumper height relative to the frame rails has been altered;
         C.   A supplemental bumper has been installed or an addition to the
original or replacement has been made.
(OAC 4501-43-04; Ord. No. 2822-89. Passed 3-19-90, eff. 3-22-90)
§ 437.30 Passenger Facial Coverings in Vehicles for Hire During the COVID-19
Pandemic
   (a)   No person shall operate a taxicab or public hack, as defined in
Section
443.011, a private car service, a ride sharing, vehicle, or any other motor
vehicle for hire, as defined in Section
401.30, (collectively "For Hire Vehicle") to transport any individuals unless
all individuals contained therein have a facial covering, as defined in Section
602.01.
   (b)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to any person who is
exempted under division (c) of Section
602.02.
   (c)   Any person who violates division (a) of this section as an operator
shall be subject to a civil penalty of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each
individual passenger failing to wear a facial covering, unless exempted as
stated in division (b).
   (d)   A civil penalty imposed under division (c) of this section may be
appealed to the Directors of Public Safety and Public Health ("Directors"), or
their designees, within ten (10) days after receipt of the civil penalty. The
Directors shall grant the appeal or conduct a hearing, which may be virtual,
within thirty (30) days. The Directors shall have jurisdiction to affirm or
reverse the civil penalty. A person aggrieved by a final decision of the
Directors may further appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals within thirty (30)
days after the Directors' written decision.
   (e)   Notwithstanding any provision of the law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause an operator of a for hire vehicle being
operated on any street or highway to stop the vehicle for the sole purpose of
determining whether a violation of division (a) of this section has been or is
being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a citation for a violation
of that nature, and no law enforcement officer shall view the interior or
visually inspect any for hire vehicle being operated on any street or highway
for the sole purpose of determining whether a violation of that nature has been
or is being committed.
   (f)   The civil penalties prescribed in this section are in addition to any
rights, remedies, or other penalties provided by law.
   (g)   This Section
437.30 shall expire upon the termination of the Mayor's Proclamation of Civil
Emergency in the City of Cleveland dated March 11, 2020, as amended.
(Ord. No. 556-2020. Passed 7-15-20, eff. 7-15-20)
§ 437.99 Penalty
   Whoever violates any provision of this
Chapter 437 for which no penalty otherwise is provided in the section violated
is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 655-17. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
CHAPTER 439 – COMMERCIAL AND HEAVY VEHICLES
439.01   Oversize or Overweight Vehicle Operation on State Routes; State Permit
439.02   Permits for Overweight and/or Oversize Vehicles, Objects and
Structures
439.021   Categories of Permits for Overweight and/or Oversize Moves; Permit
Fees
439.03   Weight of Vehicle and Load; Truck Routes
439.04   Operation of Commercial Units upon Through Streets
439.05   Following Distance for Trucks
439.06   Slow-Moving Vehicles or Equipment Crossing Railroad Tracks
439.07   Maximum Width, Height and Length
439.08   Route and Load Information
439.09   Wheel Protectors
439.10   Towing Requirements
439.11   Loads Dropping or Leaking; Removal Required; Tracking Mud
439.12   Shifting Load; Loose Loads
439.13   Vehicles with Spikes, Lugs and Chains
439.14   Use of Studded Tires and Chains
439.15   Permitting or Driving While Fatigued or Ill Prohibited
439.16   Reserved
439.99   Penalties – Repealed
Cross-reference:
   Bus stops regulated, CO
451.18
   Impounding commercial vehicles, CO
405.08
   Parking commercial vehicles in residential districts, CO
349.13
   Parking trucks and commercial vehicles, CO
451.21
   Raw rendering material transportation, CO
221.03
   Safety lighting, CO
437.06
   Slow-moving vehicle lights and emblem, CO
437.10,
437.15
   Slower moving vehicles to be driven in right-hand lane, CO
431.06
   Truck loads causing litter, CO
613.07
   Truck zones, CO
451.20
Statutory reference:
   See sectional histories for similar State law
   Arrest notice of drivers, RC 5577.14
   Hours of service of truck drivers, RC 4921.30
   Warning devices when disabled on freeways, RC 4513.28
   Weighing vehicle; removal of excess load, RC 4513.33
§ 439.01 Oversize or Overweight Vehicle Operation on State Routes; State Permit
   (a)   No person shall operate or move a vehicle or combination of vehicles
of a size or weight of vehicle or load exceeding the maximum specified in RC
5577.01 to 5577.09, inclusive, or otherwise not in conformity with RC 4513.01
to 4513.37, inclusive, upon any State route within the City, except pursuant to
special written permit issued by the Ohio Director of Transportation, or upon
any local truck route. Every such permit shall be carried in the vehicle or
combination of vehicles to which it refers and shall be open to inspection by
any police officer.
   (b)   No holder of a permit issued by the Ohio Director of Transportation
shall be required to obtain any local permit or license or pay any local fee or
charge for movement on any State route within the City. However, no person
shall operate any such vehicle or combination of vehicles upon any roadway
within the City which is not a State route, except as provided in Section
439.02.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates the weight provisions of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree for overloads not in excess of five
thousand (5,000) pounds; and is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree for
overloads in excess of five thousand (5,000) pounds but not in excess of ten
thousand (10,000) pounds.
      (2)   Whoever violates the weight provisions of this for overloads in
excess of ten thousand (10,000) pounds shall be fined three dollars ($3.00) per
one hundred (100) pounds of overload plus court costs, and may be imprisoned
not more than sixty (60) days, or both.
      (3)   Whoever violates any other provision of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree on the first offense. On each subsequent
offense within one (1) year of the first offense, the person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(Ord. No. 1281-15. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 439.02 Permits for Overweight and/or Oversize Vehicles, Objects and
Structures
   (a)   The Director of Capital Projects may issue permits, upon written
application, to move vehicles, objects or structures that are in excess of the
weight and/or size limitations specified in this chapter over any street,
highway, bridge or culvert, other than a state route. The Director of Capital
Projects shall issue each permit for a particular vehicle, object or structure
to move over a specific route as requested by the applicant or as modified by
the Director. Prior to submitting its written application, the applicant shall
review all routes requested to ensure that all height clearances and weight
allowances are met.
   (b)   The Director of Capital Projects shall issue permits only for non-
divisible loads, unless the Director determines that it would be in the best
interests of the safety of the traveling public and the welfare of the
transportation system to waive this restriction. As used in this section, “non-
divisible” means that which cannot be reduced in size or weight, or which is
impractical to divide, or which cannot be so adjusted as to be within the
weight and size limitations specified in this chapter and RC 5577.01 to
5577.14.
   (c)   The Director of Capital Projects shall require each permittee to
indemnify and save harmless the City of Cleveland with respect to the
permittee’s activities under the permit. The Director shall further require
that the permittee maintain at all times during the term of the permit
automobile liability insurance to insure both the permittee, and the City of
Cleveland as an additional insured with respect to permittee’s activities under
the permit, with limits not less than the following:
 
Bodily injury coverage per person       $375,000.00
Bodily injury coverage per occurrence   $375,000.00
Property damage coverage per occurrence $375,000.00
 
   In lieu thereof, a single limit policy of automobile liability insurance
covering both personal injury and property damage in an amount not less than
seven hundred fifty thousand dollars ($750,000.00) may be substituted.
   (d)   The Director of Capital Projects may impose such additional
requirements or conditions for the issuance of a permit under this section as
the Director deems necessary for the safety and welfare of the citizens of the
City of Cleveland and the traveling public, and to protect the integrity of the
streets, highways, bridges and culverts in the City of Cleveland. Such
additional requirements or conditions may include the keeping of a log of the
number of moves made under the authority of a permit issued pursuant to this
section.
   (e)   The Director of Capital Projects may issue such rules and regulations
as the Director deems necessary to fulfill the purposes of this section and
Section
439.021. Such rules and regulations shall take effect ten (10) days after
publication in the City Record.
(Ord. No. 1141-2023. Passed 2-3-25, eff. 2-4-25)
§ 439.021 Categories of Permits for Overweight and/or Oversize Moves; Permit
Fees
   (a)   The Director of Capital Projects shall use the following categories
for purposes of assessing fees for permits issued under Section
439.02:
      (1)   Active Permit. An active permit shall be issued for a single
movement over a designated route, and may allow for return to the place of
origin over the same route with approval of the Director of Capital Projects.
An active permit shall be issued for a duration of not to exceed seventy-two
(72) hours, except that a permit allowing the movement of a load in excess of
one hundred twenty thousand (120,000) lbs. shall be for a duration of not to
exceed five (5) days.
      (2)   Continuing Permit. A continuing permit shall be issued for repeated
movements of the same vehicle, including any approved load and axle spacing,
over the same routing between the same two (2) locations. A continuing permit
shall be issued for a period of not to exceed three hundred sixty-five (365)
days.
      (3)   Construction Equipment Permit. A construction equipment permit
shall be issued for repeated movements of the same vehicle to and from
construction work sites. A construction equipment permit shall be for a
vehicle, including trailer and/or equipment or machinery, which does not exceed
twelve (12) feet in width, and which does not exceed the weight, length, and
height limitations of this chapter and RC 5577.02 and 5577.05. A construction
equipment permit shall be issued for a period of not to exceed three hundred
sixty-five (365) days.
      (4)   Inactive Permit. An inactive permit shall be issued for repeated
movements of the same vehicle, including the approved load and axle spacing.
For an inactive permit, the route is not specified when the application is
submitted. When a given route is subsequently submitted to and approved by the
Director of Capital Projects, the Director shall issue a validation number,
which shall activate the permit for a duration of not to exceed seventy-two
(72) hours. An inactive permit shall be issued either for a period of not to
exceed ninety (90) days, or for a period of not to exceed three hundred sixty-
five (365) days, the duration of which shall be in accordance with the amount
paid by the applicant under the schedule of fees set forth in division (b) of
this section.
   (b)   The Director of Capital Projects shall charge the following fees for
permits issued under Section
439.02:
Active permit (single movement) Fee
Active permit (single movement)                      Fee
Processing fee – 72 hours or 5 days                $29.00
Overweight surcharge (over 80,000 lb.)               $15.00
Overweight superload surcharge (over 120,000 lb.)    $30.00
Overwidth surcharge (over 14 ft.)                    $15.00
Overheight surcharge (over 14 ft. 6 in.)             $29.00
Return trip surcharge with authorization             $15.00
Continuing Permit                                    Fee
                                                     $110.00
Processing fee (365 days max for under 120,001 lbs)  each month or
                                                     $1,200.00 yearly permit
Overweight surcharge (between 80,001 to 120,000 lbs) $60.00
Overwidth surcharge (over 14 ft.)                    $60.00
Overheight surcharge (over 14 ft. 6 in.)             $116.00
Overlength surcharge (over 80 feet)                  $60.00
Expedited Review                                     Fee
Additional fee for each requested and performed      $50.00
expedited review
 
   (c)   In addition to the foregoing fees and charges, if a police escort is
required by state law, or at any other time that the Director of Capital
Projects and the Traffic Commissioner determine that a police escort is needed,
the permittee shall also reimburse the City for the costs of the escort as
determined by the Chief of Police.
(Ord. No. 1141-2023. Passed 2-3-25, eff. 2-4-25)
§ 439.03 Weight of Vehicle and Load; Truck Routes
   (a)   No vehicle, object or structure shall be operated or moved upon any
public street, highway, bridge or culvert within the City other than a State
Route having an axle load, wheel load or a vehicle and load weight in excess of
the maximums specified in RC 5577.01 to 5577.14, inclusive, or such lesser axle
load, wheel load or vehicle and load weight as the Director of Public Service
shall determine due to the conditions of the public street, highway, bridge or
culvert.
   (b)   All motor trucks whose axle load, wheel load or vehicle and load
weight is in excess of the maximum specified in division (a) of this section,
shall operate in conformity with signs posted by the Chief of Police, or the
officer designated in charge of traffic control prohibiting, limiting or
diverting such motor trucks on such residential street, except while receiving
goods or making deliveries along such streets.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates the weight provisions of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree for overloads not in excess of five
thousand (5,000) pounds; and is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree for
overloads in excess of five thousand (5,000) pounds but not in excess of ten
thousand (10,000) pounds.
      (2)   Whoever violates the weight provisions of this section for
overloads in excess of ten thousand (10,000) pounds shall be fined three
dollars ($3.00) per one hundred (100) pounds of overload plus court costs, and
may be imprisoned not more than sixty (60) days, or both.
      (3)   Whoever violates any other provision of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree on the first offense. On each subsequent
offense within one (1) year of the first offense, the person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(Ord. No. 1281-15. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 439.04 Operation of Commercial Units upon Through Streets
   All commercial tractors, trailers, semitrailers and pole trailers and trucks
in excess of seven thousand (7,000) pounds gross weight shall be operated in
the lane nearest the right-hand edge of the roadway upon all through streets
and highways when parking is prohibited in such traffic lane, otherwise in the
lane of traffic immediately left thereof. No such vehicles shall overtake and
pass any other moving vehicle traveling in the same direction in the right-hand
lane of any through street and highway unless otherwise directed by a police
officer or traffic control device.
   The provisions of this section do not apply when commercial tractors,
trailers, semitrailers and pole trailers and trucks in excess of seven thousand
(7,000) pounds gross weight are making an approach for a left turn or when the
lane nearest the right-hand edge of the roadway or the lane immediately left
thereof upon any through street or highway is not available for travel, or when
the lane nearest the right-hand edge of the roadway is reserved for vehicles
making or intending to make a right turn at the next nearest intersection and
when traffic control devices have been placed or erected to so indicate the
restricted use of such traffic lane.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 439.05 Following Distance for Trucks
   The driver of any truck or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle, when
traveling upon a roadway, shall maintain a space of two hundred (200) feet
whenever conditions permit, between such vehicle and another truck or motor
vehicle drawing another vehicle ahead, so an overtaking vehicle may enter and
occupy such space without danger. The provisions of this section shall not be
construed to prevent overtaking and passing nor shall the same apply upon any
lane specially designated for use by trucks.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 439.06 Slow-Moving Vehicles or Equipment Crossing Railroad Tracks
   (a)   No person shall operate or move any crawler-type tractor, steam
shovel, derrick, roller or any equipment or structure having a normal operating
speed of six (6) or less miles per hour or a vertical body or load clearance of
less than nine (9) inches above the level surface of a roadway, upon or across
any tracks at a railroad grade crossing, without first complying with divisions
(a)(1) and (a)(2) of this section.
      (1)   Before making any such crossing, the person operating or moving any
such vehicle or equipment shall first stop the same, and while stopped the
person shall listen and look in both directions along such track for any
approaching train and for signals indicating the approach of a train, and shall
proceed only upon exercising due care.
      (2)   No such crossing shall be made when warning is given by automatic
signal or crossing gates or a flagperson or otherwise of the immediate approach
of a railroad train or car.
   (b)   If the normal sustained speed of such vehicle, equipment or structure
is not more than three (3) miles per hour, the person owning, operating or
moving the same shall also give notice of such intended crossing to a station
agent or superintendent of the railroad, and a reasonable time shall be given
to such railroad to provide proper protection for such crossing. Where such
vehicles or equipment are being used in constructing or repairing a section of
highway lying on both sides of a railroad grade crossing, and in such
construction or repair it is necessary to repeatedly move such vehicles or
equipment over such crossing, one (1) daily notice specifying when such work
will start and stating the hours during which it will be prosecuted is
sufficient.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one (1) year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
(1) predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one (1) year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two (2) or more
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(RC 4511.64; Ord. No. 1281-15. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 439.07 Maximum Width, Height and Length
   (a)   No vehicle shall be operated upon the public highways, streets,
bridges and culverts within this City whose dimensions exceed those specified
in this section.
   (b)   No such vehicle shall have a width:
      (1)   In excess of one hundred and four (104) inches for passenger bus
type vehicles operated exclusively within the municipality.
      (2)   In excess of one hundred and two (102) inches, excluding such
safety devices as are required by law, for passenger bus type vehicles operated
over freeways, and other state roads with minimum pavement widths of twenty-two
(22) feet, except those roads or portions of roads over which operation of one
hundred and two (102) inch buses is prohibited by order of the Ohio Director of
Transportation.
      (3)   In excess of one hundred and thirty-two (132) inches for traction
engines.
      (4)   In excess of one hundred and two (102) inches for recreational
vehicles, excluding safety devices and retracted awnings and other
appurtenances of six (6) inches or less in width and except that the Director
may prohibit the operation of one hundred and two (102) inch recreational
vehicles on designated state highways or portions of highways.
      (5)   In excess of one hundred and two (102) inches, including load, for
all other vehicles, except that the Director may prohibit the operation of one
hundred and two (102) inch vehicles on the state highways or portions of state
highways as the Director designates.
   (c)   No such vehicle shall have a length:
      (1)   In excess of sixty-six (66) feet for passenger bus type vehicles
and articulated passenger bus type vehicles operated by a regional transit
authority pursuant to RC 306.30 to 306.54.
      (2)   In excess of forty-five (45) feet for all other passenger bus type
vehicles.
      (3)   In excess of fifty-three (53) feet for any semitrailer when
operated in a commercial tractor-semitrailer combination, with or without load,
except that the Director may prohibit the operation of any such commercial
tractor-semitrailer combination on the state highways or portions of state
highways as the Director designates.
      (4)   In excess of twenty-eight and one-half (28.5) feet for any
semitrailer or trailer when operated in a commercial tractor-semitrailer-
trailer or commercial tractor-semitrailer-semitrailer combination, except that
the Director may prohibit the operation of any such commercial tractor-
semitrailer-trailer or commercial tractor-semitrailer-semitrailer combination
on the state highways or portions of state highways as the Director designates.
      (5)   A.   In excess of ninety- seven (97) feet for drive-away
saddlemount vehicle transporter combinations and drive-away saddlemount with
fullmount vehicle transporter combinations when operated on any interstate,
United States route or state route, including reasonable access travel on all
other roadways for a distance not to exceed one (1) road mile from any
interstate, United States route or state route, not to exceed three (3)
saddlemounted vehicles, but which may include one (1) fullmount;
         B.   In excess of seventy- five (75) feet for drive-away saddlemount
vehicle transporter combinations and drive-away saddlemount with fullmount
vehicle transporter combinations when operated on any roadway not designated as
an interstate, United States route or state route, not to exceed three (3)
saddlemounted vehicles, but which may include one (1) fullmount.
      (6)   In excess of sixty-five (65) feet for any other combination of
vehicles coupled together, with or without load, except as provided in division
(c)(3) and (c)(4), and in division (e) below.
      (7)   In excess of forty-five (45) feet for recreational vehicles.
      (8)   In excess of fifty (50) feet for all other vehicles, except
trailers and semitrailers, with or without load.
   (d)   No such vehicle shall have a height in excess of thirteen (13) feet
and six (6) inches, with or without load.
   (e)   An automobile transporter or boat transporter shall be allowed a
length of sixty-five (65) feet, and a stinger-steered automobile transporter or
stinger-steered boat transporter shall be allowed a length of seventy-five (75)
feet, except that the load thereon may extend no more than four (4) feet beyond
the rear of such vehicles and may extend no more than three (3) feet beyond the
front of the vehicles, and except further that the Director may prohibit the
operation of a stinger-steered automobile transporter, stinger-steered boat
transporter, or a B-train assembly on any state highway or portion of any state
highway that the Director designates.
   (f)   (1)   The widths prescribed in division (b) of this section shall not
include side mirrors, turn signal lamps, marker lamps, handholds for cab entry
and egress, flexible fender extensions, mud flaps, splash and spray suppressant
devices, and load- induced tire bulge.
      (2)   The widths prescribed in division (b)(5) of this section shall not
include automatic covering devices, tarp and tarp hardware, and tie-down
assemblies, provided these safety devices do not extend more than three (3)
inches from either side of the vehicle.
      (3)   The lengths prescribed in divisions (c)(2) to (c)(7) shall not
include safety devices, bumpers attached to the front or rear of the bus or
combination, non-property carrying devices or components that do not extend
more than twenty-four (24) inches beyond the rear of the vehicle and are needed
for loading or unloading, B-train assembly used between the first and second
semitrailer of a commercial tractor-semitrailer-semitrailer combination, energy
conservation devices as provided in any regulations adopted by the Secretary of
the United States Department of Transportation, or any noncargo- carrying
refrigerator equipment attached to the front of trailers and semitrailers. In
special cases, vehicles that dimensions exceed those prescribed by this section
may operate in accordance with rules adopted by the Director.
   (g)   (1)   This section does not apply to fire engines, fire trucks or
other vehicles or apparatus belonging to any municipality or to the volunteer
fire department of any municipality or used by such department in the discharge
of its functions. This section does not apply to vehicles and pole trailers
used in the transportation of wooden and metal poles, nor to the transportation
of pipes or well-drilling equipment, nor to farm machinery and equipment.
      (2)   The owner or operator of any vehicle, machinery or equipment not
specifically enumerated in this section but the dimensions of which exceed the
dimensions provided by this section, when operating the same on the highways
and streets of the municipality, shall comply with the rules of the Director
governing such movement. Any person adversely affected shall have the same
right of appeal as provided in RC Chapter 119.
      (3)   This section does not require the municipality or any railroad or
other private corporation to provide sufficient vertical clearance to permit
the operation of the vehicle, or to make any changes in or about existing
structures now crossing streets, roads and other public thoroughfares.
   (h)   As used in this section, “recreational vehicle” has the same meaning
as in RC 4501.01.
(RC 5577.05)
   (i)   No person shall violate any rule or regulation promulgated by the
Director of Transportation in accordance with RC 5577.05.
(RC 5577.06)
   (j)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a
first offense; on a second or subsequent offense, the person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(RC 5577.99(C); Ord. No. 1281-15. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 439.08 Route and Load Information
   Drivers of vehicles described in this chapter shall be required, upon
request by a police officer, to give full and true information as to the route
they are following and the name of the consignor and consignee and place of
delivery or removal and the location of any consignment being hauled or goods
being removed, and upon a designation by such police officer of a route to be
followed, shall immediately adopt and pursue such route.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 439.09 Wheel Protectors
   (a)   No person shall drive or operate, or cause to be driven or operated,
any commercial car, trailer or semitrailer, used for the transportation of
goods or property, the gross weight of which, with load, exceeds three (3)
tons, upon the public highways, streets, bridges and culverts within the City,
unless the vehicle is equipped with suitable metal protectors or substantial
flexible flaps on the rearmost wheels of the vehicle or combination of vehicles
to prevent, as far as practicable, the wheels from throwing dirt, water or
other materials on the windshields of following vehicles. The protectors or
flaps shall have a ground clearance of not more than one-third (1/3) of the
distance from the center of the rearmost axle to the center of the flaps under
any conditions of loading of the vehicle, and they shall be at least as wide as
the tires they are protecting. If the vehicle is so designed and constructed
that the requirements are accomplished by means of fenders, body construction
or other means of enclosure, then no such protectors or flaps are required.
Rear wheels not covered at the top by fenders, bodies or other parts of the
vehicle shall be covered at the top by protective means extending at least to
the centerline of the rearmost axle.
(RC 5577.11)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than twenty-five
dollars ($25.00).
(RC 5577.99(E); Ord. No. 1281-15. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 439.10 Towing Requirements
   (a)   (1)   When one (1) vehicle is towing another vehicle, the drawbar or
other connection shall be of sufficient strength to pull all the weight towed
thereby, and the drawbar or other connection shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet
from one (1) vehicle to the other, except the connection between any two (2)
vehicles transporting poles, pipe, machinery or other objects of structural
nature which cannot readily be dismembered.
      (2)   When one (1) vehicle is towing another and the connection consists
only of a chain, rope or cable, there shall be displayed upon the connection a
white flag or cloth not less than twelve (12) inches square.
      (3)   In addition to the drawbar or other connection, each trailer and
each semitrailer which is not connected to a commercial tractor by means of a
fifth wheel shall be coupled with stay chains or cables to the vehicle by which
it is being drawn. These chains or cables shall be of sufficient size and
strength to prevent the towed vehicle’s parting from the drawing vehicle in
case the drawbar or other connection should break or become disengaged. In case
of a loaded pole trailer, the connecting pole to the drawing vehicle shall be
coupled to the drawing vehicle with stay chains or cables of sufficient size
and strength to prevent the towed vehicle’s parting from the drawing vehicle.
      (4)   Every trailer or semitrailer, except pole and cable trailers and
pole and cable dollies operated by a public utility as defined in RC 5727.01,
shall be equipped with a coupling device which shall be so designed and
constructed that the trailer will follow substantially in the path of the
vehicle drawing it, without whipping or swerving from side to side. Vehicles
used to transport agricultural produce or agricultural production materials
between a local place of storage and supply and the farm, when drawn or towed
on a street or highway at a speed of twenty-five (25) miles per hour or less,
and vehicles designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a place
of storage and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a
street or highway for a distance of no more than ten (10) miles and at a speed
of twenty- five (25) miles per hour or less, shall have a drawbar or other
connection, including the hitch mounted on the towing vehicle, which shall be
of sufficient strength to pull all the weight towed thereby. Only one (1) such
vehicle used to transport agricultural produce or agricultural production
materials as provided in this section may be towed or drawn at one (1) time
except as follows:
         A.   An agricultural tractor may tow or draw more than one (1) such
vehicle;
         B.   A pickup truck or straight truck designed by the manufacturer to
carry a load of not less than one-half (1/2) ton and not more than two (2) tons
may tow or draw not more than two (2) such vehicles that are being used to
transport agricultural produce from the farm to a local place of storage. No
vehicle being so towed by such a pickup truck or straight truck shall be
considered to be a motor vehicle.
(RC 4513.32)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(RC 4513.99; Ord. No. 1281-15. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 439.11 Loads Dropping or Leaking; Removal Required; Tracking Mud
   (a)   No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any highway unless the vehicle
is so constructed, loaded or covered as to prevent any of its load from
dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that sand or
other substances may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction, or water
or other substances may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or maintaining
the roadway.
   (b)   Except for a farm vehicle used to transport agricultural produce or
agricultural production materials or a rubbish vehicle in the process of
acquiring its load, no vehicle loaded with garbage, swill, cans, bottles, waste
paper, ashes, refuse, trash, rubbish, waste, wire, paper, cartons, boxes,
glass, solid waste or any other material of an unsanitary nature that is
susceptible to blowing or bouncing from a moving vehicle shall be driven or
moved on any highway unless the load is covered with a sufficient cover to
prevent the load or any part of the load from spilling onto the highway.
(RC 4513.31)
   (c)   No person shall operate any vehicle so as to track or drop mud,
stones, concrete, gravel or other similar material on any street, highway or
other public place.
   (d)   It shall be the duty of the driver of a vehicle who unlawfully drops
or deposits mud, stones, concrete, gravel or other similar material or permits
the load or any portion thereof to be dropped or deposited upon any street,
highway or other public place to immediately remove the same or cause it to be
removed.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree on the first offense, and a misdemeanor of the second degree on the
second or any subsequent offense.
(Ord. No. 1281-15. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 439.12 Shifting Load; Loose Loads
   (a)   In addition to any other lawful requirements of load distribution, no
person shall operate any vehicle upon a street or highway unless such vehicle
is so laden as to prevent its contents from shifting or otherwise unbalancing
the vehicle to such an extent as to interfere with the safe operation of the
same.
   (b)   No motor vehicle or trailer shall be driven unless the tailboard or
tailgate, tarpaulins, chains (except ground or contact chains), ropes, stakes,
poles, and the like, or any part of the load, are securely fastened to prevent
dangling, flapping, swinging or falling from the side, end or top of the load
or body. All projecting cargo shall be properly guarded by a red flag or cloth
or a red light or lantern as required by Section
437.08.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 439.13 Vehicles with Spikes, Lugs and Chains
   (a)   No person shall drive over the improved highways of this City a
traction engine or tractor with tires or wheels equipped with ice picks, spuds,
spikes, chains or other projections of any kind extending beyond the cleats, or
no person shall tow or in any way pull another vehicle over the improved
highways of this City which towed or pulled vehicle has tires or wheels
equipped with ice picks, spuds, spikes, chains or other projections of any
kind. “Traction engine” or “tractor”, as used in this section, applies to all
self-propelling engines equipped with metal-tired wheels operated or propelled
by any form of engine, motor or mechanical power.
   (b)   This City shall not adopt, enforce or maintain any ordinance, rule or
regulation contrary to or inconsistent with division (a), nor shall this City
require any license tax upon or registration fee for any traction engine,
tractor or trailer, or any permit or license to operate. Operators of traction
engines or tractors shall have the same rights upon the public streets and
highways as the drivers of any other vehicles, unless some other safe and
convenient way is provided, and no public road open to traffic shall be closed
to traction engines or tractors.
(RC 5589.08)
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(RC 5589.99(B); Ord. No. 1281-15. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 439.14 Use of Studded Tires and Chains
   (a)   For the purposes of this section, “studded tire” means any tire
designed for use on a vehicle and equipped with metal studs or studs of wear-
resisting material that project beyond the tread of the traction surface of the
tire. “Motor vehicle”, “street or highway”, “public safety vehicle”, and
“school bus” have the same meaning as given those terms in Chapter
401.
   (b)   (1)   Except as provided in division (b)(2) of this section, no person
shall operate any motor vehicle other than a public safety vehicle or school
bus that is equipped with studded tires on any street or highway in this City,
except during the period extending from the first day of November of each year
through the fifteenth day of April of the succeeding year.
      (2)   A person may operate a motor vehicle that is equipped with
retractable studded tires with the studs retracted at any time of the year, but
shall operate the motor vehicle with the studs extended only as provided in
division (b)(1) of this section.
   (c)   Division (b) of this section does not apply to the use of tire chains
when there is snow or ice on the streets or highways where the chains are being
used, or the immediate vicinity thereof.
(RC 5589.081)
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(RC 5589.99(B); Ord. No. 1281-15. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 439.15 Permitting or Driving While Fatigued or Ill Prohibited
   (a)   No person shall drive a commercial motor vehicle, as defined in RC
4506.01, or a commercial car or commercial tractor, as defined in RC 4501.01,
while the person’s ability or alertness is so impaired by fatigue, illness or
other causes that it is unsafe for the person to drive the vehicle. No driver
shall use any drug which would adversely affect the driver’s ability or
alertness.
   (b)   No owner, as defined in RC 4501.01, of a commercial motor vehicle,
commercial car or commercial tractor, or a person employing or otherwise
directing the driver of the vehicle, shall require or knowingly permit a driver
in any such condition described in division (a) of this section to drive the
vehicle upon any street or highway.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one (1) or more violations of this section or
RC 4511.79, or RC 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.761, 4511.762, 4511.764 or 4511.77, or
a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any of those
sections, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
(RC 4511.79; Ord. No. 1281-15. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 439.16 Reserved
§ 439.99 Penalties – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1281-15. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
CHAPTER 441 – MOTOR BUSES – REPEALED
441.01 to
441.08   Motor Buses – Repealed
§§ 441.01 to 441.08 Motor Buses – Repealed
(Ord. No. 152-77. Passed 4-4-77, eff. 4-12-77)
CHAPTER 443 – TAXICABS
443.01   Jurisdiction
443.011   Definitions
443.012   Rules and Regulations
443.02   License Required; Application
443.021   Association Agreements
443.022   Company Compliance; License Revocation
443.023   Licenses Nontransferable
443.024   Prohibited Uses on Roof Tops by Non-Licensed Hacks
443.03   Number of Hack Licenses Fixed
443.04   Limitation on New Hack Licenses
443.05   Inspection Prior to Licensing Vehicles; Fee
443.051   Required Equipment for Taxicabs
443.06   Liability Insurance
443.07   Liability Agreement – Repealed
443.08   Licensee to File Monthly Statement of Claims and Judgments
443.09   License Card
443.10   Fees for Licensing Vehicles
443.11   Inspection Time and Reports; Fee
443.12   License Suspension or Revocation
443.13   Drivers’ Licenses; Application
443.131   Convictions Which Bar Issuance of Driver’s License
443.14   Examination of Drivers
443.15   Driver’s Photograph and Fingerprints – Repealed
443.16   Form and Terms of Drivers’ Licenses
443.17   Temporary Permit Issuance; Term; Fee
443.18   Driver’s License Certificate
443.19   Renewal of Drivers’ Licenses
443.20   Fee for Drivers’ Licenses
443.21   Suspension or Revocation of Driver’s License
443.22   Record of Drivers’ Licenses
443.23   Use of Taxicab Stands and Call Stations
443.24   Marking Taxicab Stands
443.25   Taximeters
443.26   Rates of Fare; Receipts
443.261   Rates of Fare Adjustment Due to Cost of Gasoline
443.27   Prepayment of Fare
443.28   Disputed Fares
443.281   Service to be Rendered on Demand
443.282   Response to Service Requests
443.29   Cruising or Soliciting
443.30   Loitering Near Public Hack Prohibited
443.31   Fraud in Obtaining License
443.32   Unlicensed Driver
443.321   Waybills
443.33   Exceptions
443.34   Violations by Owners
443.35   Violations by Drivers
443.36   Suspension or Revocation of License
443.37   Taxicab Passenger Bill of Rights
443.38   Fines for Violating Rules and Regulations
443.99   Penalties
Cross-reference:
   Appeal from license denial, suspension or revocation, CO
403.09
   Operate for hire defined, CO
401.30
   Taxicab Bureau, CO
127.39
   Taxicab stands regulated, CO
451.18
   Taxicabs at airports, CO
571.13
   Taximeter defined, CO
401.63
Statutory reference:
   Power to fix rates, RC 715.25
   Power to regulate, RC 715.22, 715.66
§ 443.01 Jurisdiction
   The licensing and inspection of public hacks, the inspecting and sealing of
taximeters, the examining of applicants for a license to drive such public
hacks, and the licensing of drivers, as hereinafter provided, and the enforcing
of the provisions of this chapter shall be under the control of the Division of
Assessments and Licenses, through its Commissioner, or his or her designee.
(Ord. No. 598-13. Passed 5-20-13, eff. 5-23-13)
§ 443.011 Definitions
   As used in this chapter, certain terms are defined as follows:
   (a)   "Association" means a society, whether incorporated or not, organized
for the purpose of benefitting a group of not less than fifteen (15) owners of
public hacks by providing for its members, dispatching services, a uniform and
distinctive color scheme, and collection and maintenance of operating records.
   (b)   "Company" means any person, partnership or corporation owning fifteen
(15) or more public hacks having a uniform distinctive color scheme.
   (c)   "Driver" means the person in actual physical control of a public hack.
   (d)   "Independent operator" means any owner to whom either of the following
applies:
      (1)   Is the owner of less than fifteen (15) public hacks;
      (2)   Does not provide his or her own dispatching services.
   (e)   "Owner" means any natural person, partnership or corporation having
legal or equitable title to a public hack and includes lessors.
   (f)   "Public hack" or "Hack" means any vehicle whose owner or driver
secures or accepts passengers for hire on the public streets, or in public or
quasi-public places, including, but not limited to, hotels as defined by
Section
363.08, and excepting carriages as defined in division (a) of Section
447.01 and vehicles operated by the Cleveland Regional Transit Authority.
(Ord. No. 1510-2019. Passed 12-2-19, eff. 12-4-19)
§ 443.012 Rules and Regulations
   The Commissioner of Licenses and Assessments is hereby authorized to
promulgate such rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the provisions of
this chapter, as he or she shall deem necessary to carry out the provisions of
this chapter. Such rules and regulations shall become effective ten (10) days
after their publication in the City Record.
(Ord. No. 1828-77. Passed 6-8-78, eff. 6-12-78)
§ 443.02 License Required; Application
   No public hack shall operate for hire upon the streets of the City without
obtaining a license from the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses. Such
licenses shall be issued as of December 1, and shall expire on November 30,
next succeeding, unless sooner suspended or revoked by the Commissioner.
Application for a license for a public hack shall be made by the owner upon the
blank forms to be furnished by the Commissioner, and such application shall
contain the full name and address of the owner, the class of vehicle for which
the license is desired, the length of time the vehicle has been in use, the
number of persons it is capable of carrying, and the motor power thereof,
together with the indemnity bond required by Section
443.06.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 443.021 Association Agreements
   (a)   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses shall not issue a license
to any independent operator until the independent operator provides the
Commissioner with evidence that he or she is a member of, and will operate as
part of an association approved by the Commissioner. No association shall be
approved unless:
      (1)   The association agrees to provide dispatching services to its
members;
      (2)   The association adopts and requires the use of a uniform and
distinctive color scheme for the hacks of all its members;
      (3)   The association agrees to provide service to the public in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
      (4)   The association agrees to assume the responsibility of collecting
daily waybills and other operating records from individual members and
maintaining the waybills and other operating records in one (1) location.
Waybills shall be retained for a period of at least one (1) year and other
operating records shall be retained for a period of at least three (3) months.
At all reasonable times, the association shall permit any duly authorized
officer or employee in the classified service of the City to examine all
property of the association.
   (b)   Should the association membership of any independent operator be
terminated, either by the independent operator or by the association, for any
reason, the association shall immediately notify the Commissioner of this fact
in writing. The Commissioner shall forthwith suspend or revoke any license
granted under this chapter to the independent operator until the independent
operator provides evidence that he or she has become a member of an
association.
(Ord. No. 1828-77. Passed 6-8-78, eff. 6-12-78)
§ 443.022 Company Compliance; License Revocation
   (a)   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses shall not issue a license
to any company except on condition that such company will assume all the
responsibilities required of an association by Section
443.021(a).
   (b)   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses shall suspend or revoke
any license granted under this chapter to any company which fails to perform
any duties required of associations by Section
443.021(a).
(Ord. No. 1828-77. Passed 6-8-78, eff. 6-12-78)
§ 443.023 Licenses Nontransferable
   Public hack licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall not be
transferable from one (1) vehicle to another.
   Any person having a security interest of lien on any vehicle licensed as a
public hack or on any equipment used in a public hack may notify the
Commissioner of Licenses and Assessments of such security interest or lien. In
the event the owner of such a vehicle or equipment does not apply for renewal
of the license or the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses suspends or
revokes the license of such vehicle, the Commissioner shall notify the holder
of the security interest or lien of such occurrence.
(Ord. No. 1828-77. Passed 6-8-78, eff. 6-12-78)
§ 443.024 Prohibited Uses on Roof Tops by Non-Licensed Hacks
   No owner or driver of a public hack, not licensed in accordance with the
provisions of this Chapter, shall operate, or permit to be operated, the
vehicle with a cab roof sign or top containing the terms "taxi", "taxicab",
"cab", "hack", or "public hack".
(Ord. No. 1510-2019. Passed 12-2-19, eff. 12-4-19)
§ 443.03 Number of Hack Licenses Fixed
   It is hereby determined that five hundred (500) licenses issued to owners of
public hacks is sufficient to serve adequately the need for hack service in the
City of Cleveland. Each public hack license shall be prominently displayed in
the interior of the licensed vehicle.
   No owner or company shall be issued more than 350 cab licenses.
(Ord. No. 1820-06, § 2. Passed 12-11-06, eff. 12-14-06)
§ 443.04 Limitation on New Hack Licenses
   (a)   No license for the operation of public hacks in excess of the
limitation prescribed by Section
443.03 shall be issued unless Council shall by resolution declare that public
convenience and necessity require the issuance of additional public hack
licenses in the number set forth in such resolution. Upon the passage of such
resolution, approved by the Mayor, the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses
shall be authorized to issue the specified additional number of public hack
licenses.
   (b)   Before the adoption of such resolution, Council shall provide for
public hearings as may be necessary to determine whether public convenience and
necessity require the issuance of additional public hack licenses, and the
number of any of such public hack licenses which should be issued to meet such
public convenience and necessity. In determining whether public convenience and
necessity require the issuance of any additional licenses for public hacks,
Council shall take into consideration:
      (1)   The number of public hacks then licensed;
      (2)   Whether the requirements of public convenience and necessity can be
met and complied with only by the issuance of additional licenses;
      (3)   The resulting effect upon the business of existing licenses and
upon the existing agencies of mass transportation;
      (4)   The effect on traffic congestion and safety of the public using the
streets;
      (5)   The effect upon working conditions and wages or other compensation
paid to drivers of public hacks of existing licensees;
      (6)   The financial responsibility of the applicant;
      (7)   Any other fact which Council may deem relevant.
   (c)   No finding of public convenience and necessity shall be required for
the issuance of licenses within the limitation of Section
443.03 and holders of existing licenses shall be entitled without such finding
of convenience and necessity to retain their present licenses and secure
renewals thereof upon the payment of the annual license fees.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 443.05 Inspection Prior to Licensing Vehicles; Fee
   (a)   No license shall be granted for a vehicle over four (4) years old,
except that an existing license for a vehicle not more than eight (8) years old
may be renewed if the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses determines,
after careful inspection of the vehicle, that it is in a thoroughly safe
condition for the transportation of passengers, clean, fit, of good appearance,
and well painted. For purposes of this section, the age of the vehicle shall be
determined by comparing the calendar year in which the application for license
is being considered to the model year of the vehicle.
   (b)   When licenses or renewals of existing licenses are issued for any
public hacks which may have been disabled, disqualified, sold or may otherwise
not be available at the time of the granting of such licenses, no such vehicle
which may thereafter be acquired for use in connection with any such licenses
shall be placed in operation until it has been thoroughly and carefully
inspected and examined and found to be in a thoroughly safe condition for the
transportation of passengers, clean, fit, of good appearance and well painted.
The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses shall thereafter make inspections
of such vehicles at least semiannually and may make inspections more frequently
at his or her discretion.
   (c)   The Commissioner shall refuse to permit the operation of any vehicle
found by him or her to be unfit or unsuited for public patronage or to which a
taximeter or acceptable radio receiver and transmitter is not affixed. He or
she shall examine any taximeter attached to any public hack and see that the
same is accurate before permitting the use thereof upon any public hack which
may be placed in operation. The Commissioner is authorized and empowered to
establish reasonable rules and regulations for the inspection of public hacks
and their appurtenances, construction and condition of fitness.
   (d)   The Commissioner is authorized to charge and collect an inspection fee
of fifty dollars ($50.00) per hour, or any portion thereof, for any inspection
performed under this section.
(Ord. No. 1510-2019. Passed 12-2-19, eff. 12-4-19; Am. Ord. No. 1222-2022.
Passed 11-28-22, eff. 11-28-22)
§ 443.051 Safety Partitions or Surveillance Cameras for Taxicabs
   (a)   Each taxicab shall be equipped with at least one (1) of the following:
      (1)   A safety partition meeting the requirements of division (b) to
completely separate the driver from the passenger section of the taxicab, and
power windows and door locks that can be operated by the driver; or
      (2)   A surveillance camera or cameras meeting the requirements of
division (c); or
      (3)   A safe meeting the requirements of division (d).
   The Commissioner shall inspect each taxicab for compliance with these
requirements as part of the vehicle inspections conducted pursuant to Section
443.05.
   (b)   All safety partitions installed in taxicabs shall meet the following
design standards, and such additional requirements as may be established by
regulation:
      (1)   The partition shall be constructed of a bullet-resistant material;
      (2)   The partition shall be designed to prevent a person in the
passenger compartment from reaching the driver;
      (3)   The partition shall be designed to afford the driver safe rearview
vision;
      (4)   The design of the partition shall allow for ventilation and heat to
the passenger compartment of the vehicle;
      (5)   The partition shall be designed to enable the driver to collect
payment without leaving the vehicle, by use of a change slot, sliding
partition, or similar means;
      (6)   The partition shall not contain any sharp edges or sharp points
that may injure the driver or passengers.
   (c)   All surveillance cameras installed in taxicabs shall be suitable in
design and placement to record the actions of the driver and passengers and,
without limiting the scope of this requirement, suitable in design and
placement to record acts or attempted acts of violence or criminal conduct. The
camera(s) shall meet such additional requirements as may be established by
regulation.
   (d)   All safes installed in taxicabs shall be suitable in design to provide
a taxicab driver with the ability to deposit money in a safe that may not be
removed from the taxicab and may only be opened under limited circumstances so
as to protect the driver of the taxicab. The safe shall meet any additional
requirements that may be established by regulation. Each taxicab driver with a
safe shall possess no more than ten dollars ($10.00) in cash and a sign shall
be posted conspicuously stating, "Driver carries no more than $10.00 in cash."
Such sign shall be legible from the interior and exterior of the taxicab.
   (e)   Equipment necessary to enable the driver to accept and process credit
and debit card payments for all fares and charges due.
   (f)   No taxicab company, association or independent operator shall increase
its drivers' lease rates for the cost of compliance with this section. Any
increase in drivers' expenses that may otherwise be allowable under Section
443.261 may not be implemented unless the taxicab company, association or
independent operator first certifies to the Commissioner by affidavit that the
costs of compliance with this section will not be borne by the taxicab drivers.
The Commissioner may require the taxicab company, association or independent
operator to produce books and records to demonstrate compliance with this
division.
   (g)   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses is hereby authorized to
issue such rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the provisions of this
chapter, as the Commissioner deems necessary to carry out the provisions of
this section, including equipment specifications, card payment processing
rules, and regulations related to credit card surcharges. Such rules and
regulations shall become effective ten (10) days after their publication in the
City Record.
(Ord. No. 598-13. Passed 5-20-13, eff. 5-23-13)
§ 443.06 Liability Insurance
   (a)   No person shall operate a public hack or other vehicle kept for hire
or permit such to be operated, nor shall any license be issued until the
applicant deposits with the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses the
following:
   A policy or certificate of liability insurance for each hack for which a
license is sought, acceptable to and approved by the Commissioner and the
Director of Law with the following limits: one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) per person, three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) per
vehicle, and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for property damage, or
a combined single limit policy of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00).
The license shall expire upon the lapse or termination of the policy of
insurance;
   (b)   Such policy of insurance shall contain a provision for a continuing
liability thereunder to the full amount thereof, notwithstanding any recovery
thereon. If at any time, in the judgment of the Commissioner, the policy is not
sufficient for any cause, the Commissioner may require the owner of such public
hack to replace such policy with another approved by the Commissioner and the
Director of Law;
   (c)   A self-insured retention plan that is equivalent or better, in the
judgment of the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses, than the insurance
described in this section may be accepted by the Commissioner in lieu of a
policy or certificate of insurance.
(Ord. No. 599-11. Passed 6-6-11, eff. 6-13-11)
§ 443.07 Liability Agreement – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1820-06, § 3. Passed 12-11-06, eff. 12-14-06)
§ 443.08 Licensee to File Monthly Statement of Claims and Judgments
   Every licensee shall furnish to the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses
not later than the third day of each month a full and complete statement of
claims filed and judgments rendered against such licensee arising out of the
operation of public hacks or vehicles, which statement shall be in such form as
the Commissioner prescribes. Failure to comply with the requirements of this
section shall be a violation of this section and cause for license suspension
or revocation.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 443.09 License Card
   If a public hack is found upon inspection to be of lawful construction, and
in proper condition, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and the
rules and regulations established thereunder, and upon the payment of the
license fees, the same shall be licensed by delivering to the owner a card of
such size and form as may be prescribed by the Commissioner of Assessments and
Licenses. The card shall contain the official license number of the hack,
together with the date of inspection of the same, and a statement to the effect
that, in case of any complaints, the Commissioner shall be notified giving the
license number of the hack. Such card shall be signed by the Commissioner, and
shall contain blank spaces upon which an entry shall be made of the date of
every inspection of the vehicle by the inspector. The license card shall be of
a distinctly different color each year, and, in case of public hacks driven by
mechanical power, the license number assigned thereunder shall in each case, be
the same as that assigned to the vehicle for that year, pursuant to law. There
shall also be printed upon such card the license number of such vehicle, which
shall be conspicuously displayed within the hack as prescribed by the
Commissioner.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 443.10 Fees for Licensing Vehicles
   (a)   The following annual license fees shall be paid:
 
For each taxicab                                           $75.00
For each coach (capable of carrying 9 or less passengers)  $75.00
For each coach (capable of carrying 10 or more passengers) $150.00
 
   (b)   For licenses issued on or after October 1 in each year, only one-half
(1/2) of the above fees shall be paid.
(Ord. No. 2393-02. Passed 2-3-03, eff. 2-3-03)
§ 443.11 Inspection Time and Reports; Fee
   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses shall maintain constant
vigilance over all public hacks, to see that they are kept in a condition of
continued fitness for public use. To this end, the Commissioner, through his or
her inspectors, shall periodically inspect all public hacks, or on the
complaint of any citizen, as often as may be necessary. The Commissioner is
authorized to set any number of mandatory inspections at such times and places
as determined by the Commissioner for purposes of inspection. Failure to submit
to a required inspection shall result in the revocation of license. The
Commissioner is authorized to set the standards of any inspection conducted
under this chapter. Copies of such standards shall be made available seven (7)
days before the inspection, and upon request. The Commissioner is authorized to
charge and collect an inspection fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) per hour, or any
portion thereof, for any inspection performed under this section. Reports in
writing of all inspections shall promptly be made to the Commissioner.
(Ord. No. 598-13. Passed 5-20-13, eff. 5-23-13)
§ 443.12 License Suspension or Revocation
   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses upon his or her own initiative
may, and upon recommendation of the Chief of Police shall revoke or suspend any
license granted under this chapter if the vehicle is used for immoral or
illegal purposes or if the vehicle is not in good condition and appearance,
clean and safe. Licenses revoked for the reason that the vehicle has been used
for immoral or illegal business or purpose shall not be reissued again.
Licenses revoked because of the condition and appearance of the vehicle shall
not be reissued until the vehicle and its appearance are put in fit condition
for use by the public.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 443.13 Drivers’ Licenses; Application
   Every person driving a public hack, shall be licensed as such. Each
applicant for a driver’s license shall:
   (a)   Be eighteen (18) years of age or over, an American citizen, or have
declared his or her intention to become such a citizen, and a bona fide
resident of Cuyahoga County for thirty (30) days next preceding the date of
such application;
   (b)   Present a certificate from a qualified physician that he or she is
sound physically and mentally, has good eyesight, and that he or she suffers
from no other infirmity of body and mind, which might render him or her unfit
for the safe operation of a public vehicle;
   (c)   Be able to read and write the English language;
   (d)   Be clean in dress and person, and not be addicted to the use of
intoxicating liquors or drugs;
   (e)   Produce, on forms to be provided by the Commissioner of Assessments
and Licenses, two (2) character references of persons not related to applicant;
   (f)   Fill out, upon a blank form to be provided by the Commissioner, a
statement giving his or her full name, residence, places of residence for five
(5) years previous to moving to his or her present address, age, color, height,
color of eyes and hair, place of birth, length of time he or she has resided in
the City, whether a citizen of the United States, places of previous
employment, whether married or single, whether he or she has ever been arrested
or convicted of a felony or misdemeanor, whether he or she has been summoned to
court, whether he or she has previously been licensed as a driver or chauffeur,
and if so, whether his or her license has ever been revoked, and for what
cause, which statement shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant, and filed
with the Commissioner, as a permanent record. Any false statement made by the
applicant for a license shall be promptly reported by the Commissioner to the
prosecuting attorney of Cuyahoga County. The Commissioner is hereby authorized
and empowered to establish such additional rules and regulations, covering the
issuance of drivers’ licenses, not inconsistent herewith, as may be necessary
and reasonable.
(Ord. No. 1828-77. Passed 6-8-78, eff. 6-12-78)
§ 443.131 Convictions Which Bar Issuance of Driver’s License
   No driver's license shall be issued if the applicant has been convicted of
any of the following offenses:
   (a)   Manslaughter, or negligent homicide, resulting from the operating of a
motor vehicle;
   (b)   Driving a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating
liquors or drugs. Any conviction under this subsection shall not be a bar to
the issuance of a license if the conviction occurred more than five (5) years
prior to the date of application; or upon a recommendation of the Commissioner
more than three (3) years from the date of application for a license;
   (c)   Any felony in the commission of which a motor vehicle was used;
   (d)   Failure to stop and render aid as required under the laws of this
State, or leaving the scene of an accident as specified by the laws of this
State;
   (e)   Perjury or false swearing in making any statement under oath in
connection with his or her application for driver's license;
   (f)   Conviction, or forfeiture of bail, not vacated, upon three (3) charges
of a violation of the motor vehicle laws of this state that are classified or
determined by the Commissioner to be moving violations, within the most recent
twelve (12) month period;
   (g)   Conviction of the violation of any law involving violence, theft or
any form of stealing, or any crime involving moral turpitude that is reasonably
related to the license referred to herein, within five (5) years preceding the
filing of the application for such license;
   (h)   Repeated violations of the City ordinances, which affect the safety of
human life or limb on the streets of the City;
   (i)   Possession by a taxicab operator within his or her taxicab of opened
or unopened beer, whiskey or wine, or of drugs or other stimulants not
specifically prescribed for him or her by a medical doctor for his or her
private use, or of gambling equipment or paraphernalia, stolen goods or any
contraband property of any kind.
(Ord. No. 598-13. Passed 5-20-13, eff. 5-23-13)
§ 443.14 Examination of Drivers
   (a)   Each applicant for a driver's license under the provisions of this
chapter shall be examined by a person designated by the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses as to his or her knowledge of the provisions of this
chapter, the City Traffic Code, and the geography of the City. Each applicant
must, if required by the Commissioner, demonstrate his or her skill and ability
to safety handle his or her vehicle, by driving it through a crowded section of
the City, accompanied by a City inspector. If the result of any examination is
unsatisfactory, the applicant shall be refused a license.
   (b)   The Commissioner is authorized to require an applicant subject to an
unsatisfactory examination in division (a) of this section to attend remedial
driver education courses approved by the Commissioner before such applicant may
again apply for a license.
   (c)   The Commissioner is authorized to develop and implement a continuing
education program and require the attendance of drivers and owners as a
condition of licensure. Program requirements developed under this section shall
be promulgated by regulation and published in the City Record. Notice of
attendance requirements to drivers and owners shall be served by United States
mail, first class, to the address of record for the licensee.
(Ord. No. 598-13. Passed 5-20-13, eff. 5-23-13)
§ 443.15 Driver’s Photograph and Fingerprints – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1510-2019. Passed 12-2-19, eff. 12-4-19)
§ 443.16 Form and Terms of Drivers’ Licenses
   Upon satisfactory fulfillment of the foregoing requirements, there shall be
issued to the applicant a license, which shall be in such form as to contain
the photograph and name of the licensee. Any licensee who defaces, removes or
obliterates any official entry made upon his or her license, shall be punished
by revocation of his or her license. Drivers’ licenses shall be issued as of
December 1 in each and every year, and shall be valid to and including November
30 next succeeding, unless previously revoked.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 443.17 Temporary Permit Issuance; Term; Fee
   Except when an extraordinary public emergency arises affecting
transportation of the public upon the streets within the City, such temporary
permits when issued shall be upon such terms and conditions as the Commissioner
of Assessments and Licenses shall provide, but such temporary permit shall in
no event be granted for a longer period than fifteen (15) days, and may be
renewable for similar periods, as necessary, only upon the written
recommendation of the Commissioner made to Council, and approved by it.
   The fee for such temporary permit shall be sixty dollars ($60.00) for the
driver and seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for the hack or vehicle.
(Ord. No. 598-13. Passed 5-20-13, eff. 5-23-13)
§ 443.18 Driver’s License Certificate
   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses shall issue a license
certificate bearing the photograph of the licensee, to each person licensed as
the driver of a public hack. Such license certificate must, under penalty of
suspension or revocation of the license, be conspicuously displayed at all
times in the vehicle operated by such licensee and in the manner required by
the Commissioner. The certificate shall be of such form and design as the
Commissioner prescribes.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 443.19 Renewal of Drivers’ Licenses
   All renewals of drivers’ licenses shall be in accordance with the procedure
prescribed by the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses.
   No driver’s license shall be renewed under this chapter unless the applicant
has first paid all parking infraction judgments and default judgments and all
notices of liability under Section
413.031 for red light or speeding violations, provided that the notices of
liability under Section
413.031 are not on appeal, that are owed by applicant.
(Ord. No. 645-06, § 2. Passed 6-12-06, eff. 6-16-06)
§ 443.20 Fee for Drivers’ Licenses
   A license fee of sixty dollars ($60.00) shall be paid for a driver's
license, and for renewals.
(Ord. No. 598-13. Passed 5-20-13, eff. 5-23-13)
§ 443.21 Suspension or Revocation of Driver’s License
   A driver’s license may be suspended or revoked at any time by the
Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses upon his or her own initiative or upon
the recommendation of the Chief of Police. Before suspending or revoking such
license the Commissioner shall afford the licensee the opportunity of a hearing
upon the charges. The licensee may appeal from such order in the manner
provided by Section
403.09. A second suspension for the same reason or, in any case a third
suspension of a driver’s license shall operate as a revocation of such license.
No driver whose license has been revoked shall again be licensed as a public
hack driver in the City unless upon the presentation of reasons satisfactory to
the Commissioner. The Commissioner shall notify the Police Division of all
suspensions or revocations of drivers’ licenses.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 443.22 Record of Drivers’ Licenses
   There shall be kept in the office of the Commissioner of Assessments and
Licenses a complete record of each license issued to a driver, and of all
renewals, suspensions and revocations thereof, which record shall be kept on
file with the original application of the driver for a license.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 443.23 Use of Taxicab Stands and Call Stations
   (a)   Only public hacks shall remain at the taxicab stand while waiting for
employment and only in single file pointed in accordance with the traffic
regulations. No public hack shall refuse to carry any orderly person applying
for a hack who agrees to pay the right rate of fare, but any orderly person may
select any hack at the stand whether it is at the head of the line or not. As
the hack leaves the line with passengers those behind shall move up, and any
public hack seeking a place on the stand shall approach the same only from the
rear of the stand and shall stop as near as possible to the last cab already on
the line. No public hack shall stand within five (5) feet of any crosswalk.
   (b)   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses may establish call
stations at locations which have been surveyed and approved by the Commissioner
of Traffic Engineering and Parking with respect to operation without
unreasonable interference to traffic.
   The permit of a call station shall specify the company or individual
operating the same, and allow the driver employed by them to stop at and call
up from such station for the purpose of answering or receiving orders. Not more
than two (2) public hacks shall be parked at the designated point at the same
time. The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses shall maintain a list of
call stations and their locations, and regulate their operation by issuance of
such regulations as will become necessary.
   (c)   No public hack shall occupy a public stand unless a permit has been
issued by the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses. Application for permits
to occupy a public stand shall be made in writing to the Commissioner by the
owner of public hack. The form of the application shall be prescribed by the
Commissioner. No vehicle other than a licensed public hack shall stop on any
public stand or call station, except while receiving or discharging passengers.
   (d)   The Commissioner of Traffic Engineering and Parking shall designate
public stands by permanent signs set at the curb boundaries, which signs shall
bear the legend that it is a stand reserved for public licensees only. The
Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses shall suspend or revoke the license of
any public hack driver who stands in front of the entrance of any building,
within the prohibited space, after his or her passengers desiring to leave the
cab have alighted, or who attempts to stand in such prohibited space waiting
for passengers, or who violates any of the other provisions of this section.
(Ord. No. 1510-2019. Passed 12-2-19, eff. 12-4-19)
§ 443.24 Marking Taxicab Stands
   The Commissioner of Traffic Engineering and Parking shall mark all taxicab
stands in such manner as he or she determines necessary in order to advise the
public of the restricted use of such area for taxicab stand purposes.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 443.25 Taximeters
   (a)   When Required. Every public hack driven by mechanical power, seating
four (4) passengers or less, shall have affixed thereto a taximeter of a size
and design approved by the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses.
   (b)   Inspection. No licenses shall be issued to a public hack until the
taximeter attached thereto has been inspected and found to be accurate.
   (c)   Inaccuracy. No person shall use or permit to be used upon any public
hack a taximeter which is in such condition as to be over five percent (5%)
incorrect, to the prejudice of any passenger.
   (d)   Wheel Operated Prohibited. No taximeter affixed to a public hack,
propelled by steam or gasoline, electricity or other motive power, shall be
operated from any wheel to which the power is applied.
   (e)   Illumination of Dial. After sundown the face of every taximeter shall
be illuminated by a suitable light, so arranged as to throw a continuous steady
light thereon.
   (f)   Case to Be Sealed. No person shall use or permit to be used, or drive
for hire, a public hack equipped with a taximeter, the case of which is
unsealed, and not having its cover and gear intact.
   (g)   False Signal. No driver of a public hack equipped with a taximeter or
other similar device, while carrying passengers, or under employment, shall
display the signal affixed to such taximeter or other similar device, in such
position as to denote such vehicle is not employed, or in such position as to
denote that he or she is employed at a rate of fare different from that to
which he or she is entitled under the provisions of this chapter.
   (h)   Unapproved Taximeter. No person shall drive a public hack to which is
attached a taximeter that has not been duly inspected and approved.
   (i)   Violations. A violation of any of the provisions of this section shall
render the offender liable to any penalty imposed in addition to license
suspension or revocation.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 443.26 Rates of Fare; Receipts
   (a)   Except as provided in division (f) of this section, the maximum rates
of fare for gasoline fueled or propane fueled taxicabs, including sales tax,
shall be as follows:
      (1)   For the first one-eighth (1/8) mile or fraction thereof, two
dollars and seventy-five cents ($2.75).
      (2)   For each additional one-eighth (1/8) mile or fraction thereof,
twenty-eight cents ($0.28).
   (b)   Waiting Time or Traffic Delay Charge. The rate for waiting or traffic
delay shall be eighteen dollars ($18.00) per hour except for coaches hired at
the hourly rate.
   (c)   Charge for More than Four (4) Passengers. The rate for carrying more
than four (4) passengers shall be an additional one dollar ($1.00) per person
for each passenger over twelve (12) years of age.
   (d)   Hourly Rate. On request of passengers, public hacks may accept
employment where the fare may be computed on an hourly rental. When a public
hack is so employed, the fare to be charged shall be computed from the time of
leaving the nearest station of the owner to the time of returning to the
nearest station from the point of dismissal.
   (e)   Receipt to Be Given. On request of a passenger, the owner, driver,
chauffeur or other person in charge or control of a public hack shall provide a
receipt to the person paying for the hire of the same at the time of payment.
The form of the receipt shall be prescribed and approved by the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses, and shall contain in legible type or writing, the
name of the owner, the City license number, the driver's City license number
and other items for which a charge is made, the total amount paid, and the date
of payment.
   (f)   Rates of Fare from Cleveland Hopkins International Airport. The
following maximum rates of fare apply to gasoline fueled, compressed natural
gas or propane fueled taxicabs which are transporting passengers from Cleveland
Hopkins International Airport to another location. These rates of fare include
metered rates, taxicab operating cost recovery, fuel surcharges and
depreciation, sales tax, and applicable fees, and shall be as follows:
      (1)   Rates from the Airport are as follows:
         A.   0 to 5 miles: $13.50
         B.   6 to 10 miles: $24.50
         C.   11 to 15 miles: $34.50
         D.   16 to 20 miles: $45.50
         E.   21 to 25 miles: $56.50
         F.   26 to 30 miles: $67.50
         G.   31 to 35 miles: $77.50
         H.   36 to 40 miles: $88.50
         I.   41 miles: $99.50, plus an additional $2.00 for each mile over 41
miles up to 55
         J.   56 miles: $132.25, plus an additional $2.00 for each mile over 56
miles up to 70
         K.   71 miles: $165.00, plus an additional $2.00 for each mile over 71
miles up to 85
         L.   86 miles: $197.75, plus an additional $2.00 for each mile over 86
miles up to 100
         M.   101 miles: $230.50, plus an additional $2.00 for each mile over
101 miles up to 115
         N.   116 miles: $263.25, plus an additional $2.00 for each mile over
116 miles up to 130
         O.   131 miles: $296.00, plus an additional $2.00 for each mile over
131 miles up to 145
         P.   146 miles: $328.75, plus an additional $2.00 for each mile over
146 miles up to 160
         Q.   161 miles: $361.50, plus an additional $2.00 for each mile over
161 miles up to 175
         R.   176 miles: $394.25, plus an additional $2.00 for each mile over
176 miles up to 190
         S.   191 miles: $427.00, plus an additional $2.00 for each mile over
191 miles up to 199
         T.   200 miles and over: $4.00 per mile
      (2)   Effective April 1, 2016, the rates from the Airport are as follows:
         A.   0 to 5 miles: $15.00
         B.   6 to 10 miles: $26.00
         C.   11 to 15 miles: $36.00
         D.   16 to 20 miles: $47.00
         E.   21 to 25 miles: $58.00
         F.   26 to 30 miles: $69.00
         G.   31 to 35 miles: $79.00
         H.   36 to 40 miles: $90.00
         I.   41 miles: $101.00, plus an additional $2.00 for each mile over 41
miles up to 55
         J.   56 miles: $133.75, plus an additional $2.00 for each mile over 56
miles up to 70
         K.   71 miles: $166.50, plus an additional $2.00 for each mile over 71
miles up to 85
         L.   86 miles: $199.25, plus an additional $2.00 for each mile over 86
miles up to 100
         M.   101 miles: $232.00, plus an additional $2.00 for each mile over
101 miles up to 115
         N.   116 miles: $264.75, plus an additional $2.00 for each mile over
116 miles up to 130
         O.   131 miles: $297.50, plus an additional $2.00 for each mile over
131 miles up to 145
         P.   146 miles: $330.25, plus an additional $2.00 for each mile over
146 miles up to 160
         Q.   161 miles: $363.00, plus an additional $2.00 for each mile over
161 miles up to 175
         R.   176 miles: $395.75, plus an additional $2.00 for each mile over
176 miles up to 190
         S.   191 miles: $428.50, plus an additional $2.00 for each mile over
191 miles up to 199
         T.   200 miles and over: $4.00 per mile
(Ord. No. 1599-12. Passed 3-25-13, eff. 3-28-13)
§ 443.261 Rates of Fare Adjustment Due to Cost of Gasoline
   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses shall review the average price
per gallon for regular unleaded gasoline prices listed by the Automobile
Association of America’s State-by-State Fuel Price Average for the Cleveland-
Lorain-Elyria Metro Area on the first Monday of May and the first Monday of
November of each calendar year and shall adjust the rates of fare as set forth
in Section
443.26 of this chapter as follows:
   (a)   If the average price per gallon is equal to or greater than three
dollars ($3.00) per gallon on both the date of review and one (1) month prior
to the date of review, the Commissioner shall authorize an increase of one
dollar ($1.00) to the rates of fare set forth in Section
443.26 of this chapter. Such increase shall be published in the City Record and
take effect thirty (30) days thereafter. No further increases shall be
authorized until all prior increases issued under this division have been
repealed under division (b) of this section.
   (b)   If the average price per gallon is less than three dollars ($3.00) per
gallon on both the date of review and one (1) month prior to the date of
review, the Commissioner shall repeal any increase in effect and the rates of
fare shall remain as set forth in Section
443.26 of this chapter until such rates may be subsequently increased under
division (a) of this section. Any revocation issued under this division (b)
shall be published in the City Record and become effective thirty (30) days
thereafter.
   (c)   Each change in the fare amount shall be applied to the meter. A
representative of the Bureau of Weights and Measures will remove the current
security seal affixed to each meter prior to the fare being changed on the
meter.
(Ord. No. 1796-08. Passed 3-23-09, eff. 3-25-09)
   Note: Former Section
443.261, relating to drivers’ expenses being capped and reporting, expired on
December 31, 2003 and is no longer in effect.
§ 443.27 Prepayment of Fare
   Every driver of a public hack shall have the right to demand payment of the
legal fare in advance, and may refuse employment unless so prepaid, but no
driver of a public hack shall, otherwise, refuse or neglect to convey any
orderly person upon request, anywhere in the City, unless previously engaged.
No driver of a licensed hack shall carry any person other than the passenger
first employing a hack, without the express consent of such passenger.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 443.28 Disputed Fares
   All disputes as to the lawful rate of fare shall be determined by the police
officer nearest to where the dispute takes place. Failure to comply with such
determination shall subject the offending party to a charge of disorderly
conduct.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 443.281 Service to be Rendered on Demand
   It shall be the duty of every driver of an unengaged taxicab, upon request,
to transport any orderly person between any two (2) points within the City.
Should it be shown at any time to the satisfaction of the Commissioner that a
driver has failed to comply with the requirements of this section, the
Commissioner may, after hearing, revoke the license of such driver.
(Ord. No. 1828-77. Passed 6-8-78, eff. 6-12-78)
§ 443.282 Response to Service Requests
   Requests for public hack service shall be responded to within a reasonable
time.
(Ord. No. 1828-77. Passed 6-8-78, eff. 6-12-78)
§ 443.29 Cruising or Soliciting
   No public hack, while soliciting employment, shall stand on any public
street or place other than at or upon a public hack stand, designated or
established in accordance with this chapter; nor shall any driver of such hack
seek employment by repeatedly and persistently driving his or her hack to and
fro in a short space before, or by otherwise interfering with the proper and
orderly access to or egress from any theater, hall, hotel, public resort,
railway or boat landings, or other place of public gatherings. No person shall
solicit passengers for public hacks, except the driver of a public hack, when
sitting upon the driver’s seat of such vehicle, except that at special points
designated by the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses not more than two
(2) agents may be employed to solicit business on the street. No persons shall
be permitted to ride in the front seat of a taxicab with the driver, unless the
rear compartment is occupied, and any driver who shall permit this may be
deprived of his or her license. All police officers and inspectors of licenses
shall notify the Commissioner of any violation of this provision.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 443.30 Loitering Near Public Hack Prohibited
   No person shall loiter within a distance nearer than twenty (20) feet of any
public hack occupying space on a public hack stand.
   The driver of any public hack shall remain on the driver’s seat, or inside
of his or her hack at all times when such hack is standing upon the public
stands or when actually engaged in carrying passengers, provided that nothing
in this section shall be held to prohibit such driver from alighting to the
street for the purpose of assisting passengers into or out of such vehicle, or
take care of the calls of nature while upon a public stand, limiting his or her
absence from such stand to fifteen (15) minutes, during which time his or her
hack shall occupy a position at the rear end of such stand.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 443.31 Fraud in Obtaining License
   No person shall give fictitious information or practice any fraud,
misrepresentation or subterfuge in order to secure any license provided for by
this chapter.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 443.32 Unlicensed Driver
   No person, firm or corporation operating public hacks shall employ as a
driver on such public hacks any person other than a driver duly licensed under
the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 443.321 Waybills
   No company or driver shall:
   (a)   Fail to maintain, for a period of one (1) year, a written record of
each trip made by such company or driver, which record shall include the time
and date such passenger is picked up, the destination, time of arrival at such
destination, the amount of fare collected for each trip and such other
information as may be required by the Director.
   (b)   Fail to deliver to the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses any
waybill demanded by him or her.
(Ord. No. 1828-77. Passed 6-8-78, eff. 6-12-78)
§ 443.33 Exceptions
   Nothing in this chapter shall apply to motor vehicles used exclusively for
service at weddings, christenings or funerals.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 443.34 Violations by Owners
   Any owner or driver of a vehicle, not licensed in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, or of a vehicle, the license of which has been
suspended or revoked, who engages in the business of a public hack as defined
herein or attempts to engage in such business, or solicits for hire passengers
upon the streets shall be guilty of a violation of this section.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 443.35 Violations by Drivers
   Any person, not having been duly licensed as a public hack driver, or any
person whose license as such driver has been revoked or any person whose
license has been suspended, and who, during the time of such suspension, drives
for hire a public hack upon the streets, shall be guilty of a violation of this
section.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 443.36 Suspension or Revocation of License
   In addition to any penalty imposed, any licensee shall be subject to the
suspension or revocation of his or her license upon conviction for any
violation of this chapter or upon conviction of any offense set forth in
Section
443.131. The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses may in his or her
discretion and shall upon the recommendation of the Chief of Police suspend or
revoke a license granted under any provision of this chapter, pending or in
advance of the criminal prosecution of the licensee for any offense set forth
in Section
443.131. In case of the refusal to issue a license or the revocation of a
license by the Commissioner the applicant or licensee may appeal from such
order in the manner provided by Section
403.09.
(Ord. No. 1828-77. Passed 6-8-78, eff. 6-12-78)
§ 443.37 Taxicab Passenger Bill of Rights
   (a)   No owner or driver shall operate or permit to be operated his or her
taxicab unless a Taxicab Passenger Bill of Rights, rate card, and other
information required to be posted by regulations are securely affixed to the
rear passenger windows of every taxicab in operation. The Taxicab Passenger
Bill of Rights shall be in a form provided by the Commissioner, which form
shall state that all taxicab passengers have a right to:
      (1)   Ride with a driver, who:
         A.   is well-groomed and appropriately dressed;
         B.   is courteous;
         C.   speaks English;
         D.   is knowledgeable about the metropolitan area;
         E.   obeys all traffic laws;
         F.   does not use a cell phone for calls and/or texting while driving,
including hand-held or hands-free devices;
      (2)   Ride in a safe, clean, and well-maintained taxi that has:
         A.   working air conditioning and heat, as appropriate;
         B.   clean cabin air that is smoke and chemical free;
         C.   reasonable silence;
         D.   working seatbelts for all passengers;
         E.   a clean cabin, exterior, and trunk;
      (3)   Take the most direct or shortest route to your destination, or to
direct the route of your choice;
      (4)   Receive a receipt with information identifying the taxicab;
      (5)   Pay for your ride with a credit/debit card;
      (6)   Be accompanied by a service animal; and
      (7)   Eliminate or reduce your tip for poor service.
   (b)   The Taxicab Passenger Bill of Rights shall display in plain view of
every passenger the phone number for registering complaints.
   (c)   A driver or owner who fails to display a Taxicab Passenger Bill of
Rights as set forth in this section shall be fined one hundred dollars
($100.00) for each such failure to display said Taxicab Passenger Bill of
Rights.
(Ord. No. 598-13. Passed 5-20-13, eff. 5-23-13)
§ 443.38 Fines for Violating Rules and Regulations
   (a)   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses shall have the authority
to set and assess fines to taxicab owners, taxicab drivers, and/or and taxicab
companies for violations of the Rules and Regulations governing their conduct
as published in the City Record.
   (b)   The authority to assess fines under this section does not limit or
affect any criminal offense, or the authority of the Commissioner to suspend or
revoke a license under Section
443.36, or any other means of enforcement of this chapter provided for in these
Codified Ordinances.
   (c)   Any fine levied under division (a) of this section, or a regulation
promulgated thereunder, for a conviction of a non-moving violation of the
traffic laws of this State, or any political subdivision thereof, shall result
in a fine issued exclusively to the taxicab owner. For purposes of this
division, a taxicab owner is the person holding legal title to the motor
vehicle used as a taxicab, regardless of any lease or other contract governing
to possession and use of such vehicle for use as a taxicab.
(Ord. No. 598-13. Passed 5-20-13, eff. 5-23-13)
§ 443.99 Penalties
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter, or any regulation lawfully
adopted pursuant thereto, is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a first offense;
on a second offense within one (1) year after the first offense, such person is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on each subsequent offense within
one (1) year after the first offense such person is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the third degree. In addition to any other method of enforcement provided for
in this chapter, any violation of the provisions of this chapter which is a
minor misdemeanor may be enforced by the issuance of a citation in compliance
with Rule 4.1 of the Ohio Rules of Criminal Procedure.
(Ord. No. 598-13. Passed 5-20-13, eff. 5-23-13)
CHAPTER 445 – SIGHT-SEEING CARS
445.01   License Required
445.02   Inspection
445.03   Liability Insurance
445.04   License Card
445.05   Fees for Sight-Seeing Cars
445.06   Driver’s License
445.07   Fees for Driver’s License
445.08   Regulation of Sight-Seeing Cars
445.09   Specially Chartered Sight-Seeing Cars
445.10   License Suspension or Revocation; Appeal
Cross-reference:
   Appeal from license denial, suspension or revocation, CO
403.09
   Sight-seeing car defined, CO
401.55
§ 445.01 License Required
   No sight-seeing car shall operate for hire or reward upon the streets of the
City without obtaining a license from the Commissioner of Assessments and
Licenses. Such license shall be issued for the calendar year and shall expire
on December 31 of each year, unless sooner suspended or revoked by the
Commissioner.
   Application for a license for sight-seeing cars shall be made by the owner
upon blank forms furnished by the Commissioner, and shall contain the full name
and address of the owner, the type of vehicle for which a license is desired,
the number of persons it is capable of carrying, and the motor power thereof,
together with a certificate of liability insurance required under the
provisions of Section
445.03.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 445.02 Inspection
   No vehicle shall be licensed until the same has been thoroughly and
carefully inspected, examined and found to be in a thoroughly safe condition
for the transportation of passengers, clean, fit, of good appearance and well
painted or varnished. Such inspection shall be made by the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses or through his or her inspectors before issuing such
license, and he or she may make such additional inspections as in his or her
judgment are necessary. The Commissioner shall refuse a license to, or revoke
or suspend the license of any vehicle found by him or her to be unfit or
unsuited for public patronage. The Commissioner is hereby authorized and
empowered to establish reasonable rules and regulations for the inspection and
operation of sight-seeing cars, their appurtenances, construction and
conditional fitness.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 445.03 Liability Insurance
   No person shall operate a sight-seeing car or other vehicle as defined in
this chapter or permit such to be operated; nor shall any license be issued
hereunder until and unless the applicant for a license hereunder deposits with
the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses a policy or certificate of
liability insurance for each sight-seeing car for which a license is sought,
acceptable and approved by the Director of Law, indemnifying the applicant in
the sum of at least ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for injury to one (1)
person and twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) for more than one (1) person,
and five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) property damage in any one (1) accident,
through the operation of the sight-seeing car of the applicant. The policy
shall further contain a clause obligating the surety company to give ten (10)
days’ written notice before cancellation of the policy to the Commissioner, the
license to expire upon the lapse or termination of the policy of insurance.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 445.04 License Card
   Any sight-seeing car which has been found upon inspection to be of lawful
construction and proper condition in accordance with this chapter and rules and
regulations established thereunder and upon the payment of the license fees
hereinafter set forth shall be licensed by delivering to the owner a card of
such size and form as may be prescribed by the Commissioner of Assessments and
licenses. The card shall contain an official license number together with date
of inspection of such vehicle and the statement that in case of any complaints
the Commissioner shall be notified. Such card shall be signed by the
Commissioner and contain blank spaces upon which entry shall be made of the
date of every inspection. The number of such card shall correspond with the
license number of such vehicle, and shall be displayed conspicuously in the
sight-seeing car as prescribed by the Commissioner.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 445.05 Fees for Sight-Seeing Cars
   The following license fee shall be paid in advance for each vehicle license:
 
Vehicle Capacity Fee
12 or less       $100.00
13 to 20         $150.00
over 20          $200.00
 
   Any licensee upon payment of any of the above fees, shall be entitled to
operate as sight-seeing cars during such year additional vehicles for which
hack or motor bus licenses have been issued and are in effect or which are
otherwise licensed for the transportation of persons for hire in the City of
Cleveland, upon payment of an additional annual fee of five dollars ($5.00) for
each such vehicle; provided the Director of Law is satisfied that the public
liability insurance on such vehicle covers or is made to include the operation
thereof for sight-seeing purposes.
   Upon a finding by the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses that an
extraordinary demand upon any special occasion requires the use of more sight-
seeing vehicles by any person, firm or corporation to whom there has been
issued one (1) or more sight-seeing licenses for the calendar year, he or she
may issue special permits for not to exceed twenty- four (24) hours upon the
payment of a fee of one dollar ($1.00) each for the use of vehicles which are
duly licensed for the transportation of persons for hire and which carry public
liability insurance satisfactory to the Director of Law. No transfer of a
license shall be permitted except with the consent of the Commissioner, which
consent shall be endorsed on the original license. The Commissioner shall
permit a transfer only when it appears that one (1) of the cars owned and
operated by the licensee is retired, destroyed, demolished or otherwise
rendered unfit for service.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 445.06 Driver’s License
   Every person driving a sight-seeing car shall be licensed as a motor bus
operator and each applicant for such license must:
   (a)   Be eighteen (18) years of age or over;
   (b)   Be of sound physique, good eyesight and not subject to epilepsy, heart
trouble, vertigo or any infirmity of body or mind which might render him or her
unfit for the safe operation of a sight-seeing car;
   (c)   Be able to read and write the English language;
   (d)   Be clean in dress and person and not addicted to use of intoxicating
liquors or drugs;
   (e)   Produce on forms furnished by the Commissioner of Assessments and
Licenses the names of two (2) character references of persons not related to
the applicant and such other information as the Commissioner may require. The
form shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant and filed with the
Commissioner as a permanent record. The Commissioner is hereby authorized and
empowered to establish such additional rules and regulations covering the
issuance of an operator’s license not inconsistent herewith as may be
reasonable and necessary.
(Ord. No. 687-85. Passed 4-15-85, eff. 4-17-85)
§ 445.07 Fees for Driver’s License
   A fee of ten dollars ($10.00) each shall be paid annually in advance for a
motor bus operator’s license or renewal.
(Ord. No. 2393-02. Passed 2-3-03, eff. 2-3-03)
§ 445.08 Regulation of Sight-Seeing Cars
   (a)   The use of sight-seeing cars shall be limited to sight-seeing
purposes. The transportation for sight- seeing purposes afforded thereby shall
not be subject to the direction or control of passengers. Sight-seeing cars
shall not be used to carry passengers or property for hire to or from any
railroad station, airport, steamboat landing or dock, except as incident to
sight-seeing trips, nor shall they be used in any manner which will compete
with transportation services rendered or designed to be rendered by public
hacks, motor buses, or other agencies of mass or public transportation.
   (b)   A schedule of rates charged for a trip by a sight-seeing car, the
route traversed, the time consumed and the time of departure shall be
prominently displayed at the starting point of the sight-seeing car and upon a
sign attached to the front of the sight-seeing car before the trip starts. The
sign may also be displayed on the sidewalk in such manner as the Director of
Public Service determines. The sign shall display the prices of the trip in
letters or figures at least four (4) inches in height. A charge or an attempt
to charge any passenger a sum greater than set forth in such schedule shall be
deemed a violation of this section. A sight-seeing car, after leaving its
starting point, shall not receive additional passengers between such place of
starting and its ultimate destination point. The routes over which sight-seeing
cars may be operated shall be subject to the approval of the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses.
   (c)   Only sight-seeing cars in such numbers as provided herein shall remain
while awaiting employment, at the stand provided, and only in single file
headed in accordance with the traffic regulations, and shall take their turns
in rotation thereon as their license numbers indicate. At no time shall there
be more than two (2) cars of any one (1) owner upon such stands regardless of
whether it is a firm, person or corporation owned fully or in part or
controlled or under the direction of any other person, firm or corporation. The
Commissioner of Traffic Engineering and Parking shall determine the number and
location of the public stands, and shall establish such further regulations not
inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter as he or she deems necessary.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 445.09 Specially Chartered Sight-Seeing Cars
   The owner of a sight-seeing car licensed as provided in this chapter may
load or unload a group of passengers at such a point or points in the City as
may have been agreed upon in advance by the person, firm or corporation
chartering such sight-seeing car for any special or regular sight-seeing tour
subject to the approval of the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 445.10 License Suspension or Revocation; Appeal
   In addition to any penalty imposed and authorized by any section of this
chapter, any licensee shall be subject to the suspension or revocation of his
or her license upon conviction for any violation. The Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses may in his or her discretion, suspend or revoke a
license granted under any provision of this chapter, provided such licensee
shall have the right to appeal in the manner provided in Section
403.09.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
CHAPTER 447 – CARRIAGES
447.01   Definitions
447.02   Licenses Required
447.03   License Applications
447.04   Fees
447.05   Insurance
447.06   Route Map and Operations Schedule
447.07   License Issuance and Renewal
447.08   Regulations Governing Carriages and Carriage Businesses
447.09   Impounding of Horses
447.10   Suspension and Revocation of License; Appeal
447.99   Penalties
§ 447.01 Definitions
   (a)   "Carriage" means a horse-drawn or manually-or mechanically-driven
vehicle the owner or operator of which secures or accepts passengers for hire
on public streets or in public or quasi-public places, including, but not
limited to, horse-drawn carriages, pedal-propelled carriages, and pedicabs.
   (b)   "Carriage Operator" means the person in actual physical control of a
carriage.
   (c)   "Carriage Operator's Assistant" means the person required by division
(b) of Section
447.08 to assist the Carriage Operator with those duties which are ancillary to
the operation of the carriage.
   (d)   "Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses or
his or her designee.
   (e)   "Carriage Business" means the business of transporting persons for
hire by carriage.
   (f)   "For hire" has the same meaning as defined in Section
401.30.
   (g)   "Police Traffic Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Traffic
Control of the Division of Police.
(Ord. No. 481-13. Passed 4-29-13, eff. 5-1-13)
§ 447.02 Licenses Required
   (a)   No person shall operate any carriage upon the public rights of way of
the City without a carriage license and a carriage operator’s license, each
issued pursuant to Section
447.07.
   (b)   No person shall operate a carriage business in the City without a
carriage business license issued pursuant to Section
447.07.
   (c)   A carriage operator or business that operates, without charging the
public a fee, as part of a special event permitted under Section
133.07 that lasts less than three (3) consecutive days shall be exempt from the
license requirements of divisions (a) and (b) of this section but shall comply
with all other provisions in this chapter unless specifically exempted.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 447.03 License Applications
   (a)   The application for a carriage business license shall be made to the
Commissioner on forms to be prescribed by the Commissioner, and shall contain
the following information:
      (1)   The name and business address of the applicant, and if a
corporation or partnership, the name and address of any person owning directly
or indirectly five percent (5%) or more of the ownership interest in said
business;
      (2)   The number of carriages to be operated by the carriage business;
      (3)   A schedule of rates and charges to be made to passengers;
      (4)   A statement signed by the applicant that the applicant will operate
the carriage business strictly in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter and other applicable provisions of these Codified Ordinances;
      (5)   The route map and operations schedule described in Section
447.06;
      (6)   Such other information as the Commissioner may require.
   No carriage business license shall be issued to an owner of a carriage
business if the applicant has been convicted of a felony, or of a violation of
any law involving theft or any form of stealing, or of any crime involving
moral turpitude that is reasonably related to the business license referred to
herein, unless such conviction occurred more than five (5) years prior to the
application date. No carriage business license shall be issued to an owner of a
carriage business who makes a false statement in connection with an application
for a business license. No carriage business license shall be issued to a
business which will transport persons for hire in horse-drawn carriages until
an officer of the Cleveland Police Mounted Unit has inspected every horse that
will pull such carriages and has determined that each horse complies with the
requirements of division (n) of Section
447.08. After a carriage business license has been issued to a business which
transports persons for hire in horse-drawn carriages and a new horse is
acquired for such purpose, the licensee shall have the new horse inspected by
an officer of the Cleveland Police Mounted Unit to determine that the horse
complies with the requirements of division (n) of Section
447.08 prior to using the horse in the business.
   (b)   The application for a carriage license shall be made to the
Commissioner on forms to be prescribed by the Commissioner, and shall contain
the following information:
      (1)   The name and address of the carriage’s owner;
      (2)   The number of persons the carriage is capable of carrying; and
      (3)   Such other information as the Commissioner may require.
   (c)   No carriage other than a horse-drawn carriage shall be licensed until
the Commissioner has inspected the carriage and no horse-drawn carriage shall
be licensed until an officer of the Cleveland Police Mounted Unit has inspected
the carriage. Any such inspection shall determine that, consistent with the
standards set forth herein, the carriage is clean, sightly, and in such
condition as to be completely safe for the transporting of passengers. Only
those carriages which contain the following equipment may be licensed:
      (1)   On the rear of the carriage, brakes, brakelights, taillights, and
turn signals;
      (2)   On each side of the front of the carriage, lights that emit light
to the front and to the side, and that are visible from a distance of five
hundred (500) feet; and
      (3)   Attached to the rear of the vehicle, a “slow-moving vehicle” sign
approved by the State of Ohio.
   (d)   The application for a carriage operator’s license shall be made to the
Commissioner on forms to be prescribed by the Commissioner, and shall contain
the following:
      (1)   A statement signed by the applicant that the applicant is:
         A.   Licensed by the State of Ohio to operate a motor vehicle;
         B.   At least eighteen (18) years of age;
         C.   Able to speak, read, and write English:
         D.   Free of hearing, vision, and other problems that would render the
applicant unable to safely operate a horse-drawn vehicle; and
         E.   Free of drugs and alcohol addiction.
      (2)   The type or types of carriage the applicant will be driving;
      (3)   Written evidence, satisfactory to the Commissioner, of experience
in driving the type or types of carriage specified in division (d)(2) of this
section or of successful completion of a course in such driving, or both;
      (4)   Two (2) front face photographs of the applicant taken within thirty
(30) days of the date of the application. The photographs shall be two (2)
inches by two (2) inches in size;
      (5)   A list of all criminal or city ordinances violated, convictions,
forfeiture of bond and pleadings of nolo contendere on all charges, except
minor traffic violations, within the last five (5) years.
   (e)   Each applicant for a carriage operator’s license shall be examined by
a person designated by the Commissioner as to the applicant’s knowledge of the
City Traffic Code and geography of the City. If the result of the examination
is unsatisfactory, the applicant shall be refused a license.
   (f)   No carriage operator’s license shall be issued if the applicant has
been convicted of any of the following offenses:
      (1)   Manslaughter or negligent homicide resulting from the operation of
a motor vehicle;
      (2)   Driving a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating
liquors or drugs, unless such conviction occurred more than five (5) years
prior to the application date;
      (3)   Failure to stop and render aid as required by the laws of this
state, or leaving the scene of an accident contrary to the laws of this state,
unless such conviction occurred more than five (5) years prior to the
application date;
      (4)   Conviction of a felony, or of the violation of any law involving
violence, theft or any form of stealing, or of any crime involving moral
turpitude that is reasonably related to the license referred to herein, unless
such conviction occurred more than five (5) years prior to the application
date;
      (5)   Conviction, or forfeiture of bail, not vacated, upon three (3)
charges of a violation of the motor vehicle laws of this state within a period
of twelve (12) months;
      (6)   Repeated violations of the City ordinances which affect the safety
of human life or limb on the streets of the City.
   (g)   No carriage operator’s license shall be issued to an applicant who
makes a false statement in connection with an application for a carriage
operator’s license.
(Ord. No. 2459-A-91. Passed 12-14-92, eff. 12-18-92)
§ 447.04 Fees
   The following license fees shall be paid to the Commissioner when the
applications to which they apply are submitted:
   (a)   Carriage Business License.
 
Initial license fee $150.00
Annual renewal fee  $150.00
 
   (b)   Carriage License.
 
Initial license fee per vehicle $70.00
Annual renewal fee per vehicle  $70.00
 
   (c)   Carriage Operator’s License.
 
Initial license fee $10.00
Annual renewal fee  $10.00
 
(Ord. No. 2393-02. Passed 2-3-03, eff. 2-3-03)
§ 447.05 Insurance
   (a)   No person shall operate a carriage business or a carriage, nor shall
any carriage business or carriage license be issued until the applicant
deposits with the Commissioner a policy or certificate of liability insurance
for each carriage for which a license is sought, acceptable to and approved by
the Commissioner and the Director of Law, insuring the applicant against
property damage and personal injury liability in the following amounts: not
less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for injuries, including
accidental death, to any one (1) person, not less than one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) on account of one (1) occurrence involving injury to more than
one (1) person, and five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for property
damage. The license shall expire upon the lapse or termination of the policy of
insurance.
   (b)   The policy of insurance required by this section shall contain a
provision for continuing liability thereunder to the full amount thereof,
notwithstanding any recovery thereon. If at any time, in the judgment of the
Commissioner, the policy is not sufficient for any cause, the Commissioner may
require the policy to be replaced with another approved by the Commissioner and
the Director of Law.
(Ord. No. 599-11. Passed 6-6-11, eff. 6-13-11)
§ 447.06 Route Map and Operations Schedule
   (a)   A carriage business shall operate only upon routes and under schedules
which have been submitted to and approved by the Director of Public Works and
the Police Traffic Commissioner.
   (b)   The route map and operations schedule shall be filed with the
application for a carriage business license and shall contain the following:
      (1)   A map of the tour routes on which the business' carriages will
operate;
      (2)   The location of any curbside areas to be designated as zones for
pickup and discharge of passengers; and
      (3)   With respect to horse-drawn carriages, the location of the site or
sites to be used for off-street storage, stabling, and loading of carriages and
horses.
   (c)   The Director of Public Works and the Police Traffic Commissioner may
reject any route map and operations schedule, the implementation of which would
result in the unsafe use of public rights-of-way or an unreasonable impediment
to the orderly flow of traffic.
   (d)   The licensee may file with the Commissioner of Assessments and
Licenses additional routes from time to time, provided that they have first
been submitted to and approved by the Director of Public Works and the Police
Traffic Commissioner.
   (e)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit a licensee from
operating on special routes for special events, including without limitation
weddings, dinner-and-theater packages, concerts and other performances,
provided that the routes have first been submitted to and approved by the
Director of Public Works and the Police Traffic Commissioner.
   (f)   Upon receipt of an application, the Commissioner of Assessments and
Licenses shall notify the Council Member or Members in whose ward or wards a
carriage business intends to operate for their written recommendation of
approval. No license shall be issued until the expiration of thirty (30) days
from the date of the notice, unless the period of thirty (30) days is expressly
waived by the Council members in writing.
(Ord. No. 481-13. Passed 4-29-13, eff. 5-1-13)
§ 447.07 License Issuance and Renewal
   (a)   It is hereby determined that in order to prevent disruption of the use
of public rights-of-way within the Downtown Area by motor vehicles and
pedestrians, the number of carriage licenses shall at no time exceed thirty
(30), and no carriage business shall operate more than eight (8) carriages. The
carriage licenses shall be issued by the Commissioner on a first-come-first-
serve basis.
   (b)   Upon receipt of the application required by division (a) of Section
447.03, the fee required by division (a) of Section
447.04, and the insurance policy required by Section
447.05, the Commissioner shall issue a carriage business license which, unless
sooner revoked or suspended pursuant to Section
447.10, shall be valid for the period of one (1) year, commencing upon April 1
and ending upon March 31. The Commissioner shall issue to the licensee a number
of copies of the carriage business license equal to that number of carriages
for which the owner of the carriage business obtains licenses pursuant to
division (c) of this section.
   (c)   Subject to the provisions of division (a) of this section, upon
receipt of the application required by division (b) of Section
447.03 and the fee required by division (b) of Section
447.04, and upon a satisfactory conclusion to the inspection required by
division (c) of Section
447.03, the Commissioner shall issue a carriage license which, unless sooner
revoked or suspended pursuant to Section
447.10, shall be valid for the period of one (1) year, commencing April 1 and
ending upon March 31.
   (d)   Upon receipt of the application required by division (d) of Section
447.03 and the fee required by division (c) of Section
447.04, the Commissioner shall issue a carriage operator's license which shall
contain the photograph of the applicant and which, unless sooner revoked or
suspended pursuant to Section
447.10, shall be valid for the period of one (1) year, commencing upon April 1
and ending upon March 31.
   (e)   Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter are not transferrable, but
each license may be renewed from year to year upon filing of a renewal
application and payment of the renewal fee specified in Section
447.04, provided that the Commissioner determines that the business, carriage,
or operator, as the case may be, continues to meet the requirements for initial
issuance contained in Section
447.03. Notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding sentence, division (a)
of this section shall apply to renewals.
(Ord. No. 734-16. Passed 6-6-16, eff. 6-7-16)
§ 447.08 Regulations Governing Carriages and Carriage Businesses
   (a)   No carriage may operate in or upon the public rights of way of the
City without displaying its carriage license and its carriage business license,
unless exempt under division (c) of Section
447.02 from the license requirements.
   (b)   No carriage operator may operate a carriage without having the
carriage operator’s license issued pursuant to division (d) of Section
447.07 upon his or her person, unless exempt under division (c) of Section
447.02 from the license requirements. When passengers are being picked up or
discharged by a horse-drawn carriage, a carriage operator’s assistant shall
assist the carriage operator so that the carriage operator may devote his or
her attention entirely to operating the carriage and keeping the horse and
carriage under secure control.
   (c)   Every carriage business shall provide each of its horse-drawn vehicles
with rate cards which set forth the rates and charges filed with the
Commissioner pursuant to division (a)(3) of Section
447.03 unless exempt under division (c) of Section
447.02 from the license requirements. Rate cards shall be prominently displayed
within each carriage, and each carriage operator shall acquaint all prospective
passengers with current rates and charges prior to taking on said passengers.
Rates shall not be changed without ten (10) days prior written notice to the
Commissioner.
   (d)   No carriage operator or carriage operator’s assistant shall solicit
passengers in a loud voice or in such a manner as to annoy or obstruct the
movement of any person; nor shall any carriage operator pursue any person for
purposes of soliciting patronage.
   (e)   No carriage operator or carriage operator’s assistant shall smoke
while operating a carriage that is carrying passengers.
   (f)   No carriage operator shall permit the occupancy of the carriage which
he or she is operating to exceed the rated seating capacity of that carriage.
   (g)   Each carriage operator shall ensure that all of his or her passengers
are seated inside the carriage when the carriage is in motion.
   (h)   Carriages shall be operated as near to the right side of the roadway
as practicable, shall obey all traffic laws, rules, and regulations applicable
to motor vehicles, and shall exercise due care when passing a standing vehicle
or a vehicle which is proceeding in the same direction.
   (i)   Horse-drawn carriages shall pick up and discharge passengers only
while legally parked at the curb in zones established by the Director of Public
Safety after consultation with the Commissioner of Traffic Engineering. All
other carriages may pick up and discharge passengers anywhere along their
approved routes, provided that they are legally parked at the curb when doing
so.
   (j)   No person shall operate a carriage on the streets of the City except
during the hours of 10:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., Mondays through Fridays, 6:00 p.m.
to midnight, Mondays through Fridays, and 8:00 a.m. to midnight on Saturdays,
Sundays, and legal holidays.
   (k)   No person shall operate a carriage on any street of the City which has
been closed pursuant to lawful authority, including closings pursuant to
Sections 133.03,
403.05, or
411.05 of these Codified Ordinances. Upon notification of the Police Traffic
Commissioner that special circumstances cause a particular street or a
particular area to be unsafe or too congested for the operation of carriages
during a specified time period, no person shall operate a carriage upon such
street or in such area during such time period.
   (l)   No person shall carry passengers in a carriage into or out of the
Flats on the west side of the Cuyahoga River. No person shall carry passengers
in a carriage into or out of the Flats on the east side of the Cuyahoga River,
except on Front Street.
   (m)   All horse-drawn carriage business owners and horse-drawn carriage
operators shall maintain their horses in accordance with the following
standards of animal husbandry:
      (1)   No person shall operate a horse-drawn carriage when the
temperature, as reported by the National Weather Service, exceeds eighty-five
degrees Fahrenheit (85°F).
      (2)   No person shall work any one (1) horse more than six (6) hours per
day.
      (3)   Every horse-drawn carriage owner shall properly fit or cause to be
fitted each of his or her horses with rubber shoes.
      (4)   Every horse-drawn carriage business owner and every horse-drawn
carriage operator shall ensure that his or her horses are properly watered and
given a ten (10) minute rest period for every hour of use, are in good health
and at a proper body weight, are not more than fifteen (15) years old, and are
properly fitted with harness and tack.
      (5)   Every horse-drawn carriage business owner shall ensure that
emergency veterinary treatment is available for his or her horse.
      (6)   No horse-drawn carriage business owner or carriage operator shall
permit more than four (4) passengers in a horse-drawn carriage at any time.
   (n)   Every six (6) months, commencing with the date of the application
submitted pursuant to division (b) of Section
447.03, a carriage license holder shall submit to the Police Traffic
Commissioner a medical certificate for each horse used by the carriage license
holder in the operation of horse-drawn carriages. A carriage operator that is
exempt under division (c) of Section
447.02 shall submit to the Special Events Committee the same medical
certificate for each horse used by the carriage operator. The medical
certificate shall be signed by a registered veterinarian and shall indicate
that the horse is medically fit, in good health both physically and by
temperament, sufficient to pull a horse-drawn carriage, and has received all
those inoculations which are determined to be usual and customary according to
generally-accepted principles of animal husbandry.
   (o)   Every horse-drawn carriage owner shall ensure that, whenever his or
her horses are upon the public rights-of-way, each of them is fitted with a
device which prevents the horse’s feces from dropping to the ground.
(Ord. No. 1474-13. Passed 11-25-13, eff. 11-26-13)
§ 447.09 Impounding of Horses
   (a)   Whenever a horse-drawn carriage is impounded pursuant to Section
405.02, officers of the Cleveland Police Mounted Unit are authorized to provide
for the removal of the horse to the Mounted Unit’s stables and to care for such
horse until such time as the person who is entitled to possession of the
carriage has secured its release in accordance with the Traffic Code.
   (b)   The following fees shall be assessed against the owner or other person
claiming an impounded horse:
 
Impounding       $60.00
Storage and Care $15.00 per day or part thereof
 
(Ord. No. 2459-A-91. Passed 12-14-92, eff. 12-18-92)
§ 447.10 Suspension and Revocation of License; Appeal
   (a)   The Commissioner may at any time suspend or revoke any license granted
under authority of this chapter for failure to comply with the provisions of
this chapter or with any other applicable laws or regulations of the City or
the State of Ohio.
   (b)   Whenever the Commissioner refuses to issue or revokes or suspends a
license, the applicant or licensee shall have the right to appeal in the manner
provided in Section
403.09.
(Ord. No. 2459-A-91. Passed 12-14-92, eff. 12-18-92)
§ 447.99 Penalties
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which a penalty is
not already provided in another section of this Traffic Code is guilty of a
minor degree misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars
($100.00). In addition to any other method of enforcement provided for in this
chapter, any violation of the provisions of this chapter which is a minor
misdemeanor may be enforced by the issuance of a citation in compliance with
Rule 4.1 of the Ohio Rules of Criminal Procedure.
(Ord. No. 2459-A-91. Passed 12-14-92, eff. 12-18-92)
CHAPTER 449 – SNOWMOBILES, OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLES, AND ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLES
449.01   Definitions
449.02   Registration Required; Exceptions; Operation of Watercraft
449.03   Rules for Equipment of Snowmobiles, Off- Highway Motorcycles, and All-
Purpose Vehicles
449.04   Prohibited Acts
449.05   Operation of a Mini-Truck
449.06   Permitted Operations
449.07   Driver’s License Required
449.08   Dealer to Maintain Vehicles
449.09   Reporting of Accident
449.10   Impoundment of Vehicle
449.11   Local Regulations
449.12   Operation of Off-Highway Motorcycle or All- Purpose Vehicle Without
Certificate of Title
449.13   Fueling
§ 449.01 Definitions
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   “All-purpose vehicle” means any self- propelled vehicle designed
primarily for cross-country travel on land and water, or on more than one (1)
type of terrain, and steered by wheels or caterpillar treads, or any
combination thereof, including vehicles that operate on a cushion of air,
vehicles commonly known as all-terrain vehicles, all-season vehicles, mini-
bikes, trail bikes, and dirt bikes. “All-purpose vehicle” does not include a
utility vehicle as defined in RC 4501.01 or any vehicle principally used in
playing golf, any motor vehicle or aircraft required to be registered under RC
Chapters 4503 or 4561, and any vehicle excepted from definition as a motor
vehicle by division (B) of RC 4501.01.
   (b)   “Dealer” means any person or firm engaged in the business of
manufacturing or selling snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, or all-purpose
vehicles at wholesale or retail, or who rents, leases, or otherwise furnishes
snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, or all-purpose vehicles for hire.
   (c)   “Interstate highway” means any part of the interstate system of
highways as defined in subsection (e), 90 Stat. 431 (1976), 23 U.S.C. 103, as
amended.
   (d)   “Limited access highway” and “freeway” have the same meanings as in RC
5511.02.
   (e)   “Mini-truck” means a vehicle that has four (4) wheels, is propelled by
an electric motor with a rated power of seven thousand five hundred (7,500)
watts or less or an internal combustion engine with a piston displacement
capacity of six hundred sixty (660) cubic centimeters or less, has a total dry
weight of nine hundred (900) to two thousand two hundred (2,200) pounds,
contains an enclosed cabin and a seat for the vehicle operator, resembles a
pickup truck or van with a cargo area or bed located at the rear of the
vehicle, and was not originally manufactured to meet federal motor vehicle
safety standards.
   (f)   “Off-highway motorcycle” means every motorcycle, as defined in RC
4511.01, that is designed to be operated primarily on lands other than a street
or highway.
   (g)   “Operator” means any person who operates or is in actual physical
control of a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle.
   (h)   “Owner” means any person or firm, other than a lienholder or dealer,
having title to a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle,
or other right to the possession thereof.
   (i)   “Snowmobile” means any self- propelled vehicle designed primarily for
use on snow or ice, and steered by skis, runners, or caterpillar treads.
   (j)   “Street or highway” has the same meaning as in RC 4511.01.
(RC 4519.01; Ord. No. 726-17. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 449.02 Registration Required; Exceptions; Operation of Watercraft
   (a)   (1)   Except as provided in divisions (b), (c), and (d) of this
section, no person shall operate any snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or
all- purpose vehicle within the City unless the snowmobile, off-highway
motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle is registered and numbered in accordance
with RC 4519.03 and RC 4519.04.
      (2)   Except as provided in RC 4511.215, no registration is required for
a mini-truck that is operated within this state. A mini-truck may be operated
only in accordance with that section and RC 4519.401.
   (b)   (1)   No registration is required for a snowmobile or off-highway
motorcycle that is operated exclusively upon lands owned by the owner of the
snowmobile or off-highway motorcycle, or on lands to which the owner of the
snowmobile or off-highway motorcycle has a contractual right.
      (2)   No registration is required for an all-purpose vehicle that is used
primarily for agricultural purposes when the owner qualifies for the current
agricultural use valuation tax credit, unless it is to be used on any public
land, trail, or right-of-way.
      (3)   Any all-purpose vehicle exempted from registration under division
(b)(2) of this section and operated for agricultural purposes may use public
roads and rights-of-way when traveling from one farm field to another, when
such use does not violate RC 4519.41.
      (4)   No registration is required for a snowmobile or all-purpose vehicle
that is operated on a state highway as authorized by division (F) of RC
4519.41.
   (c)   No registration is required for a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle,
or all-purpose vehicle owned and used in this state by a resident of another
state whenever that state has in effect a registration law similar to this
chapter and the snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle is
properly registered under that state’s law. Any snowmobile, off-highway
motorcycle, or all- purpose vehicle owned and used in this state by a resident
of a state not having a registration law similar to this chapter shall comply
with RC 4519.09.
   (d)   No registration is required for a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle,
or all-purpose vehicle owned and used in this state by the United States,
another state, or a political subdivision thereof, but the snowmobile, off-
highway motorcycle, or all- purpose vehicle shall display the name of the owner
thereon.
   (e)   The owner or operator of any all- purpose vehicle operated or used
upon the waters in this state shall comply with RC Chapters 1547 and 1548
relative to the operation of watercraft.
   (f)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a) of this section shall be fined not less than fifty dollars
($50.00) but not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00).
(RC 4519.02; Ord. No. 726-17. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 449.03 Rules for Equipment of Snowmobiles, Off- Highway Motorcycles, and All-
Purpose Vehicles
   (a)   Snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, and all-purpose vehicles shall
include, but not be limited to requirements for the following items of
equipment:
      (1)   At least one (1) headlight having a minimum candlepower of
sufficient intensity to reveal persons and objects at a distance of at least
one hundred (100) feet ahead under normal atmospheric conditions during hours
of darkness;
      (2)   At least one (1) red tail light having a minimum candlepower of
sufficient intensity to be plainly visible from a distance of five hundred
(500) feet to the rear under normal atmospheric conditions during hours of
darkness;
      (3)   Adequate brakes. Every snowmobile, while traveling on packed snow,
shall be capable of carrying a driver who weighs one hundred seventy-five (175)
pounds or more, and, while carrying such driver, be capable of stopping in not
more than forty (40) feet from an initial steady speed of twenty (20) miles per
hour, or locking its traction belt.
      (4)   A muffler system capable of precluding the emission of excessive
smoke or exhaust fumes, and of limiting the engine noise of vehicles. On
snowmobiles manufactured after January 1, 1973, such requirement shall include
sound dampening equipment such that noise does not exceed eighty-two (82)
decibels on the “A” scale at fifty (50) feet as measured according to SAE J192
(September 1970).
   (b)   No person shall operate any snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or
all-purpose vehicle in violation of division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), or (a)(4)
of this section, except that equipment specified in divisions (a)(1) and (a)(2)
of this section shall not be required on snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles,
or all-purpose vehicles operated during the daylight hours on state controlled
land under the jurisdiction of the Ohio Department of Natural Resources and
that are limited to off-street or off-highway use.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, whoever violates
division (b) of this section shall be fined not more than fifty dollars
($50.00). If the offender within the preceding year previously has committed a
violation of division (b) of this section, whoever violates division (b) of
this section shall be fined not less than fifteen dollars ($15.00) nor more
than one hundred dollars ($100.00), imprisoned not more than three (3) days, or
both.
(RC 4519.20; Ord. No. 726-17. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 449.04 Prohibited Acts
   (a)   The applicable provisions of this Traffic Code and RC Chapters 4511
and 4549 shall be applied to the operation of snowmobiles, off-highway
motorcycles, and all-purpose vehicles, except that no person shall operate a
snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle as follows:
      (1)   On any state highway, including a limited access highway or freeway
or the right-of-way thereof, except for emergency travel during such time and
in such manner as the Director of Public Safety shall designate;
      (2)   On any private property, or in any nursery or planting area,
without having in his possession the written permission of the owner or other
person having the right to possession of the property;
      (3)   On any land or waters controlled by the state, except at those
locations where a sign has been posted permitting such operation;
      (4)   On the tracks or right-of-way of any operating railroad;
      (5)   While transporting any firearm, bow, or other implement for
hunting, that is not unloaded and securely encased;
      (6)   For the purpose of chasing, pursuing, capturing, or killing any
animal or wildfowl;
      (7)   During the time from 8:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., unless displaying
lighted lights as required by RC 4519.20;
      (8)   On any street or sidewalk of the City;
      (9)   On any property owned or leased by the City except in areas
designated for such purposes;
      (10)   On any restricted public property. As used in this subsection,
“restricted public property” means any public property other than street right-
of-way and streets or highways, or private property used by the public for
purposes of vehicular travel or parking.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) on a first
offense. On a second offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. On a third or subsequent offense, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(RC 4519.40; Ord. No. 726-17. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 449.05 Operation of a Mini-Truck
   (a)   Except as provided in this section and RC 4511.215, no person shall
operate a mini-truck within the City.
   (b)   A person may operate a mini-truck on a farm for agricultural purposes
only when the owner of the farm qualifies for the current agricultural use
valuation tax credit. A mini-truck may be operated by or on behalf of such a
farm owner on public roads and rights-of-way only when traveling from one farm
field to another.
   (c)   A person may operate a mini-truck on property owned or leased by a
dealer who sells mini- trucks at retail.
   (d)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. If within one (1) year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one (1) predicate motor vehicle or
traffic offense, whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If within one (1) year of the offense, the
offender previously has been convicted of two (2) or more predicate motor
vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(RC 4519.401; Ord. No. 726-17. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 449.06 Permitted Operations
   Snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, and all-purpose vehicles may be
operated as follows:
   (a)   To make a crossing of a highway, other than a highway as designated in
division (A)(1) of RC 4519.40, whenever the crossing can be made in safety and
will not interfere with the movement of vehicular traffic approaching from any
direction on the highway, and provided that the operator yields the right-of-
way to any approaching traffic that presents an immediate hazard;
   (b)   On highways in the county or township road systems whenever the local
authority having jurisdiction over such highways so permits;
   (c)   Off and alongside a street or highway for limited distances from the
point of unloading from a conveyance to the point at which the snowmobile, off-
highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle is intended and authorized to be
operated;
   (d)   On the berm or shoulder of a highway, other than a highway as
designated in division (A)(1) of RC 4519.40, when the terrain permits such
operation to be undertaken safely and without the necessity of entering any
traffic lane.
(RC 4519.41; Ord. No. 726-17. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 449.07 Driver’s License Required
   (a)   No person who does not hold a valid, current motor vehicle driver’s or
commercial driver’s license, motorcycle operator’s endorsement, or probationary
license, issued under RC Chapters 4506 or 4507, or a valid, current driver’s
license issued by another jurisdiction, shall operate a snowmobile, off-
highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle on any street or highway in this
City, on any portion of the right-of-way thereof, or on any public land or
waters. Notwithstanding the license requirements under this division (a), the
City may permit operation of a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-
purpose vehicle on City property designated for recreational use of such
vehicles.
   (b)   No person who is less than sixteen (16) years of age shall operate a
snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle on any land or
waters other than private property or waters owned by or leased to the person’s
parent or guardian, unless accompanied by another person who is eighteen (18)
years of age, or older, and who holds a license as provided in division (A) of
this section, except as follows:
      (1)   The Ohio Department of Natural Resources may permit such operation
on state controlled land under its jurisdiction when such person is less than
sixteen (16) years of age and is accompanied by a parent or guardian who is a
licensed driver eighteen (18) years of age or older.
      (2)   The City may permit such operation on City property designated for
recreational use of such vehicles, under rules and regulations governing such
property, when a person is less than sixteen (16) years of age and is
accompanied by a parent or guardian.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), imprisoned not
less than three (3) nor more than thirty (30) days, or both.
(RC 4519.44; Ord. No. 726-17. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 449.08 Dealer to Maintain Vehicles
   (a)   Any dealer who rents, leases, or otherwise furnishes a snowmobile,
off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle for hire shall maintain the
vehicle in safe operating condition. No dealer, or agent or employee of a
dealer, shall rent, lease, or otherwise furnish a snowmobile, off-highway
motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle for hire to any person who does not hold a
license as required by division (a) of Section
449.07. This section shall not apply to any dealer located on City property
designated for the recreational use of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, or
all-purpose vehicles.
   (b)   No dealer, or agent or employee of a dealer shall rent, lease or
otherwise furnish a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle
for hire to any person whom the dealer or an agent or employee of the dealer
has reasonable cause to believe is incompetent to operate the vehicle in a safe
and lawful manner.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(RC 4519.45; Ord. No. 726-17. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 449.09 Reporting of Accident
   The operator of a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle
involved in any accident resulting in bodily injury to or death of any person,
or damage to the property of any person in excess of one hundred dollars
($100.00), shall report the accident within forty-eight (48) hours to the Chief
of Police, and shall within thirty (30) days forward a written report of the
accident to the Ohio Registrar of Motor Vehicles on a form prescribed by the
Registrar. If the operator is physically incapable of making the reports and
there is another participant in the accident not so incapacitated, the
participant shall make the reports. In the event there is no other participant,
and the operator is other than the owner, the owner, within the prescribed
periods of time, shall make the reports.
   Any law enforcement officer, or other person authorized by RC 4519.42 and RC
4519.43, who investigates or receives information of an accident involving a
snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle, shall forward to
the Registrar a written report of the accident within forty-eight (48) hours.
(RC 4519.46; Ord. No. 726-17. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 449.10 Impoundment of Vehicle
   (a)   Whenever a person is found guilty of operating a snowmobile, off-
highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle in violation of any rule authorized
to be adopted under RC 4519.21 or RC 4519.42, the trial judge of any court of
record, in addition to or independent of any other penalties provided by law,
may impound for not less than sixty (60) days the certificate of registration
and license plate, if applicable, of that snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle,
or all-purpose vehicle. The court shall send the impounded certificate of
registration and license plate, if applicable, to the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles, who shall retain the certificate of registration and license plate,
if applicable, until the expiration of the period of impoundment.
   (b)   If a court impounds the certificate of registration and license plate
of an all-purpose vehicle pursuant to RC 2911.21, the court shall send the
impounded certificate of registration and license plate to the Registrar, who
shall retain them until the expiration of the period of impoundment.
   (c)   Police officers are authorized to provide for the removal of a
snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, mini-truck, or all-purpose vehicle whenever
any such vehicle is in violation of the provisions of this Traffic Code under
the authority of Section 405.02.
(RC 4519.47; Ord. No. 726-17. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 449.11 Local Regulations
   Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent local authorities from
regulating the operation of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, and all-
purpose vehicles on streets and highways and other public property under their
jurisdiction, and within the reasonable exercise of the police power, except
that no local authority shall require the registration or licensing of any
snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all- purpose vehicle required to be
registered or titled under this chapter.
(RC 4519.48; Ord. No. 726-17. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 449.12 Operation of Off-Highway Motorcycle or All-Purpose Vehicle Without
Certificate of Title
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Operate in this City an off- highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle without having a certificate of title for the off-highway motorcycle or
all-purpose vehicle, if such a certificate is required by this chapter to be
issued for the off- highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle, or, if a
physical certificate of title has not been issued for it, operate an off-
highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle knowing that the ownership
information relating to the motorcycle or vehicle has not been entered into the
automated title processing system by a clerk of a court of common pleas;
      (2)   Operate in this City an off- highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle if a certificate of title to the off-highway motorcycle or all- purpose
vehicle has been issued and then has been canceled;
      (3)   Violate any provision of RC 4519.51 to 4519.70 for which no penalty
is otherwise provided or any lawful rules adopted pursuant to those sections;
      (4)   Operate in this City an off- highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle knowing that the certificate of title to or ownership of the motorcycle
or vehicle as otherwise reflected in the automated title processing system has
been canceled.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than two hundred
dollars ($200.00), imprisoned not more than ninety (90) days, or both.
(RC 4519.66; Ord. No. 726-17. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 449.13 Fueling
   (a)   No person shall fuel or knowingly permit to be fueled a snowmobile,
off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle from a gasoline pump at a retail
gasoline service station when such vehicle is driven to the service station and
is not transported by another vehicle.
   (b)   For purposes of this section “person” includes any individual,
partnerships, corporations, companies, or their agents, assigns, or employees.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 726-17. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
CHAPTER 450 – UNDER-SPEED VEHICLES (INCLUDING NON-MODIFIED GOLF CARTS)
450.01   Under-Speed Vehicles Permitted on City Streets
450.02   Title and Registration Required
450.03   Annual Vehicle Inspection
450.04   Compliance with Traffic Laws
450.05   Rules and Regulations by Director of Public Safety
450.06   Required Equipment
450.07   Required Information to Display
450.08   Suspension or Revocation of Permission to Operate; Appeal
450.99   Penalty
§ 450.01 Under-Speed Vehicles Permitted on City Streets
   Subject to the requirements of this chapter, and the rules and regulations
promulgated by the Director of Public Safety or their designee (“Director”),
the use of under-speed vehicles shall be permitted on City streets where the
speed limit is thirty-five (35) miles per hour or less, and only for legitimate
business purposes as determined by the Director. For the purposes of this
section, under-speed vehicle rentals and private use shall not be included as a
legitimate business purpose.
(Ord. No. 1215-2025. Passed 10-13-25, eff. 10-14-25)
§ 450.02 Title and Registration Required
   (a)   Prior to the operation of an under-speed vehicle on City streets, the
vehicle must be titled in accordance with RC Chapter 4505 and registered in
accordance with RC Chapter 4503.
   (b)   Only under-speed vehicles that are titled and registered in the State
of Ohio are permitted on City streets.
(Ord. No. 1215-2025. Passed 10-13-25, eff. 10-14-25)
§ 450.03 Annual Vehicle Inspection
   (a)   Prior to the operation of an under-speed vehicle on City streets, the
under-speed vehicle must pass an annual inspection conducted by the Cleveland
Division of Police. The inspection fee shall be one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00) per vehicle.
   (b)   At the time of the inspection, the owner of the under-speed vehicle
must present all of the following:
      (1)   A valid driver’s license. If the owner of the under-speed vehicle
is a business, the business must require that all persons operating the under-
speed vehicles have a valid driver’s license;
      (2)   Proof of insurance;
      (3)   Proof of ownership;
      (4)   Proof of the gross vehicle weight;
      (5)   Payment for the inspection fee;
      (6)   Certificate of Good Standing from the Secretary of the State of
Ohio; and
      (7)   Service area map.
   (c)   Following a successful annual inspection, the Cleveland Division of
Police will provide a sign indicating that the vehicle passed inspection that
must be visibly displayed on every approved under-speed vehicle and shall
transmit the service area map to the Clerk of Council.
(Ord. No. 1215-2025. Passed 10-13-25, eff. 10-14-25)
§ 450.04 Compliance with Traffic Laws
   All under-speed vehicles must be operated on City streets in accordance with
all applicable state and local laws, including but not limited to the
following:
   (a)   For the purposes of this section, under-speed vehicles are defined as
vehicles under the Revised Code and the Codified Ordinances of the City of
Cleveland and are subject to all vehicle traffic laws of the Revised Code and
Codified Ordinances of the City of Cleveland.
   (b)   Anyone who operates a vehicle on the City streets must have a valid
driver’s license;
   (c)   A vehicle must have the required license plates; and
   (d)   A vehicle must have at least minimum liability insurance coverage as
required by the State of Ohio.
(Ord. No. 1215-2025. Passed 10-13-25, eff. 10-14-25)
§ 450.05 Rules and Regulations by Director of Public Safety
   All under-speed vehicles shall conform to the rules and regulations
governing their use, imposed by the Director, as deemed necessary for the
protection of life and property. The Director may create a restricted service
area map, implement any special event restrictions, and may charge a fee for
pick up and drop off zones in an amount to be determined by the Board of
Control. Such rules and regulations shall become effective seven (7) days after
publication in the City Record.
(Ord. No. 1215-2025. Passed 10-13-25, eff. 10-14-25)
§ 450.06 Required Equipment
   An under-speed vehicle, at a minimum, must have all of the following in the
manner required by the equipment provisions of RC Chapter 4513:
   (a)   Brake lights (2 lights);
   (b)   Head lights (2 lights);
   (c)   Tail lights (2 lights);
   (d)   Turn signals (2 front, 2 rear);
   (e)   A horn;
   (f)   A rearview mirror;
   (g)   A windshield;
   (h)   Brakes and a brake system;
   (i)   A steering mechanism;
   (j)   Appropriate tires that are free of major bumps, bulges, breaks, or any
other unsafe conditions; and
   (k)   Seat belts sufficient for the maximum occupancy of the vehicle.
(Ord. No. 1215-2025. Passed 10-13-25, eff. 10-14-25)
§ 450.07 Required Information to Display
   An under-speed vehicle, at a minimum, must display all of the following
information:
   (a)   Rates and fees schedule, if applicable;
   (b)   The telephone number, email address, and name or dba designation filed
with the Secretary of State for the entity responsible for operating the under-
speed vehicle;
   (c)   A properly placed inspection sign issued by the Cleveland Division of
Police; and
   (d)   Any other required business permits or licenses.
(Ord. No. 1215-2025. Passed 10-13-25, eff. 10-14-25)
§ 450.08 Suspension or Revocation of Permission to Operate; Appeal
   (a)   Consent to operate under-speed vehicles under this chapter may be
suspended or revoked by the Director at any time if it is determined that the
rules and regulations of this section are violated. Additionally, if the
operation of under-speed vehicles on City streets becomes a hazard or risk to
the health, safety, and welfare of the public, the Director may revoke existing
permissions and discontinue the acceptance of applications to operate under
this chapter.
   (b)   The Director shall give written notice of suspension or revocation of
consent to the under-speed vehicle operator or his or her agent stating the
reasons therefor. The action shall be effective upon giving such notice to the
operator or to his or her agent. If the business owner or operator fails to
comply, the Cleveland Division of Police may seize and hold the under-speed
vehicle.
   (c)   Within five (5) business days of receipt of the notice, the operator
may request a hearing before the Director. The Director shall forthwith hold
the requested hearing, at which time the operator shall be afforded the
opportunity to give his or her version of the facts which gave rise to the
Director's action. After the hearing the Director shall determine whether to
reinstate consent to operate or to permanently rescind it. The action of the
Director may be appealed in accordance with the provisions of the Charter.
(Ord. No. 1215-2025. Passed 10-13-25, eff. 10-14-25)
§ 450.99 Penalty
   Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter
450 for which a penalty is not already provided in another section of this
Traffic Code is guilty of a minor misdemeanor, and shall face potential
impoundment of the under-speed vehicle pursuant to Section
450.08.
   In addition to any other method of enforcement provided for in this Chapter
450, any violation of the provisions of this chapter which is a minor
misdemeanor may be enforced by the issuance of a citation in compliance with
Rule 4.1 of the Ohio Rules of Criminal Procedure. Each day of non-compliance
shall constitute a separate violation. Individuals, corporations, companies, or
other commercial or legal entities so named on the title of said vehicle shall
be responsible for all safety equipment and shall also be responsible for all
penalties set forth in this section.
(Ord. No. 1215-2025. Passed 10-13-25, eff. 10-14-25)
TITLE VII: PARKING
   Chapter
451   Parking Generally
   Chapter
453   Street Parking Meters
   Chapter
455   Municipal Parking Facilities
   Chapter
457   Public Garages and Parking Lots
   Chapter
459   Parking Infractions and Parking Violations Bureau
   Chapter
461   Residential Permit Parking Program
   Chapter
463   Valet Services
CHAPTER 451 – PARKING GENERALLY
451.01   Officer May Remove Ignition Key
451.02   Prima Facie Evidence of Unlawful Parking
451.03   Statutory Prohibited Standing or Parking Places
451.04   Manner of Parallel Parking
451.041   Physically Handicapped Parking
451.05   Manner of Angle Parking
451.06   Unattended Vehicle: Duty to Stop Engine, Remove Key, Set Brake and
Turn Wheels
451.07   Opening Vehicle Door on Traffic Side
451.08   Narrow Roadways and Alleys
451.09   Hydrant Side of Street
451.10   Hazardous Traffic Obstructions
451.11   Hospital Grounds
451.12   City Property
451.13   Distance from Theaters
451.14   Advertising, Displaying for Sale, Washing or Repairing
451.15   Fire Lanes on Public and Private Property
451.16   Street Cleaning
451.17   Snow Emergency
451.18   Bus Stops and Taxicab Stands
451.19   Motor Carriers
451.20   Truck Zones
451.21   Trucks and Commercial Vehicles
451.22   Between Sidewalk and Setback Line
451.23   Tree Lawn and Private Driveway
451.24   Private Driveway or Private Property
451.241   Parking Vehicles on Vacant Lots Prohibited
451.25   Abandoned Vehicles
451.251   Prohibition Against Abandonment of Junk Motor Vehicle
451.26   Vehicles on Service Station Property
451.27   Notice to Cover or Remove Junk Motor Vehicles
451.271   Abandonment Established by Notice
451.28   Reserved Street Parking for United States Marshal
451.29   Reserved Street Parking for United States Postal Service
451.30   Reserved Street Parking for City Vehicles – Expired
451.31   Reserved Street Parking for City Police Vehicles
451.32   Reserved
451.33   Establishment of Zones for Valet Parking, Limousine, Day Care and
Passenger Drop off/Pick up, and Hotel Check In/Check Out; Violations; Fees
Cross-reference:
   Abandoned vehicles prohibited at airports, CO
571.40
   Airport parking areas, CO
571.37 et seq.
   Downtown area parking, CO
403.04
   Lights on parked or stopped vehicles, CO
437.09
   Parking commercial vehicles in residential districts, CO
349.13
   Parking near stopped fire apparatus, CO
431.27
   Parking waste collection vehicles restricted, CO
203.08
   Placing handbills on vehicles, CO
613.12
   Restrictions on driving and parking in parks, CO
559.60
Statutory reference:
   See sectional histories for similar State law
§ 451.01 Officer May Remove Ignition Key
   A law enforcement officer may remove the ignition key left in the ignition
switch of an unlocked and unattended motor vehicle parked on a street or
highway, or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking. The officer removing such key shall place
notification upon the vehicle detailing his or her name and badge number, the
place where such key may be reclaimed and the procedure for reclaiming such
key. The key shall be returned to the owner of the motor vehicle upon
presentation of proof of ownership.
(RC 4549.05; Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 451.02 Prima Facie Evidence of Unlawful Parking
   In any hearing of the Municipal Court on a charge of unlawful stopping,
standing or parking of a motor vehicle, testimony that a vehicle bearing a
certain license was found to be unlawfully stopping, standing or parking in
violation of any of the provisions of the Traffic Code, and further testimony
that the records of the Ohio Registrar or the Deputy Registrar of Motor
Vehicles show that such license plate was issued to the defendant shall be
prima facie evidence that the vehicle which was so stopping, standing or
parking was operated by the defendant at the time of the violation. A certified
copy showing such fact of registration from the Registrar or Deputy Registrar
or a computer printout from the Law Enforcement Automated Data System shall be
proof of such ownership.
(Ord. No. 3038-78. Passed 4-30-79, eff. 5-1-79)
§ 451.03 Statutory Prohibited Standing or Parking Places
   (a)   No person shall stand or park a trackless trolley or vehicle, except
when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or to comply with the
provisions of this Traffic Code, or while obeying the directions of a police
officer or a traffic-control device, in any of the following places:
      (1)   On a sidewalk, except as provided in division (b) of this section;
      (2)   In front of a public or private driveway, or within two and one-
half (2-1/2) feet, thirty (30) inches;
      (3)   Within an intersection;
      (4)   Within ten (10) feet of a fire hydrant;
      (5)   On a crosswalk;
      (6)   Within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk at an intersection or within
twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk located within the block where a school is
located during regular school hours;
      (7)   Within thirty (30) feet of, and upon the approach to, any flashing
beacon, stop sign, or traffic control device;
      (8)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty (30)
feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone,
unless a different length is indicated by a traffic control device;
      (9)   Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
      (10)   Within twenty (20) feet of a driveway entrance to any fire station
and, on the side of the street opposite the entrance to any fire station,
within seventy-five (75) feet of the entrance when it is properly posted with
signs;
      (11)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
the standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
      (12)   Alongside any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a
street;
      (13)   Upon any bridge or elevated structure upon a highway, or within a
highway tunnel;
      (14)   At any place where signs prohibit stopping, standing or parking,
or at any place in excess of the maximum time limited by signs;;
      (15)   Within one (1) foot of another parked vehicle;
      (16)   On the roadway portion of a freeway, expressway or thruway;
      (17)   Except for bicycles, on any on- street path, lane, trail, or
multi-purpose lane designated by official signs or markings for the exclusive
use of bicycles or other non-motorized modes of transportation.
   (b)   A person shall be permitted, without charge or restriction, to stand
or park on a sidewalk a motor-driven cycle or motor scooter that has an engine
not larger than one hundred fifty (150) cubic centimeters, or a bicycle,
provided that the motor-driven cycle, motor scooter, or bicycle does not impede
the normal flow of pedestrian traffic. This division does not authorize any
person to operate a vehicle in violation of RC 4511.711, or any substantially
equivalent section of these Codified Ordinances.
(RC 4511.68; Ord. No. 656-17. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 451.04 Manner of Parallel Parking
   (a)   Every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where there is an
adjacent curb shall be stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels of the
vehicle parallel with and not more than twelve (12) inches from the right-hand
curb, unless it is impossible to approach so close to the curb; in this case
the stop shall be made as close to the curb as possible and only for the time
necessary to discharge and receive passengers or to load or unload merchandise.
   (b)   This section does not apply to streets or parts thereof where angle
parking is lawfully permitted. However, no angle parking shall be permitted on
a state route unless an unoccupied roadway width of not less than twenty-five
(25) feet is available for free-moving traffic.
   (c)   (1)   A.   Except as provided in division (c)(1)B. of this section, no
vehicle or trackless trolley shall be stopped or parked on a road or highway
with the vehicle or trackless trolley facing in a direction other than the
direction of travel on that side of the road or highway.
         B.   The operator of a motorcycle may back the motorcycle into an
angled parking space so that when the motorcycle is parked it is facing in a
direction other than the direction of travel on the side of the road or
highway.
      (2)   The operator of a motorcycle may back the motorcycle into a parking
space that is located on the side of, and parallel to, a road or highway. The
motorcycle may face any direction when so parked. Not more than two (2)
motorcycles at a time shall be parked in a parking space as described in this
division (c)(2) of this section irrespective of whether or not the space is
metered.
   (d)   Notwithstanding any statute or any rule, regulation, resolution, or
ordinance, air compressors, tractors, trucks and other equipment, while being
used in the construction, reconstruction, installation, repair, or removal of
facilities near, on, over, or under a street or highway, may stop, stand, or
park where necessary in order to perform the work, provided a flagperson is on
duty or warning signs or lights are displayed as may be prescribed by the Ohio
Director of Transportation.
   (e)   Whoever violates division (a) or (c) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(RC 4511.69(A) - (D), (J)(1); Ord. No. 656-17. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 451.041 Physically Handicapped Parking
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Handicapped person” means any person who has lost the use of one
(1) or both legs or one (1) or both arms, who is blind, deaf, or so severely
handicapped as to be unable to move without the aid of crutches or a
wheelchair, or whose mobility is restricted by a permanent cardiovascular,
pulmonary, or other handicapping condition.
      (2)   “Person with a disability that limits or impairs the ability to
walk” has the same meaning as in RC 4503.44.
      (3)   “Special license plates” and “removable windshield placard” mean
any license plates or removable windshield placard or temporary removable
windshield placard issued under RC 4503.41 or RC 4503.44, and also mean any
substantially similar license plates or removable windshield placard or
temporary removable windshield placard issued by a state, district, country, or
sovereignty.
(RC 4511.69(K))
   (b)   Special parking locations and privileges for persons with disabilities
that limit or impair the ability to walk, also known as handicapped parking
spaces or disability parking spaces, shall be provided and designated by the
City and all agencies and instrumentalities thereof at all offices and
facilities, where parking is provided, whether owned, rented, or leased, and at
all publicly owned parking garages. The locations shall be designated through
the posting of an elevated sign, whether permanently affixed or movable,
imprinted with the international symbol of access and shall be reasonably close
to exits, entrances, elevators and ramps. All elevated signs posted shall be
mounted on a fixed or movable post, and the distance from the ground to the
bottom edge of the sign shall measure not less than five (5) feet. If a new
sign or a replacement sign designating a special parking location is posted on
or after October 14, 1999, there also shall be affixed upon the surface of that
sign or affixed next to the designating sign a notice that states the fine
applicable for the offense of parking a motor vehicle in the special designated
parking location if the motor vehicle is not legally entitled to be parked in
that location.
(RC 4511.69(E))
   (c)   (1)   A.   No person shall stop, stand, or park any motor vehicle at
special parking locations provided under division (b) of this section or at
special clearly marked parking locations provided in or on privately owned
parking lots, parking garages, or other parking areas and designated in
accordance with that division, unless one of the following applies:
            (i)   The motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport
of a person with a disability that limits or impairs the ability to walk and is
displaying a valid removable windshield placard or special license plates;
            (ii)   The motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport
of a handicapped person and is displaying a parking card or special handicapped
license plates.
         B.   Any motor vehicle that is parked in a special marked parking
location in violation of division (c)(1)A(i) or (c)(1)A.(ii) of this section
may be towed or otherwise removed from the parking location by the law
enforcement agency of the political subdivision in which the parking location
is located. A motor vehicle that is so towed or removed shall not be released
to its owner until the owner presents proof of ownership of the motor vehicle
and pays all towing and storage fees normally imposed by that political
subdivision for towing and storing motor vehicles. If the motor vehicle is a
leased vehicle, it shall not be released to the lessee until the lessee
presents proof that that person is the lessee of the motor vehicle and pays all
towing and storage fees normally imposed by that political subdivision for
towing and storing motor vehicles.
         C.   If a person is charged with a violation of division (c)(1)A.(i)
or (c)(1)A.(ii) of this section, it is an affirmative defense to the charge
that the person suffered an injury not more than seventy-two (72) hours prior
to the time the person was issued the ticket or citation and that, because of
the injury, the person meets at least one of the criteria contained in RC
4503.44(A)(1).
      (2)   No person shall stop, stand, or park any motor vehicle in an area
that is commonly known as an access aisle, which area is marked by diagonal
stripes and is located immediately adjacent to a special parking location
provided under division (b) of this section or at a special clearly marked
parking location provided in or on a privately owned parking lot, parking
garage, or other parking area and designated in accordance with that division.
(RC 4511.69(F))
   (d)   When a motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of a
person with a disability that limits or impairs the ability to walk and is
displaying a removable windshield placard or a temporary removable windshield
placard or special license plates, or when a motor vehicle is being operated by
or for the transport of a handicapped person and is displaying a parking card
or special handicapped license plates, the motor vehicle is permitted to park
for a period of two (2) hours in excess of the legal parking period permitted
by local authorities, except where local ordinances or police rules provide
otherwise or where the vehicle is parked in such a manner as to be clearly a
traffic hazard.
(RC 4511.69(G))
   (e)   Special reserved on-street parking locations and privileges for
persons with disabilities that limit or impair the ability to walk, also known
as handicapped parking spaces or disability parking spaces, shall be provided
upon full compliance with the following requirements:
      (1)   An investigation determining need for proposed reserved on-street
parking for the handicapped must be performed through the Division of Traffic
Engineering, including verification that the proposed on-street parking
location meets the requirements of this section. The Commissioner of Traffic
Engineering must approve the on-street parking for practicality and feasibility
of traffic operations. Upon completion of the investigation and the approval of
the Commissioner of Traffic Engineering, the Director of Public Safety may
designate reserved on- street parking for persons with disabilities that limit
or impair the ability to walk, also known as handicapped parking spaces or
disability parking spaces, in accordance with the requirements of Section
403.03.
      (2)   When applying for an on-street parking space for the exclusive use
by persons with disabilities that limit or impair the ability to walk, also
known as handicapped parking spaces or disability parking spaces, the following
information shall be supplied by the applicant to the City and shall be used as
criteria for determining the appropriate location for a handicapped parking
space:
         A.   The nature and use of adjacent buildings;
         B.   The number of on- street parking spaces requested, with the
maximum requested spaces not to exceed three (3) adjacent or contiguous spaces;
         C.   Any other information which the Director of Public Safety or
Commissioner of Traffic Engineering may require.
      (3)   Reserved on-street parking spaces for persons with disabilities
that limit or impair the ability to walk, also known as handicapped parking
spaces or disability parking spaces, shall not be provided at any location
where off-street parking locations and privileges for persons with disabilities
that limit or impair the ability to walk, also known as handicapped parking
spaces or disability parking spaces, are available in close proximity to the
proposed on-street parking location;
      (4)   Reserved on-street parking spaces for persons with disabilities
that limit or impair the ability to walk, also known as handicapped parking
spaces or disability parking spaces, shall be located as close as practicable
to educational institutions, government buildings, hospitals, medical centers,
cultural institutions and recreational facilities;
      (5)   Reserved on-street parking spaces shall not be provided at any
location where parking is prohibited by ordinance;
      (6)   Reserved on-street parking for persons with disabilities that limit
or impair the ability to walk, also known as handicapped parking spaces or
disability parking spaces, in residential areas may be provided upon satisfying
the requirements found in divisions (e)(1), (e)(2), (e)(3) and (e)(5) of this
section.
   (f)   Any handicapped person as defined in division (a) of this section or
any property owner may request that a parking space be designated as reserved
for persons with disabilities that limit or impair the ability to walk, also
known as handicapped parking spaces or disability parking spaces. Approval of
the property owner adjacent to the proposed parking space must be obtained
prior to the handicap designation. All requests for designations shall be
submitted to the Commissioner of Traffic Engineering. Following the designation
of a parking space as reserved for persons with disabilities that limit or
impair the ability to walk, also known as handicapped parking spaces or
disability parking spaces, by the Director of Public Safety, the Division of
Traffic Engineering shall install a sign or signs indicating that an on-street
parking space is reserved for the exclusive use of handicapped persons.
   (g)   The Chief of Police or his or her designee, in his or her discretion,
may limit or temporarily suspend any of the parking privileges specified in
this section to cover emergencies or special events and may impose any other
restriction deemed necessary in the interest of traffic safety and control.
   (h)   No person shall stop, stand or park any motor vehicle at special
parking locations provided for persons with disabilities that limit or impair
the ability to walk, also known as handicapped parking spaces or disability
parking spaces, under this section or at special, clearly marked, parking
locations provided for persons with disabilities that limit or impair the
ability to walk, also known as handicapped parking spaces or disability parking
spaces, in or on privately owned parking lots, parking garages or other parking
areas, unless the motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of a
person with a disability that limits or impairs the ability to walk and is
displaying a removable windshield placard or a temporary removable windshield
placard or special license plates, or when a motor vehicle is being operated by
or for the transport of a handicapped person and is displaying a removable
windshield placard or a temporary removable windshield placard or special
license plates.
   (i)   No owner of an office, facility, or parking garage where special
parking locations are required to be designated in accordance with division (b)
of this section shall fail to properly mark the special parking locations in
accordance with that division or fail to maintain the markings of the special
locations, including the erection and maintenance of the fixed or movable
signs.
(RC 4511.69(H))
   (j)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require a person or
organization to apply for a removable windshield placard or special license
plates if the parking card or special license plates issued to the person or
organization under prior law have not expired or been surrendered or revoked.
(RC 4511.69(I))
   (k)   (1)   A.   Whoever violates division (c)(1)A.(i) or (c)(1)A.(ii) of
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in
division (k)(1)A. and (k)(1)B. of this section. Except as otherwise provided in
division (k)(1)A. of this section, an offender who violates division (c)(1)A.
(i) or (c)(1)A.(ii) of this section shall be fined not less than two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). An
offender who violates division (c)(1)A.(i) or (c)(1)A.(ii) of this section
shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) if the offender,
prior to sentencing, proves either of the following to the satisfaction of the
court:
            i.   At the time of the violation of division (c)(1)A.(i) of this
section, the offender or the person for whose transport the motor vehicle was
being operated had been issued a removable windshield placard that then was
valid or special license plates that then were valid but the offender or the
person neglected to display the placard or license plates as described in
division (c)(1)A.(i) of this section.
            ii.   At the time of the violation of division (c)(1)A.(ii) of this
section, the offender or the person for whose transport the motor vehicle was
being operated had been issued a parking card that then was valid or special
handicapped license plates that then were valid but the offender or the person
neglected to display the card or license plates as described in division (c)
(1)A.(ii) of this section.
         B.   In no case shall an offender who violates division (c)(1)A.(i) or
(c)(1)A.(ii) of this section be sentenced to any term of imprisonment.
   An arrest or conviction for a violation of division (c)(1)A.(i) or (c)(1)A.
(ii) of this section does not constitute a criminal record and need not be
reported by the person so arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries
contained in any application for employment, license, or other right or
privilege, or made in connection with the person’s appearance as a witness.
   Every fine collected under divisions (k)(1) and (k)(2) of this section shall
be paid to the City in which the violation occurred. Except as provided in
division (k)(1) of this section, the City shall use the fine moneys it receives
under divisions (k)(1) and (k)(2) of this section to pay the expenses it incurs
in complying with the signage and notice requirements contained in division (b)
of this section. The City may use up to fifty percent (50%) of each fine
received under divisions (k)(1) and (k)(2) of this section to pay the costs of
educational, advocacy, support, and assistive technology programs for persons
with disabilities, and for public improvements within the City that benefit or
assist persons with disabilities, if governmental agencies or nonprofit
organizations offer the programs.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (c)(2) of this section shall be fined not
less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00).
   In no case shall an offender who violates division (c)(2) of this section be
sentenced to any term of imprisonment. An arrest or conviction for a violation
of division (c)(2) of this section does not constitute a criminal record and
need not be reported by the person so arrested or convicted in response to any
inquiries contained in any application for employment, license, or other right
or privilege, or made in connection with the person’s appearance as a witness.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (i) of this section shall be punished as
follows:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (k)(3) of this section,
the offender shall be issued a warning.
         B.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (i) of this section or of a municipal
ordinance that is substantially similar to that division, the offender shall
not be issued a warning but shall be fined not more than twenty-five dollars
($25.00) for each parking location that is not properly marked or whose
markings are not properly maintained.
(RC 4511.69(J)(2)-(J)(4); Ord. No. 656-17. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 451.05 Manner of Angle Parking
   Upon streets where angle parking is permitted, no person shall stop, stand
or park a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway as
is indicated by appropriate signs or markings and entirely within the limits of
a space designated by marked lines.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 451.06 Unattended Vehicle: Duty to Stop Engine, Remove Key, Set Brake and
Turn Wheels
   No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand
unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition, removing
the key from the ignition, effectively setting the parking brake, and when the
motor vehicle is standing upon any grade, turning the front wheels to the curb
or side of the highway.
   The requirements of this section relating to the stopping of the engine,
locking of the ignition and removing the key from the ignition of a motor
vehicle shall not apply to an emergency vehicle or a public safety vehicle.
(RC 4511.661; Ord. No. 1459-78. Passed 11-22-78, eff. 11-30-78)
§ 451.07 Opening Vehicle Door on Traffic Side
    No person shall open the door of a vehicle on the side available to moving
traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, and can be done
without interfering with the movement of other traffic, including bicyclists,
nor shall any person leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to
moving traffic for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload
passengers.
(RC 4511.70(C); Ord. No. 672-12. Passed 6-4-12, eff. 6-8-12)
§ 451.08 Narrow Roadways and Alleys
   (a)   No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a street, other
than an alley, in such manner or under such conditions as to leave available
less than ten (10) feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of
vehicular traffic, except that a driver may stop temporarily during the actual
loading or unloading of passengers or when necessary in obedience to traffic
control devices or signals of a police officer.
   (b)   No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or
under such conditions as to leave available less than ten (10) feet of the
width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic.
   (c)   No person shall stand or park a vehicle on a roadway having less than
twenty (20) feet in width.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 451.09 Hydrant Side of Street
   No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the side of the street on which
fire hydrants are placed, unless the roadway exceeds thirty (30) feet in width,
when signs are erected giving notice thereof.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 451.10 Hazardous Traffic Obstructions
   No person shall stand or park a vehicle within fifty (50) feet of any
hazardous or congested place, when such standing, stopping or parking would
create or increase such hazard.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 451.11 Hospital Grounds
   No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any driveway within the
Metropolitan General Hospital grounds.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 451.12 City Property
   No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any property owned by the City
if a sign erected on such property gives notice that such standing or parking
is prohibited. In addition, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any
property owned by the City, even absent any such sign, for more than seventy-
two (72) hours.
(Ord. No. 2000-80. Passed 5-18-81, eff. 5-20-81)
§ 451.13 Distance from Theaters
   No person shall stand or park a vehicle in front of any theater or in front
of or within ten (10) feet of any theater exit when such theater is open for
business, when signs are erected giving notice thereof.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 451.14 Advertising, Displaying for Sale, Washing or Repairing
   No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal
purpose of:
   (a)   Advertising;
   (b)   Displaying such vehicle or any article for sale;
   (c)   Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle except repairs
necessitated by an emergency.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 451.15 Fire Lanes on Public and Private Property
   (a)   At the request of the Fire Chief, the Director of Public Safety by
regulation adopted in the manner provided in Section
403.03 shall designate as fire lanes such streets or parts of streets upon
which the standing or parking of vehicles constitutes a hazard or obstruction
to the operation of the fire fighting equipment of the City in case of fire.
When so designated and upon the erection of signs giving notice thereof, no
person, other than members of the safety forces of the City engaged in the
performance of duty at a fire, shall stand or park a vehicle within a fire
lane.
   (b)   The Fire Chief shall designate fire lanes on private property open to
public use subject to approval of the property owners involved. Signs, approved
as to type and location by the Fire Chief, shall be erected at the pro rata
expense of such property owners. No person shall stand or park a vehicle within
a posted fire lane on private property except in an emergency.
   (c)   No person shall stand or park a vehicle in any private driveway,
alleyway or areaway between buildings, when in the opinion of the Fire Chief,
such parking constitutes a fire hazard or an obstruction to or interference
with operation of the fire fighting equipment of the City and is so posted.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 451.16 Street Cleaning
   The Director of Public Service shall erect signs upon such streets or parts
of streets as the Director designates when such streets or parts of streets are
about to be cleaned of dirt, rubbish or snow by the Division of Streets. When
signs have been posted, no person shall park a vehicle during the time such
street or part of street is so posted prohibiting parking thereon.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 451.17 Snow Emergency
   (a)   Whenever, during any period of twenty-four (24) hours or less, snow
falls in the City or in a section thereof to a depth of two (2) inches or more,
an emergency is declared to exist in that such a heavy snow storm constitutes a
serious public hazard impairing transportation, the movement of food and fuel
supplies, medical care, fire, health and police protection and other vital
facilities of the City. The emergency shall continue until an announcement by
the Director of Public Safety that snow plowing operations have been completed,
which announcement shall be made in the same manner as outlined in subsection
(b) hereof.
   (b)   Whenever such an emergency exists the Director shall request the
cooperation of the local press and radio and television stations to announce
the emergency and the time that emergency parking regulations will become
effective, which time shall be no sooner than one (1) hour after the first
announcement. Such announcement by two (2) local radio stations or two (2)
local television stations or in a daily newspaper of general circulation
published in the City shall constitute notice to the general public of the
existence of the emergency. However, the owners and operators of motor vehicles
shall have full responsibility to determine existing weather conditions and to
comply with the emergency parking regulations.
   (c)   During the period of the emergency, the Director may prohibit the
parking of any vehicles upon any or all of the City streets designated as a
through street or highway by Section
413.02, or as a snow emergency street in the regulations adopted pursuant to
the authority of section 403.03. During the emergency, no person shall park, or
cause or permit to be parked or permit to remain parked, or abandon or leave
unattended, any vehicle of any kind or description upon such specified streets.
However, vehicles may be parked for a period of not longer than three (3)
minutes for actual loading or unloading of passengers or thirty (30) minutes
for actual loading or unloading of property if no other ordinance restricting
parking as to place or time is violated thereby.
   (d)   Any motor vehicle parked in violation of this prohibition may be
impounded in accordance with the provisions of Chapter
405 at the cost and expense of the owner thereof. If the Director of Public
Safety authorizes additional emergency equipment to be used, the fees to be
charged for towing and storage by such authorized agents shall conform to the
fees assessed by the City for the same service.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 451.18 Bus Stops and Taxicab Stands
   (a)   The driver of any bus, other than a charter bus, or taxicab shall not
stand upon any street in any business district at any place other than a bus
stop or taxicab stand, respectively, except that this provision shall not
prevent the driver of any such vehicle from temporarily stopping in accordance
with other stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and
while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers or for the purpose of
picking up or delivering a message or package.
   (b)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a
bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when such stop or stand
has been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver
of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and
while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers, when such stopping
does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter such stop or stand,
and when stopping or parking is not prohibited therein.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 451.19 Motor Carriers
   No motor carrier or commercial car carrier with a vehicle net weight not
exceeding six thousand (6,000) pounds, its agents or employees shall park any
motor vehicle used in the business of such motor carrier or commercial car
carrier on any street in the City, except not exceeding three (3) minutes while
actually discharging or taking on passengers or not exceeding ten (10) minutes
while engaged in receiving or discharging goods, wares or merchandise
(Ord. No. 952-A-86. Passed 4-18-88, eff. 4-21-88)
§ 451.20 Truck Zones
   (a)   No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle other than a
commercial car in any place marked as a truck zone during the hours when such
zone is reserved for loading purposes.
   (b)   No person shall stop, stand or park a commercial car for any purpose
or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or
pickup and loading of materials in any place marked as a truck zone during the
hours when the provisions applicable to truck zones are in effect. In no case
shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed thirty (30)
minutes.
   (c)   No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle for any purpose or
length of time other than for the expeditious unloading of materials or pickup
and loading of materials in any place where there is a physically recessed area
from the street provided for the purpose of such unloading and delivery or
pickup and loading of materials, and which area has been posted for loading and
unloading. In no case shall the stop for loading and unloading exceed thirty
(30) minutes.
   (d)   Notwithstanding any provision of this Code to the contrary, building
service vehicles, while being used for building service business, may stop,
stand or park in any place marked as a truck zone during hours when the
provisions applicable to truck zones are in effect or in any place where there
is a physically recessed area from the street specifically posted for unloading
and delivery or pickup and loading of materials, for a maximum period of two
(2) hours. As used in this section “building service” refers to entities that
are servicing a building and its systems, such as plumbing, electrical,
heating, air conditioning, telecommunications systems, kitchen equipment, or
other similar building components.
(Ord. No. 1925-02. Passed 11-25-02, eff. 12-3-02)
§ 451.21 Trucks and Commercial Vehicles
   (a)   No person shall stand or park a truck with a net weight over seven
thousand (7,000) pounds, commercial tractor, trailer or semitrailer in a
roadway at any time except for the minimum period required in the usual course
of business for making delivery of or loading merchandise for delivery.
   (b)   No person shall stand or park a truck, commercial tractor or other
commercial unit in any public roadway, street or highway at any time in front
of or alongside of property used for residential purposes except in case of a
breakdown or for delivery or loading and unloading purposes. Commercial
vehicles as herein set forth, which are left standing or parked in violation of
this section, shall be subject to be impounded upon the complaint of any person
or duly constituted law enforcement authority.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 451.22 Between Sidewalk and Setback Line
   No person shall stand or park a vehicle between the sidewalk and setback
line in a residential area except upon a driveway.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 451.23 Tree Lawn and Private Driveway
   (a)   No person shall stand or park a vehicle in the area between the
sidewalk and roadway or, where no sidewalk exists, in the area between the
right-of-way line and roadway, except on any section of private driveway within
such areas.
   (b)   No person shall stand or park a vehicle on any section of private
driveway in the area between the sidewalk and roadway or, where no sidewalk
exists, in the area between the right-of-way line and roadway.
   (c)   Notwithstanding divisions (a) and (b) of this section, parking may be
permitted in such areas at such specified locations as may be recommended by
the Commissioner of Traffic Engineering and approved by the City Planning
Commission, which will not unduly interfere with travel or constitute a
detriment to the character of the neighborhood.
   (d)   No permit shall be issued until the members of Council of the wards
affected have been given written notice by the Commissioner of Traffic
Engineering and until the expiration of thirty (30) days from the date of such
notice, unless such period of thirty (30) days is expressly waived by such
Council members in writing.
   (e)   When so approved, such permit shall be issued by the Director of
Public Service upon the payment to the Director of the cost of hard surfacing
the area to be so used and of the appropriate marking thereof for parking
purposes. Any permit shall be subject to revocation if such area is not
maintained in a condition satisfactory to the Director, unduly interferes with
the normal movement of traffic upon such street or otherwise constitutes a
nuisance.
(Ord. No. 530-91. Passed 3-4-91, eff. 3-4-91)
§ 451.24 Private Driveway or Private Property
   (a)   If an owner of private property posts on the property in a conspicuous
manner a prohibition against parking on the property or conditions and
regulations under which parking is permitted, no person shall do either of the
following:
      (1)   Park a vehicle on the property without the consent of the owner or
person in lawful possession;
      (2)   Park a vehicle on the property in violation of any condition or
regulation posted by the owner or person in lawful possession of such property.
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(RC 4511.681)
   (c)   Any motor vehicle parked in violation of this section may be impounded
upon complaint of any person adversely affected in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 405 at the cost and expense of the motor vehicle’s owner.
(Ord. No. 656-17. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 451.241 Parking Vehicles on Vacant Lots Prohibited
   (a)   No person who is the owner of a vacant lot shall knowingly allow a
vehicle to be parked or left upon any vacant lot within the City unless the lot
is a licensed parking lot under Chapter
457 of Codified Ordinances or the lot is an approved off-street parking
facility pursuant to the Zoning Code of the City and the lot is clearly marked
by a sign identifying the owner, the approved private use, and the parking lot
license number, if it is a licensed parking lot.
   (b)   No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any vacant lot within the
City unless the lot is a licensed parking lot under Chapter
457 of Codified Ordinances or the lot is an approved off-street parking
facility pursuant to the Zoning Code of the City and the lot is clearly marked
by a sign identifying the owner and the approved private use.
   (c)   For purposes of this section, a vacant lot shall be defined as a
parcel that does not contain any permanent lawful occupied structure.
   (d)   Cleveland City Council has determined that a vehicle parked on a
vacant lot constitutes a nuisance which must be abated. For this reason, any
vehicle parked or left upon a vacant lot in violation of this section shall be
subject to be impounded as provided in Chapter
405.
   (e)   Any person who violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor for the first offense and is guilty of misdemeanor of the
third degree for a second and any subsequent offense. In addition to any other
method of enforcement provided for in this section, any violation of the
provisions of this section that is a minor misdemeanor may be enforced by the
issuance of a citation in compliance with Rule 4.1 of the Ohio Rules of
Criminal Procedure.
   (f)   This section shall not be construed or interpreted in any manner that
would hinder or limit the ability of the City to enforce section 3101.10(e) of
the Codified Ordinances as it relates to motor vehicles.
(Ord. No. 1491-01. Passed 8-3-05, eff. 8-9-05)
§ 451.25 Abandoned Vehicles
   No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any street, alley or public
grounds within the City for a period in excess of seventy-two (72) hours. Any
vehicle so parked shall be deemed abandoned and shall be subject to be
impounded as provided in Chapter
405.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 451.251 Prohibition Against Abandonment of Junk Motor Vehicle
   (a)   No person shall willfully leave an abandoned junk motor vehicle as
defined in RC 4513.63 on private property for more than seventy-two (72) hours
without the permission of the person having the right to the possession of the
property, or on a public street or other property open to the public for
purposes of vehicular travel or parking, or upon or within the right-of-way of
any road or highway, for forty-eight (48) hours or longer without notification
to the chief of police of the reasons for leaving the motor vehicle in such
place.
   For purposes of this section, the fact that a motor vehicle has been so left
without permission or notification is prima facie evidence of abandonment.
   (b)   Notwithstanding Sections
403.99 and
459.02, whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than three
hundred dollars ($300.00) no portion of such fine to be suspended, and shall
also be assessed any costs incurred by the city in removing and disposing of
such abandoned junk motor vehicle, less any money accruing to the city from
such disposal.
(Ord. No. 520-86. Passed 1-26-87, eff. 1-29-87)
§ 451.26 Vehicles on Service Station Property
   As a supplement to and not in contravention of the provisions of Sections
343.20 and
451.27 of the Codified Ordinances, no person who is the operator of a service
station or any employee of such person shall permit any vehicle not owned by
such person or employee to stand out of doors on such property for more than
twenty-four (24) hours, except that in the case of a junked vehicle, no person
shall permit such vehicle to stand on any property for more than seventy-two
(72) hours without the person who owns or is entitled to possession of such
premises or the employee of such person having filed a complaint in writing
with a law enforcement officer as authorized by RC 4513.60.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 451.27 Notice to Cover or Remove Junk Motor Vehicles
   (a)   (1)   For purposes of this section, “junk motor vehicle” means any
motor vehicle meeting the requirements of RC 4513.63 (B), (C), (D), and (E)
that is left uncovered in the open on private property for more than seventy-
two (72) hours with the permission of the person having the right to possession
of the property, except if the person is operating a junk yard or scrap metal
processing facility licensed under the authority of RC 4737.05 through 4737.12,
or regulated under authority of the City; or if the property on which the motor
vehicle is left is not subject to licensure or regulation by any governmental
authority, unless the person having the right to the possession of the property
can establish that the motor vehicle is part of a bona fide commercial
operation; or if the motor vehicle is a collector’s vehicle.
      (2)   This section shall not prevent a person from storing or keeping, or
restrict a person in the method of storing or keeping, any collector’s vehicle
on private property with the permission of the person having the right to the
possession of the property; except that a person having such permission may be
required to conceal, by means of buildings, fences, vegetation, terrain or
other suitable obstruction, any unlicensed collector’s vehicle stored in the
open.
      (3)   The Police Chief or his or her designee may send notice, by
certified mail with return receipt requested, to the person having the right to
the possession of the property on which a junk motor vehicle is left, that
within ten (10) days of receipt of the notice, the junk motor vehicle either
shall be covered by being housed in a garage or other suitable structure, or
shall be removed from the property.
      (4)   No person shall willfully leave a junk motor vehicle uncovered in
the open for more than ten (10) days after receipt of a notice as provided in
this section. The fact that a junk motor vehicle is so left is prima facie
evidence of willful failure to comply with the notice, and each subsequent
period of thirty (30) days that a junk motor vehicle continues to be so left
constitutes a separate offense.
(RC 4513.65)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a
first offense; on a second offense, such person is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree; on each subsequent offense, such person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(Ord. No. 656-17. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 451.271 Abandonment Established by Notice
   (a)   The Chief of Police may send notice by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the owner of private property, and unless the property is
unoccupied, to the person having the right to possession of the private
property, if different, on which a motor vehicle meeting the requirements of
divisions (B), (C), (D), and (E) of RC 4513.63 is left. Each notice sent
pursuant to this division shall describe the motor vehicle by make, if known,
and manufacturer’s serial number, if known, and shall state that the motor
vehicle shall be deemed to be on the property without permission unless the
owner or person having the right to possession of the property notifies the
Chief of Police to the contrary within ten (10) days of receipt of notice. Each
notice sent to a private property owner shall be addressed to the owner as
shown in the records of the county recorder for Cuyahoga County and sent to the
tax mailing address on file with the county treasurer for Cuyahoga County,
except that if the county treasurer has no tax mailing address on file, the
notice shall be sent to the tax mailing address listed on the last recorded
deed for the property. Each notice sent to the person having the right to
possession of the private property, if different from the owner, shall use the
address of the private property on which the motor vehicle is left. If all
applicable notices are sent and are claimed and the owner or person having the
right to possession of the property fails to notify the Chief of Police within
ten (10) days of receipt of notice that the motor vehicle is on the property
with permission, it shall be deemed to meet the requirement of abandonment on
private property described in division (A) of RC 4513.63.
   (b)   In the event that a given notice sent pursuant to division (a) of this
section is returned to the sender unclaimed, the Chief of Police may send the
notice by regular U.S. mail to the same person that failed to claim the
certified mail notice, using the same address described in division (a) of this
section. If each person that failed to claim a notice sent pursuant to division
(a) of this section is sent the notice by regular U.S. mail and such notice is
not returned by the postal authorities with an endorsement showing failure of
delivery, and if the owner or person having the right to possession of the
property fails to notify the Chief of Police within ten (10) days of the
sending of notice that the motor vehicle is on the property with permission,
then the motor vehicle shall be deemed to meet the requirement of abandonment
on private property described in division (A) of RC 4513.63.
(Ord. No. 1434-A-86. Passed 1-26-87, eff. 1-29-87)
§ 451.28 Reserved Street Parking for United States Marshal
   No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle in any place marked as
reserved for the United States Marshal. The reserved parking places for the
United States Marshal are as follows:
   South side of Rockwell Avenue between East 3rd Street and Public Square;
   West side of East 3rd Street between Rockwell Avenue and Superior Avenue.
(Ord. No. 206-78. Passed 12-17-79, eff. 12-19-79)
§ 451.29 Reserved Street Parking for United States Postal Service
   No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle in any place marked as
reserved for the United States Postal Service between the hours of 9:30 a.m.
and 1:00 p.m. Such reserved parking places are located as follows:
   (a)   The southeast corner of West 9th Street at Frankfort Avenue;
   (b)   The southeast corner of West 9th Street at Johnson Court;
   (c)   The east side of West 6th Street between Frankfort Avenue and Superior
Avenue;
   (d)   The west side of West 6th Street between Lakeside Avenue and Johnson
Court;
   (e)   The northeast corner of West 3rd Street at Superior Avenue;
   (f)   The southwest corner of Ontario Street at Lakeside Avenue;
   (g)   The southeast corner of St. Clair Avenue and West 2nd Street;
   (h)   The south side of Euclid Avenue between East 14th Street and East 18th
Street;
   (i)   The southwest corner of East Mall Drive at St. Clair Avenue;
   (j)   The southeast corner of St. C1air Avenue at East 18th Street;
   (k)   The south side of Huron Road between East 4th Street and East 9th
Street;
   (l)   The northwest corner of Sumner Court at East 14th Street;
   (m)   The northwest corner of East 6th Street at Rockwell Avenue; and
   (n)   The southwest corner of East 17th Street at Payne Avenue.
(Ord. No. 2742-81. Passed 3-29-82, eff. 4-1-82)
§ 451.30 Reserved Street Parking for City Vehicles – Expired
(Ord. No. 2970-87. Passed 1-25-88, eff. 2-1-88)
   Note: As of 1-25-89, this section is no longer effective.
   No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle except for vehicles owned by
the City of Cleveland in the following places marked as reserved for City of
Cleveland vehicles: The west side of East 6th Street extending from St. Clair
Avenue north, a distance of two hundred ninety-eight (298) feet. This section
shall be effective for a period of one (1) year after its passage.
§ 451.31 Reserved Street Parking for City Police Vehicles
   No person shall stop, stand, or park any vehicle except for vehicles owned
by the City of Cleveland, Division of Police, in the following places marked as
reserved for City of Cleveland Police Vehicles:
   The west side of Ontario Street extending from St. Clair Avenue north to
Lakeside Avenue;
   The north side of St. Clair Avenue extending from Ontario Street west, a
distance of 249 feet.
(Ord. No. 71-A-87. Passed 10-17-88, eff. 10-20-88)
§ 451.32 Reserved
§ 451.33 Establishment of Zones for Valet Parking, Limousine, Day Care and
Passenger Drop off/Pick up, and Hotel Check In/Check Out; Violations; Fees
   (a)   The Director of Public Service is authorized to establish valet zones
on public streets to be reserved for persons leaving vehicles with a valet
parking attendant.
   (b)   On receipt of an application for a permit to establish a valet zone,
and payment of a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00), the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses shall transmit the application to the Director of
Public Service to determine if the area in question complies with the
requirements of this section. The Director of Public Service shall, within
sixty (60) days of receipt of the application, notify the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses whether the area complies with this section. On
notification of compliance, the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses shall
issue the permit on a form promulgated by the Commissioner for that purpose.
   (c)   The Director of Public Service is also authorized to establish
limousine zones for limousines and other vehicles momentarily dropping off or
picking up passengers and day care zones on public streets reserved for
motorists standing or parking vehicles for the purpose of dropping off or
picking up children enrolled at day care centers.
   (d)   The Director of Public Service is also authorized to establish hotel
check in/check out zones on public streets for motorists standing or parking
vehicles for the purpose of checking in or checking out of a hotel.
   (e)   Prior to the establishment of any zone, the Commissioner of Traffic
Engineering shall conduct a study and report the findings to the Director of
Public Service together with recommendations as to the need for and the
advisability of creating the zone. The investigation shall consider all
relevant traffic engineering considerations, including without limitation the
specific considerations identified in this division. Following the
investigation, the zone shall not be established if the Director of Public
Service determines that any of the following are true:
      (1)   Establishing proposed zone would create or contribute to a traffic
flow or traffic congestion problem;
      (2)   The proposed zone is in an area already experiencing traffic
congestion, and there are adequate off-street areas for standing or parking
vehicles, and the proposed zone cannot be implemented without resolving,
accommodating or decreasing said traffic congestion;
      (3)   The proposed zone is presently a restricted parking area, unless
the investigation of the Commissioner of Traffic Engineering reveals that it is
desirable to lift or change the restriction.
   (f)   The establishment of a zone under this section shall be effective ten
(10) days after publication of a notice in the City Record and on the posting
of signs sufficient in number and location to apprise the ordinarily observant
person of the existence of the zone, and shall have the force and effect of law
until rescinded by the Director of Public Service or until disapproved by
ordinance of Council.
   (g)   The use of any zone established under this section shall be suspended
on any street of the City which has been closed under any lawful authority,
including without limitation street closings made under Section 133.09,
403.05 or
411.05 of these Codified Ordinances.
   (h)   Each zone established under this section shall be for public use and
not reserved for any particular business establishment or any particular
private user, except that the Director of Public Service may designate that any
zone created under this section be restricted to motorists standing or parking
vehicles for the purpose of dropping off or picking up children enrolled at a
given day care center or centers or for the purpose of checking in or checking
out of a hotel. If a zone is so restricted, the signs required by division (f)
of this section shall apprise motorists of the restriction.
   (i)   No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a zone established for
valet parking or passenger drop off/pick up for a period in excess of ten (10)
minutes, nor shall any person stand or park a vehicle in any such zone except
for the purpose of leaving the vehicle in the possession of a valet parking
attendant then on duty, or while actually dropping off or picking up
passengers. In the case of zones established in front of business
establishments with the capacity to seat more than eight hundred (800)
individuals, no person shall stand or park a vehicle in a zone established for
valet parking or passenger drop off/pick up for a period in excess of thirty
(30) minutes, nor shall any person stand or park a vehicle in any such zone
except for the purpose of leaving the vehicle in the possession of a valet
parking attendant then on duty, or while actually dropping off or picking up
passengers. In the case of zones established for day care drop off/pick up, no
person shall stand or park a vehicle in the zone in excess of fifteen (15)
minutes, nor shall any person stand or park a vehicle in any zone except for
the purpose of dropping off or picking up a child or children enrolled in a day
care center.
   (j)   No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a zone established for
checking in or checking out of a hotel for a period in excess of thirty (30)
minutes, nor shall any person stand or park a vehicle in any such zone except
for the purpose of checking in or checking out of a hotel.
   (k)   No person standing or parking a vehicle in a zone established under
this section shall fail to pull the vehicle curbside, right wheels to the curb,
nor shall any person stop or park a vehicle alongside any vehicle stopped or
parked curbside in such a zone, commonly referred to as “double parking.”
   (l)   In valet parking zones, a valet attendant shall remove the vehicle
from the city streets as soon as practicable, and under no condition shall the
vehicle remain on the street for a period of time in excess of ten (10)
minutes.
   (m)   In zones established for checking in or checking out of a hotel,
parking within such zone shall be permitted twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven
(7) days a week.
   (n)   The Director of Public Service shall have the authority to promulgate
rules and regulations to implement the provisions of this section.
(Ord. No. 833-03. Passed 6-10-03, eff. 6-12-03)
CHAPTER 453 – STREET PARKING METERS
453.01   Parking Regulations in Parking Meter Zones
453.02   Parking Violations
453.03   Collection of Coins
453.04   Application of Funds Collected
Cross-reference:
   General parking regulations, CO
Ch. 451
   Municipal parking facilities, CO
Ch. 455
   Parking meter defined, CO
401.33
   Registered owner prima facie liable for unlawful parking, CO
451.02
§ 453.01 Parking Regulations in Parking Meter Zones
   (a)   No person shall park a vehicle in an individual street parking space
within a parking meter zone unless the curb side wheels of such a vehicle are
parallel with and not more than twelve (12) inches from the curb. Whenever a
vehicle is parked in a street parking meter zone, the person parking such
vehicle shall remit the required parking fee.
   (b)   The Director of Public Works is authorized to charge and cause to be
collected the payment required in parking meter zones such charges and fees
ranging from one dollar ($1.00) per hour to eight dollars ($8.00) per hour in
the Downtown Parking Area and one dollar ($1.00) per hour to five dollars
($5.00) per hour outside of the Downtown Parking Area and is further authorized
to establish regulations that set forth the days of the week, hours of the day,
and intervals of time for which parking is permissible.
   (c)   Notice to the public shall be given by appropriate signs, setting
forth the length of time for which parking is permitted and the conditions
thereof. These may be upon the parking meter stand or in the immediate
vicinity. Any vehicle which remains in a metered parking zone after the
prescribed time for parking is hereby determined to be illegally parked. At
each place where street metered parking zones are so established as provided in
Section
403.06, each vehicle shall be parked entirely within a metered parking zone The
provisions of this section shall not apply to vehicles parking upon the street
of the City between the hours of 10:00 p.m. until 7:00 a.m. the following
morning and upon Sundays outside of the Downtown Parking Area, New Year’s Day,
Martin Luther King Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving
Day, the day after Thanksgiving Day (“Black Friday”), Christmas Day, and the
day after Christmas Day, unless a different rule or regulation is otherwise set
forth in this Traffic Code. The Director of Public Works, in the Director’s
discretion, may exempt provisions of this section on an as-needed basis.
(Ord. No. 817-2023. Passed 9-18-23, eff. 9-21-23)
§ 453.02 Parking Violations
   (a)   No person shall park, cause, allow or permit to be parked any vehicle
owned or operated by such person in any parking meter zone without remitting
the required parking fee.
   (b)   No person shall cause, allow or permit any vehicle registered in his
or her name to be parked overtime or beyond a lawful period of time prescribed
by or in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (c)   No person shall remit or cause to be remitted in a parking meter any
payment for the purpose of increasing or extending the parking time of any
vehicle beyond legal parking time established for the parking meter zone.
   (d)   No person shall cause, allow or permit any vehicle owned or operated
by such person to be parked across any line designating a metered parking zone
space.
   Any such vehicle that remains parked in a space in excess of the posted time
restriction shall be deemed prima facie evidence of the unlawful parking of
such vehicle by its owners, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 817-2023. Passed 9-18-23, eff. 9-21-23)
§ 453.03 Collection of Coins
   The City Treasurer shall have charge of the collection of the parking fees
for on-street parking.
(Ord. No. 817-2023. Passed 9-18-23, eff. 9-21-23)
§ 453.04 Application of Funds Collected
   The parking fees required to be remitted under the provisions of Section
453.01 are hereby levied as a regulation and inspection fee to cover the cost
of inspection, installation, operation, control and use of street metered
parking zones and parking meters.
(Ord. No. 817-2023. Passed 9-18-23, eff. 9-21-23)
CHAPTER 455 – MUNICIPAL PARKING FACILITIES
455.01   Designation of Parking Spaces; Use of Meters or Gates
455.02   Regulations by Commissioner of Traffic Engineering and Parking and
Commissioner of Parking Facilities
455.03   Police Enforcement Duty
455.04   Duty to Place Signs and Mark Surfaces
455.05   Parking Regulations
455.06   Parking Time Limits
455.061   Reserved Parking Spaces at Willard Park Garage
455.07   Violations
455.08   Issuance of Parking Tokens, Parking Keys and Parking Cards
455.09   Collection of Parking Fees
455.10   Application of Funds Collected
Cross-reference:
   Municipal parking facility defined, CO
401.27
   Parking attendants to report unclaimed vehicles, CO
435.14
   Parking meter regulations, CO
Ch. 453
   Public garages and parking lots, CO
Ch. 457
Statutory reference:
   Off-street parking facilities, RC 717.05 et seq.
§ 455.01 Designation of Parking Spaces; Use of Meters or Gates
   (a)   The Commissioner of Parking Facilities is hereby authorized and
directed to establish and mark off individual parking spaces in such portions
of a Municipal off-street parking facility which are, in his or her opinion,
necessary for the proper parking of motor vehicles within such Municipal
parking facility. The Commissioner of Traffic Engineering has like authority
with regard to street parking facilities.
   (b)   The Commissioner of Parking Facilities may install and maintain
individual parking meters, or he or she may install and maintain automatically
operated gates at the exits or entrances of off-street parking facilities and
parking booths for the issuance of tickets, as are in the best interests of the
City. The Commissioner of Parking Facilities also has authority to install and
maintain parking meters on City streets.
(Ord. No. 817-2023. Passed 9-18-23, eff. 9-21-23)
§ 455.02 Regulations by Commissioner of Traffic Engineering and Parking and
Commissioner of Parking Facilities
   (a)   The Commissioner of Traffic Engineering and Parking, with respect to
roadways on City property, and the Commissioner of Parking Facilities, with
respect to off-street parking facilities, are hereby authorized to adopt
regulations for Municipal roadways on City property and off-street parking
facilities, respectively, not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter,
including, but not limited to:
      (1)   Establishing limits of speed, to be determined upon the basis of
official engineering and traffic investigations;
      (2)   Designating, laying out and identifying drives for the purpose of
furnishing ingress and egress to vehicles using Municipal parking facilities;
      (3)   Designating drives upon which vehicles shall move in only one (1)
direction;
      (4)   Prohibiting right-hand turns or left-hand turns, or permitting only
right-hand turns or left-hand turns at designated drive intersections;
      (5)   Designating those drives upon which vehicles must stop or yield the
right-of-way at drive intersections;
      (6)   Designating, locating and marking crosswalks, center lines, lane
lines, stop lines and other markings upon the surface of the Municipal parking
facility to provide for the protection and safety of the public;
      (7)   Designating and marking those areas in which vehicles shall not
stop, stand or park;
      (8)   Designating roadways, drives or parts thereof upon which only RTA
buses shall operate.
   (b)   The regulations adopted by authority of subsections (a)(2) through (8)
hereof shall become effective ten (10) days after publication in the City
Record and upon the erection of signs sufficient in number and location to
apprise the ordinarily observant person of the existence of the regulation, and
shall have the force and effect of ordinances until rescinded by the
Commissioner or disapproved by ordinance of Council.
   The speed regulations adopted by the Commissioner pursuant to subsection (a)
(1) hereof shall be first approved by Council and thereafter shall become
effective as is provided in the foregoing paragraph.
(Ord. No. 1525-81. Passed 6-29-81, eff. 7-2-81)
§ 455.03 Police Enforcement Duty
   The members of the Police Division and civilian employees of the Division of
Traffic Engineering and Parking and the Division of Parking Facilities shall
enforce the provisions of this chapter and the regulations of the Commissioner
of Traffic Engineering and Parking and the Commissioner of Parking Facilities
issued pursuant to the authority of Section
455.02.
(Ord. No. 1525-81. Passed 6-29-81, eff. 7-2-81)
§ 455.04 Duty to Place Signs and Mark Surfaces
   The Commissioner of Traffic Engineering and Parking, with respect to street
parking, and the Commissioner of Parking Facilities, with respect to off-
street parking, shall place and maintain signs and traffic control devices when
and as required under this chapter. The Commissioners may place and maintain
such additional signs and traffic control devices as they may deem necessary to
regulate, guide, warn or apprise traffic consistent with this chapter. The
Commissioner of Parking Facilities shall also mark the surface of the Municipal
parking lot and other such off-street parking facilities by lines painted or
durably marked thereon where such surface marking is necessary or proper under
this chapter.
(Ord. No. 1525-81. Passed 6-29-81, eff. 7-2-81)
§ 455.05 Parking Regulations
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, when any vehicle is
parked in any parking space to which a parking meter zone is located, the
person so parking such vehicle shall, upon entering such parking space,
immediately remit or cause to be remitted the required parking fees in parking
meters. Upon remittance of such parking fees, and the placing of such parking
meter or mobile pay option in operation, the parking space may be lawfully
occupied by such vehicle during the period indicated on the meter or mobile pay
option. Any person so parking a vehicle who fails to remit the required parking
fees and the vehicle remains in an individual on-street or off-street parking
space after the prescribed time for parking shall be deemed illegally parked
and in violation of the provisions of this section. No vehicle shall remain
parked in a parking space in excess of the posted time restriction pursuant to
the provisions of this section. The fact that the vehicle is located in an on-
street or off-street parking space when the time on the parking meter or mobile
payment option for the same shows no parking permitted shall be deemed prima
facie evidence of the unlawful parking of such vehicle by its owner, and such
parking shall be deemed a violation of this section.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, when any vehicle is
parked in a parking space in a Municipal parking facility in which
automatically operated gates have been erected at the exits or entrances of
such parking facility, the person so parking such vehicle shall, upon removing
such vehicle from the Municipal parking facility, upon entering such parking
facility, remit or cause to be remitted the required parking fees or the use of
the proper parking key or parking card as is required for such automatically
operated gate and as is designated by proper directions adjacent thereto.
Failure to remit the required parking fees or use the proper parking key or
parking card shall constitute a violation of this section. Upon the remittance
of the required parking fees or the use of the proper parking key or parking
card, the vehicle being removed from the parking facility shall be deemed to
have been lawfully parked for that continuous period of parking time
immediately preceding the removal of the vehicle from the Municipal parking
facility.
(Ord. No. 817-2023. Passed 9-18-23, eff. 9-21-23)
§ 455.06 Parking Time Limits
   Parking or standing a vehicle in a parking space in a Municipal parking
facility adjacent to which parking space a parking meter has been erected or in
a Municipal parking facility which is equipped with automatically operated
gates at the exits or entrances, shall be lawful for such length of time and
for such charges and fees as may be established by the Board of Control and
approved by Council as provided in Section 133.25 of the Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 2199-81. Passed 9-21-81, eff. 9-22-81)
§ 455.061 Reserved Parking Spaces at Willard Park Garage
   The Commissioner of Parking Facilities shall designate parking spaces in the
Willard Park Garage to be reserved at no charge for members of Council and such
members of Council staff as the President shall designate, the Clerk of
Council, the Mayor and such members of his or her staff as the Mayor shall
designate, the directors of departments, and the Chiefs of Police and Fire.
When signs are posted giving notice of such reserved parking spaces, no other
person shall park in such reserved parking spaces on Mondays from 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 p.m., and on other weekdays and Saturdays from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
(Ord. No. 139-99. Passed 2-1-99, eff. 2-10-99)
§ 455.07 Violations
   It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this chapter for
any person:
   (a)   To cause, allow or permit any vehicle registered in the name of or
operated by such person to be parked overtime or beyond the period of legal
parking time as may be provided in Section
455.06;
   (b)   To permit any vehicle to remain or be placed in any parking space
adjacent to any parking meter zone while the vehicle occupying such parking
space has already been parked beyond the period prescribed for such parking
space;
   (c)   To park any vehicle across any line or marking of a parking space or
in such position that the vehicle shall not be entirely within the area
designated by such lines or marking;
   (d)   To perform any act other than the remittance of parking fees in
parking meters or mobile pay options, the deposit of parking tokens, or the use
of parking keys and parking cards for the purposes of securing or increasing
the parking meter indication of legal parking time or for the purpose of
putting into operation the automatically operated gate; and
   (e)   To fail to comply with any other provisions of this chapter or with
any rules or regulations duly adopted by the Commissioner of Traffic
Engineering and Parking and the Commissioner of Parking Facilities, pursuant to
the authority of Section
455.02.
(Ord. No. 817-2023. Passed 9-18-23, eff. 9-21-23)
§ 455.08 Issuance of Parking Tokens, Parking Keys and Parking Cards
   The Commissioner of Parking Facilities shall issue parking tokens, parking
keys and parking cards and shall collect such charges and fees as are
established by the Board of Control pursuant to the provisions of Section
133.25 of the Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 1525-81. Passed 6-29-81, eff. 7-2-81)
§ 455.09 Collection of Parking Fees
   The Commissioner of Parking Facilities shall have charge of the collection
of the parking fees and charges remitted in parking meters, mobile payment
options or in automatically operated gates on Municipal parking facilities.
(Ord. No. 1061-2024. Passed 3-3-25, eff. 3-4-25)
§ 455.10 Application of Funds Collected
   The parking fees and charges remitted in parking meters or by way of a
mobile pay option or automatically operated gates and the fees and charges
collected for the issuance of parking tokens, parking keys or parking cards in
Municipal off-street parking facilities are required and, except for any
charges assessed by a New Community Authority, shall be used to defray the
expense of proper regulation of parking and traffic upon Municipal off-street
parking facilities in the City; to provide the cost of supervision, regulation
and control of the parking of vehicles in Municipal off-street parking
facilities; the payment of the interest on and the retirement at maturity of
bonds issued for the purchase of land, the improvement thereof and the
equipping of such premises for off-street parking operation; and to cover the
cost of purchase, supervision, protection, inspection, installation, operation,
maintenance, control and use of parking meters, automatically operated gates on
Municipal off-street parking facilities; all of which serve to regulate traffic
and reduce the congestion caused by vehicles upon the streets of the City.
   Separate accounts shall be maintained for each Municipal off-street parking
facility so as to show the financial results of City ownership and operation,
including all assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, the cost of all
improvements, expense of maintenance and the amount set aside for interest and
debt retirement.
(Ord. No. 1061-2024. Passed 3-3-25, eff. 3-4-25)
CHAPTER 457 – PUBLIC GARAGES AND PARKING LOTS
457.01   License Required
457.02   License Application
457.03   License Issuance; Renewal
457.035   Districts Established
457.04   Signs
457.05   Claim Checks to be Furnished – Repealed
457.06   Change of Rates
457.07   Screening Barriers
457.071   Downtown Parking Lot Landscaping Encroachment Permits
457.08   Employees
457.09   Maintenance of Parking Place and Surroundings, Payment of Fees and
Safety Requirements
457.10   Bicycle Parking
457.11   Revocation or Suspension of License
457.12   Appeals
457.99   Penalty
457.991   Civil Penalties, Enforcement and Appeals
Cross-reference:
   Municipal parking facilities, CO
Ch. 455
   Parking attendants to report unclaimed vehicles, CO
435.14
Statutory reference:
   Off-street parking facilities, RC 717.05 et seq.
§ 457.01 License Required
   No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of storing motor
vehicles for hire in a building or a lot within the City unless and until
licensed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. As used in this
chapter, the terms “parking facility,” “parking place,” “public garage” and
“parking lot” reference the business activity defined in Section
401.34 hereof.
(Ord. No. 726-2025. Passed 8-13-25, eff. 8-18-25)
§ 457.02 License Application
   Every applicant for a license to operate a public garage or parking lot
shall make application in writing to the Commissioner of Assessments and
Licenses, which application shall set forth the following information:
   (a)   The name and address of the applicant, and if a partnership, the names
and addresses of all partners, and if a corporation, the name, date and state
under which incorporated, and the names and addresses of the officers and the
statutory agent;
   (b)   An accurately scaled and dimensioned site plan and elevation drawing
(s) showing the configuration of entrances, exits, aisles and spaces;
identifying the right-of-way, curbs and sidewalks, signage, landscaping,
curbing, wheel stops, screening materials, bicycle parking, and lighting; and
indicating the dimensions of all such elements;
   (c)   The hours during which motor vehicles may be stored and the hours
during which the premises will be served by an attendant;
   (d)   For a parking facility located within the Downtown Core Parking
District, Warehouse Parking District, Erieview Parking District, and Gateway
Parking District, as established in division (b) Section
457.035 of the Codified Ordinances and which are referred to in this chapter as
the “Designated Parking Districts”, such information as the Chief of Police, or
their designee, deems pertinent or necessary to detail the security measures at
such facility;
   (e)   The certificate of occupancy for the parking facility. Changes in the
site, landscaping, or parking lot conditions shall require an updated
certificate of occupancy;
   (f)   Accurately scaled and dimensioned images of all parking facility
signage; and
   (g)   Such other information as the Commissioner deems pertinent or
necessary to carry into effect the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 726-2025. Passed 8-13-25, eff. 8-18-25)
§ 457.03 License Issuance; Renewal
   (a)   Public Garages. On receipt of an application for a license to operate
a public garage, the payment of the fee required by division (h) of this
section, and subject to division (c) of this section, as applicable, the
Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses shall issue the license on a form
promulgated by the Commissioner for that purpose. No license shall be issued
except to an applicant for a property which is in compliance with the terms of
this chapter and is also in compliance with Section
350.17 and Section
352.13 of the Codified Ordinances.
   (b)   Parking Lots. On receipt of an application for a license to operate a
parking lot, the payment of the fees required under divisions (h) and (i) of
this section, and subject to division (c) of this section, as applicable, the
Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses shall transmit the application to the
Director of the City Planning Commission to determine whether the facility in
question complies with the substantive provisions of the chapter. The Director
of the City Planning Commission shall, within sixty (60) days of receipt of the
application, notify the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses whether the
facility in question complies with all of the substantive provisions of this
chapter. On notification of compliance from the Director of City Planning under
this division and the Chief of Police under division (c) of this section, the
Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses shall issue the license on a form
promulgated by the Commissioner for that purpose. No license shall be issued
except to an applicant for property which is in compliance with the terms of
this chapter and is also in compliance with Section
350.17 and Section
352.13 of the Codified Ordinances, as applicable to the subject property.
   (c)   Review by the Chief of Police of Safety Measures in Applications
within Designated Parking Districts. The Commissioner of Assessments and
Licenses shall transmit each application for a parking facility within the
Designated Parking Districts to the Chief of Police to determine whether the
parking facility has reasonable operational, staffing, infrastructure, or other
security measures reasonably calculated and necessary to address or minimize
instances of criminal behavior. The Chief shall, within sixty (60) days of
receipt of the application, notify the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses
of such determination. The applicant shall supply all additional information
requested by the Chief for evaluation of the safety measures. No license shall
be issued unless the Chief determines that reasonable safety measures are or
will be in place. If the Chief determines that such reasonable safety measures
are insufficient, the applicant may submit revised security measures for review
one time without incurring any additional costs or may appeal the Chief’s
determination in accordance with Section
457.12 of these Codified Ordinances.
   (d)   Issuance and Renewal. All licenses issued under this section shall be
issued for a period of one (1) year commencing November 1. Licenses may be
renewed if an application for renewal containing the information listed in
Section
457.02 is submitted to the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses not less
than ninety (90) days before termination of the previous license or
registration. Applications for license renewal or for the licensing of a
registered parking lot shall be accompanied by an approved site and landscape
plan as documented in the certificate of occupancy. Changes in the site,
landscaping, or parking lot conditions shall require an updated certificate of
occupancy to be included with the application.
   (e)   License Extension. If an application for a license renewal has been
submitted in accordance with the provisions of Sections
457.02 and
457.03 of this chapter, and if, before the existing license has expired, the
City has not taken all administrative and legislative action required for
approval of the renewal of the license (including, if applicable, the granting
of an encroachment permit), the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses shall
extend the existing license on a month-by-month basis until the City has taken
action as required by this chapter.
   (f)   Applicability to Premises. Licenses issued under this section shall
apply only to the premises described in the application, and a separate
application and license shall be required for each noncontiguous site operated.
The license shall not be assignable or transferable.
   (g)   Notification of Police Chief. The Commissioner of Assessments and
Licenses shall notify the Chief of Police of each license issued under this
chapter.
   (h)   License Fee. Each application for a new or renewal license shall be
accompanied by a fee of one dollar ($1.00) per parking space.
   (i)   Site Plan Review Fee. Each application for a new or renewal license,
including a new or revised site plan, shall be accompanied by an additional fee
of one hundred and twenty dollars ($120.00).
(Ord. No. 726-2025. Passed 8-13-25, eff. 8-18-25)
§ 457.035 Districts Established
   Six (6) specific geographic districts are hereby established for the
application of particular provisions of this chapter. Except as otherwise
specified, regulations of this chapter shall apply in each of the six (6)
districts as well as in the remainder of the City.
   (a)   Purpose. It is recognized that, on a citywide basis, Cleveland’s
central business district is characterized by the highest levels of vehicular
traffic, pedestrian traffic, parking demand, general business activity, and
convention and tourism-related activity. These circumstances require that the
highest standards for parking facility operation be applied to facilities
closest to the City’s core.
   (b)   Description of Districts. The six (6) parking facility licensing
districts are as follows:
      (1)   Downtown Core Parking District. Beginning at a point of
intersection of the center line of West 3 Street and the center line of the
Conrail Tracks; thence northeasterly along said center line of the Conrail
Tracks to its intersection with the center line of East 12 Street; thence
southeasterly along said center line of East 12 Street to its intersection with
the center line of Chester Avenue, N.E.; thence northeasterly along said center
line of Chester Avenue, N.E. to its intersection with the center line of East
18 Street; thence southerly along said center line of East 18 Street to its
intersection with the center line of Brownell Court, S.E.; thence easterly
along said center line of Brownell Court, S.E. to its intersection with a line
located one hundred thirty two (132) feet east of the easterly line of East 18
Street; thence southerly along said line which is parallel to and one hundred
thirty two (132) feet east of said easterly line of East 18 Street to its
intersection with the center line of Prospect Avenue, S.E.; thence westerly
along said center line of Prospect Avenue, S.E. to its intersection with the
center line of East 14 Street; thence northwesterly along said center line of
East 14 Street to its intersection with the center line of Brownell Court,
S.E.; thence westerly, northwesterly, and southwesterly along said center line
of Brownell Court, S.E., to its intersection with a twelve (12) foot unnamed
alley; thence northwesterly along said twelve (12) foot unnamed alley to its
intersection with the center line of Huron Road, S.E.; thence southwesterly
along said center line of Huron Road, S.E. to its intersection with the center
line of East 9 Street; thence northwesterly along said center line of East 9
Street to the center line of Alpha Court, S.E.; thence westerly and
northwesterly along said center line of Alpha Court, S.E. to its intersection
with the center line of East 8 Street; thence northeasterly along said center
line of East 8 Street to its intersection with a line located one hundred (100)
feet southwest of the southwesterly line of Euclid Avenue; thence northwesterly
and southwesterly along said line which is parallel to and one hundred (100)
feet southwest of said southwesterly line of Euclid Avenue to its intersection
with the center line of Ontario Street; thence southeasterly along said center
line of Ontario Street to its intersection with the center line of Huron Road,
S.E.; thence northwesterly along said center line of Huron Road, S.E. to its
intersection with the center line of Superior Avenue, S.E.; thence easterly
along said center line of Superior Avenue, S.E. to its intersection with the
center line of West 3 Street; thence northerly along said center line of Old
River Road to its intersection with the center line of West 3 Street; thence
northerly along said center line of West 3 Street to the place of beginning.
      (2)   Warehouse Parking District. Beginning at a point of the
intersection of the center line of Superior Avenue, S.E., and the center line
of Old River Road; thence northwesterly along said center line of Old River
Road to its intersection with the center line of West St. Clair; thence
northeasterly along said center line of West St. Clair to its intersection with
the center line of West 10 Street; thence northwesterly along said center line
of West 10 Street to its intersection with the center line of Main Avenue,
N.E.; thence northeasterly along said center line of Main Avenue, N.E. to its
intersection with the center line of West 3 Street; thence southerly along said
center line of West 3 Street to its intersection with the center line of
Superior Avenue, S.E.; thence westerly along said center line of Superior
Avenue, S.E. to its intersection with the center line of Huron Road, S.E.;
thence northwesterly along the center line of Superior Road, S.E. to the place
of beginning.
      (3)   Erieview Parking District. Beginning at a point of intersection of
the center line of Chester Avenue, N.E. and the center line of East 12 Street;
thence northwesterly along said center line of East 12 Street to its
intersection with the center line of the Conrail Tracks; thence northeasterly
along said center line of said Conrail Tracks to its intersection with the
center line of East 18 Street; thence southeasterly along said center line of
East 18 Street to its intersection with the center line of Chester Avenue,
N.E.; thence northwesterly and southwesterly along said center line of Chester
Avenue, N.E. to the place of beginning.
      (4)   Flats Parking District. Beginning at a point of intersection of the
center line of the Detroit Superior Bridge and the center line of West 25
Street; thence northwesterly along said center line of West 25 Street to its
intersection with the center line of Mulberry Street; thence northwesterly
along said center line of Mulberry Street to its intersection with the center
line of River Road, N.W.; thence northeasterly along said center line of River
Road, N.W. to its intersection with the northwesterly edge of the river bank;
thence westerly, northwesterly and northerly along said northerly edge of the
river bank to its intersection with the center line of the Conrail Tracks;
thence northeasterly along said center line of the Conrail Tracks to its
intersection with the center line of West 3 Street; thence southeasterly along
said center line of West 3 Street to its intersection with the center line of
Superior Avenue, N.W.; thence southwesterly along said center line of Superior
Avenue, N.W. and continuing southwesterly along the center line of the Detroit
Superior Bridge to the place of beginning.
      (5)   Downtown Lakefront Parking District. Beginning at a point of
intersection of the center line of the Conrail Tracks and the center line of
West 3 Street; thence northwesterly along said center line of West 3 Street to
its intersection with the center line of the Memorial Shoreway; thence
northeasterly along said center line of the Memorial Shoreway to its
intersection with the northwesterly extension of the center line of I-71
Innerbelt Freeway; thence southeasterly along said northwesterly extension and
along said center line of said I-71 Innerbelt Freeway to its intersection with
said center line of said Conrail Tracks; thence southwesterly along said center
line of said Conrail Tracks to the place of beginning.
      (6)   Gateway. Beginning at a point of intersection of the center line of
East 14 Street and the center line of the Inner Belt; thence southwesterly
along said center line of the Inner Belt to its intersection with the center
line of Broadway; thence northwesterly along said center line of Broadway to
its intersection with the center line of Ontario Street; thence northwesterly
along said center line of Ontario Street to its intersection with the westerly
extension of a line located one hundred (100) feet southwest of the
southwesterly line of Euclid Avenue; thence easterly along said westerly
extension and continuing southeasterly along said line which is parallel to and
one hundred (100) feet southwest of said southwesterly line of Euclid Avenue
and along its easterly extension to its intersection with the center line of
East 9 Street; thence southeasterly along said center line of East 9 Street to
its intersection with Huron Road, S.E.; thence northeasterly along said center
line of Huron Road, S.E. to its intersection with the center line of a twelve
(12) foot unnamed alley; thence southeasterly along said center line of said
twelve (12) foot unnamed alley to its intersection with the center line of
Brownell Court, S.E.; thence easterly along said center line of Brownell Court,
S.E. to the center line of East 14 Street; thence southeasterly along said
center line of East 14 Street to its intersection with the center line of
Prospect Avenue, S.E.; thence easterly along said center line of Prospect
Avenue to its intersection with the center line of East 18 Street; thence
southerly along said center line of East 18 Street to its intersection with the
center line of East 14 Street; thence southerly along said center line of East
14 Street to the place of beginning.
(Ord. No. 1552-A-90. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 6-26-91)
§ 457.04 Signs
   (a)   Purpose. The regulations of this section are established to ensure
that licensed parking facilities are furnished with signs which provide
customers with accurate, useful, and legible information regarding rates and
other operational matters. Furthermore, these regulations are established to
ensure provision of signs which clearly and effectively identify parking
available to visitors seeking daily or other short-term parking. The
requirement for provision of such visitor-oriented signage is intended to
promote economic activity in the City by facilitating easy access to parking
which serves the Central Business District and major visitor attractions.
   (b)   Display of Rates and Other Information. The following regulations
shall apply to all parking lots and garages subject to licensing regulations.
      (1)   Display of Rates. Each parking facility shall be furnished with
signs readable from each vehicular entrance, displaying all parking rates
applicable at any given time. When multiple rates are applicable at a given
time, the display shall include, at a minimum, the lowest and highest rates.
All rates applicable at a given time shall be displayed in numerals which are
the same size for each rate. Rates displayed on signs for surface lots or on
free-standing signs for garages shall be a minimum height of five (5) inches
for dollar amounts and three (3) inches for display of cents and other rate
information. For garages, rates and rate information displayed on or adjacent
to booths and ticket dispensers shall have a minimum character height of two
(2) inches.
      (2)   Visibility of Rate Information. For a surface lot or for a garage
which is set back from the street, the sign displaying the required rate
information shall be placed so that the rates are visible and readable to the
motorist prior to entering the property. For a garage entrance located at the
sidewalk edge, such sign shall be placed so that the rates are readable to the
motorist prior to passing the ticket dispenser or attendant’s booth.
      (3)   Required Information. In addition to the rate information required
in division (b)(1) of this section, each parking facility shall display the
following items of information: 1) a full listing of all rates applicable at
all times, 2) the telephone number for after-hours contact, 3) the name of the
operator, 4) the closing time of the facility if exits are blocked after
closing, and (5) the presence of security measures on the premises, including
if the premises is patrolled by a security guard during the hours of operation.
Such additional information shall be displayed in lettering and numerals a
minimum of two (2) inches and a maximum of eight (8) inches in height, placed
at all attendant’s booths, all payment boxes and/or at all vehicular entrances.
      (4)   Destination Information. The sign(s) identifying the parking
facility and/or its rates, as required in division (b)(1) of this section, may
also display information identifying businesses or other uses served by the
parking facility. Such information shall be displayed in lettering no more than
five (5) inches in height and shall be incorporated within the standard- size
sign, as permitted in this section.
   (c)   Special Event and Other Special Rate Parking. Information regarding
flat rates for special event parking or other special time-period parking, such
as “early bird specials,” shall be displayed in accordance with the following
regulations. Such sign may also be used to indicate that the garage is “full.”
      (1)   Such rate information shall be displayed on the permanent free-
standing sign or signs which identify the parking facility’s regular rates,
using changeable panels or electronically-changeable copy, in accordance with
design standards adopted by the City Planning Commission.
      (2)   In the case of a garage which is not served by a free-standing rate
sign, the special event or other special time-period parking rate may be
displayed on a metal or plastic panel, mounted on a pole which is inserted into
a base which is permanently affixed to the ground. Such sign shall be a maximum
of six (6) square feet in area and four (4) feet in height above the ground and
shall not project into the public right-of-way.
      (3)   Availability of parking for special events shall be identified by
use of the term “Event,” accompanied by the applicable rate. Such information
may be displayed in characters which are larger than those used for display of
other rates.
   (d)   Sign Structures and Locations. The following regulations shall apply
to all parking lots and garages subject to licensing regulations.
      (1)   Sign Types. Signs for parking facilities may take the form of a
free-standing sign, a sign projecting from or otherwise applied to a building
wall, a sign mounted on an attendant’s booth, ticket machine or payment box, a
sign placed on a canopy or marquee, or a sign mounted above a fence post or
pier. Portable signs (i.e., “sandwich boards” and other signs not permanently
affixed to the ground or to a permitted structure) shall not be permitted,
except as permitted in division (c)(2) of this section.
      (2)   Location of Signs. No freestanding sign, nor any portion of such
sign, shall be located within or above the public right-of-way, except as
permitted in division (e)(1) of this section for a sign element displaying the
international parking symbol. No sign projecting from a building wall shall
extend to a point which is within two (2) feet of the outer edge of a street
curb nor shall such sign extend more than five (5) feet from the building wall.
      (3)   Vertical Clearance. No portion of a sign located above a sidewalk
or other pedestrian walking area shall be located less than eight (8) feet
above the surface of such area. No portion of a sign located above a driveway
or other vehicular way shall be located less than sixteen (16) feet above the
surface of such area.
      (4)   Primary and Secondary Signs. As used in this section, the terms
“primary signs” and “secondary signs” shall have the following meanings.
“Primary signs” are a parking facility’s principal signs identifying the
parking facility and/or its rates. A primary sign may display other permitted
information in addition to the identification and rate information. “Secondary
signs” are signs which display only directional and instructional messages
necessary to guide motorists and pedestrians within the parking facility. Signs
which provide detailed rate information, supplementing that provided on the
primary signs, shall also be considered secondary signs.
      (5)   Size, Number and Height of Signs. Each parking facility shall be
permitted a total of thirty-two (32) square feet of “primary sign” area for
each vehicular entrance, except that two (2) vehicular entrances located less
than thirty (30) feet apart, as measured along the property line, shall be
counted as a single entrance for this purpose. Such primary sign area permitted
for each entrance may be displayed on either one (1) or two (2) sign
structures. If two (2) sign structures are used, rate information must be
readable at each vehicular entrance. No single primary sign shall exceed
thirty-two (32) square feet in area nor shall it exceed fifteen (15) feet in
height if free-standing. “Secondary signs,” if free-standing, shall not exceed
six (6) square feet in area nor four (4) feet in height, and shall be placed,
as approved by the City Planning Director, only where necessary to provide
instructions to customers of the parking facility. Secondary signs displayed on
building walls or on overhead structures shall be no larger than necessary to
display permitted information in a readable manner, as determined by the City
Planning Director.
      (6)   Measurement of Sign Area. Only one (1) side of double-sided signs
shall be counted in the measurement of sign area if the two (2) sides are in
parallel, back-to-back arrangement.
      (7)   Temporary Signs. For a newly- established license parking facility,
the following temporary signs shall be permitted for a period not exceeding
sixty (60) days following the opening of the parking facility:
         A.   Signs substituting for approved but not-yet-installed permanent
signs, conforming, to the maximum extent feasible, with all regulations and
design standards for permanent signs except those pertaining to fabrication
materials; and
         B.   For each vehicular entrance, one (1) wall-mounted banner, not
exceeding forty (40) square feet in area, or one (1) free-standing temporary
sign, not exceeding ten (10) square feet in area, announcing the opening of the
parking facility.
   (e)   Signs for Visitor-Oriented Parking Facilities. In addition to other
applicable regulations of this section, the following supplemental regulations
shall apply to signs for parking facilities which are available to the general
public on an hourly, daily or special event basis (i.e., “visitor-oriented
parking facilities”). These supplemental regulations shall not apply to parking
facilities which are restricted to use by employees, residents, faculty or
students of businesses, institutions or other buildings served by the parking
facility nor shall these regulations apply to parking facilities which are
restricted exclusively to use on a weekly or monthly basis.
      (1)   Use of the International Parking Symbol. All visitor-oriented
parking facilities shall be furnished with a sign or signs, visible from each
vehicular entrance, displaying the international parking symbol, displayed as a
white letter “P” at least fourteen (14) inches in height, placed on a purple
(PMS #2685) circular background, a minimum of twenty-two (22) inches in
diameter. The design shall be in accordance with design standards adopted by
the City Planning Commission. In the case of a free-standing sign, the parking
symbol may project over a public sidewalk, extending no more than thirty (30)
inches beyond the property line and maintaining a minimum vertical clearance of
eight (8) feet. No other element of such sign may project over the public
sidewalk.
      (2)   Design Standards. The City Planning Commission shall adopt and
disseminate design standards which, through use of narrative materials and
illustrations, describe and depict signs which conform to the requirements of
this section applicable to signs for visitor-oriented parking facilities. The
standards shall also provide supplemental information on such design elements
as color, materials, illumination, methods of attachment, border areas,
positioning of information items, etc.
      (3)   Approval Process. The Director of the City Planning Commission
shall determine whether a proposed sign for a visitor-oriented parking facility
meets the requirements of this section and the adopted design standards, and
shall approve or disapprove each application on that basis. In the case of a
proposed sign which does not meet the requirements of this section, the City
Planning Commission may approve the sign if it determines that such sign meets
the standards of division (e)(7) of this section.
      (4)   Comprehensive Sign Systems for Large- Scale Facilities. In the case
of a large-scale complex of facilities served by a network of parking lots or
garages under common management, the City Planning Commission may approve signs
which differ from the standards established in this section as necessary to
create a uniform series of signs which identify parking facilities serving such
complex.
      (5)   Replacement of Nonconforming Signs. For parking signs installed
prior to the initial effective date of this ordinance, any such signs which do
not conform to the applicable regulations of this section shall be replaced by
conforming signs in accordance with the following schedule, except as provided
in division (e)(6) of this section.
         A.   For parking facilities located within the Downtown Core and
Downtown Lakefront Parking Districts, as established in Section
457.035, and for parking facilities located in the area directly north of the
Downtown Lakefront Parking District, all nonconforming signs shall be replaced
or removed by August 1, 1997, except that any nonconforming sign installed
pursuant to a Building Permit issued between June 1, 1991 and May 31, 1996,
shall be replaced or removed by August 1, 1998.
         B.   For parking facilities located within the Gateway, Warehouse,
Erieview, and Flats Parking Districts, as established in Section
457.035, all nonconforming signs shall be replaced or removed by August 1,
1998.
         C.   For parking facilities located within the remainder of the City,
all nonconforming signs shall be replaced or removed by August 1, 1999.
      (6)   Retention of Nonconforming Signs. With respect to signs whose
replacement is required under the provisions of division (e)(5), any owner
wishing to retain such sign shall submit a written request to the City Planning
Commission no later than six (6) months prior to the date on which replacement
is required. Such application shall include the address of the parking place, a
sketch showing the sign’s dimensions and its approximate location on the
property, and color photographs of the sign. The City Planning Commission
shall, within two (2) months of receipt, approve retention of the sign if it
determines that such sign meets the standards of division (e)(7) of this
section.
      (7)   Standards for Approval of Nonconforming Signs. With respect to an
application for the installation or retention of a sign which does not conform
to the regulations of this section, the City Planning Commission shall approve
such application if it determines that the sign, either alone or in combination
with other signs, provides information which is sufficient to fulfill the
stated purposes of this section, and that the sign meets the following
standards, as applicable:
         A.   The sign is attached to the wall of a building and is better
suited to the design of such building than a conforming sign would be; or
         B.   The sign meets a higher standard of design quality than would
result from minimal conformance to the standards of this section; or
         C.   The sign has been designed so that it is more appropriate to its
environs or the uses which it serves than a conforming sign would be; or
         D.   The sign is part of a comprehensive signage system for a large-
scale complex of facilities, and such system meets the standards of division
(e)(4); and
         E.   In the case of a new sign, the deviation from the otherwise
applicable regulations of this section is the minimum necessary to meet one (1)
or more of the special standards established for approval of nonconforming
signs.
   (f)   Application. Plans for installation of signs regulated in this section
shall be submitted to the City Planning Director either prior to or
concurrently with submission of any required Building Permit application. The
plans shall be sufficient to demonstrate compliance with all regulations of
this section and with the design standards adopted by the City Planning
Commission pursuant to the provisions of this section. No signs regulated in
this section shall be installed before approval by the City Planning Director
and issuance of any required Building Permit.
(Ord. No. 726-2025. Passed 8-13-25, eff. 8-18-25)
§ 457.05 Claim Checks to be Furnished – Repealed
(Ord. No. 726-2025. Passed 8-13-25, eff. 8-18-25)
§ 457.06 Change of Rates
   (a)   No operator of a parking place shall make any charge for storing a
motor vehicle in excess of the rates set forth on the sign erected on the
premises as required by Section
457.04.
   (b)   For at least two (2) weekdays prior to the effective date of an
increase in hourly or daily rates, and for at least five (5) weekdays prior to
the effective date of an increase in monthly parking rates, the operator of a
parking place which requires payment upon exiting shall post the change of
rates and the date on which the change of rates is to take effect on a sign
conforming to the size requirements of Section
457.04 and placed so that the information is clearly visible from each customer
entrance to the parking place or from each place of payment.
   (c)   However, nothing herein contained shall be deemed to prevent the
operator of any parking lot from charging a rate in case of special events
different from that ordinarily charged, if such operator has placed over that
portion of the sign indicating such the usual rate for parking a sign bearing
the following legend: “SPECIAL EVENT PARKING,” and indicating the increased
rate in lettering at least twice as large as the lettering of the usual rate
indicated on such sign.
(Ord. No. 2603-91. Passed 8-19-92, eff. 8-27-92)
§ 457.07 Screening Barriers
   Except as provided in division (e) of Section
457.07, all surface parking lots with ten (10) or more spaces shall be bordered
along the entire length of all lot lines fronting on public streets or public
alleys, as defined in Section
303.09 of the Codified Ordinances, except at established entrances and exits,
by a visual screen and a vehicular barrier, as further described in divisions
(a) and (b) of this section. Such screen and barrier shall be sufficient to
prevent vehicular ingress and egress except at established entrances and exits,
to prevent motor vehicles from encroaching into the public right-of-way, to
restrict pedestrian movement to established sidewalk areas and to screen parked
vehicles from view from the public right-of-way.
   (a)   Vehicular Barriers. The vehicular barrier shall consist of a
continuous concrete or cut stone curb at least eight (8) inches high and six
(6) inches wide or anchored concrete wheel stops, as necessary to prevent motor
vehicles from projecting into the public right-of- way or impacting with the
visual screen.
   (b)   Visual Screens. All visual screens shall meet the following
requirements with respect to height, opacity and materials.
      (1)   Central City Area. Within the Downtown Core, Gateway and Warehouse
Parking Districts, as established in Section
457.035, visual screens shall meet the following standards. Minimum required
height and opacity shall be provided throughout the length of any required
visual screen. The visual screen shall be a minimum of four (4) feet and a
maximum of six (6) feet in height and shall conform to one (1) of the following
four (4) standards with respect to materials and opacity.
         A.   Shrubbery and Fence: A continuous hedge of shrubbery and a metal
picket and rail fence, together providing one hundred percent (100%) opacity to
a height of two and one-half (2.5) feet and providing a minimum of five percent
(5%) and a maximum of twenty-five (25%) opacity between a height of two and
one-half (2.5) feet and four (4) feet.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4cc937dcc99cd9ae45e5f9bfbf6bc5ab64112b8f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11398.jpg]
 
         B.   Shrubbery, Fence and Trees: Shrubbery and a metal picket and rail
fence, supplemented by trees planted at a minimum average spacing of twenty
(20) feet, together providing fifty percent (50%) opacity to a height of two
and one-half (2.5) feet and providing a minimum of five percent (5%) and a
maximum of twenty-five percent (25%) opacity between a height of two and one-
half (2.5) feet and four (4) feet.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4cc937dcc99cd9ae45e5f9bfbf6bc5ab64112b8f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11400.jpg]
 
         C.   Berm and Trees: A landscaped earthen berm planted with trees
placed at a minimum average spacing of twenty (20) feet, providing one hundred
percent (100%) opacity to a height of two and one-half (2.5) feet and a maximum
of twenty-five percent (25%) opacity between a height of two and one-half (2.5)
feet and four (4) feet.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4cc937dcc99cd9ae45e5f9bfbf6bc5ab64112b8f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11402.jpg]
 
         D.   Wall/Fence and Shrubbery: Shrubs planted at a minimum average
spacing of eight (8) feet and a combination metal picket and rail fence/masonry
wall, together providing a minimum of one hundred percent (100%) opacity to a
height of two and one-half (2.5) feet and providing a minimum of five percent
(5%) and a maximum of twenty-five percent (25%) opacity between two and one-
half (2.5) feet and four (4) feet.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4cc937dcc99cd9ae45e5f9bfbf6bc5ab64112b8f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11404.jpg]
 
      (2)   Other Areas. All parking lot areas established and licensed on or
after June 26, 1991 shall meet the screening standards established in division
(b)(1) of this section. Outside of the Downtown Core, Gateway and Warehouse
Parking Districts, as established in Section
457.035, all parking lots legally established prior to June 26, 1991 shall meet
the following visual screening standards. The visual screen shall be composed
of anchored concrete, wood or metal bollards, at least eight (8) inches in
width or diameter and at least two and one-half (2.5) feet in height, in
uniform intervals of not more than eight (8) feet, connected through the top of
each bollard by aluminum or galvanized metal chains, at least one-half (1/2)
inch in diameter. The bollards and chains shall be supplemented by trees
planted at minimum intervals of thirty (30) feet.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4cc937dcc99cd9ae45e5f9bfbf6bc5ab64112b8f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11406.jpg]
 
   (c)   Supplemental Standards for Visual Screens. The elements which compose
a required visual screen shall meet the following requirements:
      (1)   Standards for Shrubs, Trees and Ground Cover. Shrubbery used as
part of a visual screen must be sufficient to meet the height and opacity
requirements by the end of the second growing season after initial planting.
All shrubs and trees shall be selected from lists of approved types, as adopted
by the City Planning Commission. At the time of installation, deciduous trees
shall be a minimum of two (2.0) inches in caliper at one (1) foot above grade,
and evergreen trees shall be a minimum of six (6.0) feet in height. Trees shall
be permitted as part of any visual screen, and the maximum height and opacity
limitations shall not apply to trees. In the event that irrigation as required
under division (c)(4) of this section is not available, landscaping materials
installed on such property shall be of a type which do not require such
irrigation for proper maintenance, as determined by the Director of Public
Works, or his or her designee.
      (2)   Standards for Landscaped Areas. If a visual screen is set within a
landscaped area, such area shall be bordered by a continuous concrete or cut
stone curb at least six (6) inches wide and eight (8) inches high and such area
shall be covered by grass or other suitable vegetative ground cover, bark or
decorative stones. If planted with shrubs, the landscaped area shall be a
minimum of three (3) feet in width. If planted with trees, the landscaped area
shall be a minimum of four (4) feet in width.
      (3)   Standards for Fences and Walls. All walls and fences used as part
of a visual screen shall be of uniform appearance and shall be set in a
concrete base. Required metal picket and rail fences shall be of actual or
simulated wrought iron or cast iron construction. Masonry walls shall be of
brick or stone construction.
      (4)   Irrigation Requirements.
         A.   General Provisions. Every landscaped area shall be served by a
permanently- installed underground irrigation system. No irrigation system,
however shall be required for trees provided to supplement the use of bollards
and chains as required by division (b)(2) of this section.
         B.   Method of Connection. For parking lots established on or after
June 26, 1991, the irrigation system shall be connected directly to City water
lines. For parking lots legally established before June 26, 1991, the
irrigation system shall be either connected to City water lines or shall be
configured for coupling to a hose which draws water from any permitted source.
In such instances, the selection of the water source shall be made by the
applicant. In all instances, however, the Division of Water may reject a
particular method of connection if it determines that such method is
technically infeasible or unsafe in a particular location.
         C.   Responsibilities. In the case of a property, or adjoining
properties under common ownership, which are not served by City water lines,
the City shall provide, at its expense, water line hook- ups to serve the
irrigation system. The City’s responsibility to dedicate a water source shall
arise upon approval by the Division of Building and Housing and the Division of
Water of plans, submitted by the applicant, for such irrigation, including
necessary water line hook-ups. The parking lot operator shall not be
responsible for installing live landscaping materials until the City provides
the water line hook up. Each applicant shall be required to install and pay for
a separate water meter or meters, vault and backflow devices and shall pay for
all water used. In the case of a system served by a fire hydrant tap, the
applicant shall be responsible for payment of a single annual fee to cover the
costs of estimated water use and issuance of a permit.
   (d)   Maintenance. All screening materials shall be maintained in good
condition at all times. Unhealthy or dead vegetation shall be replaced with
healthy plantings no later than the end of the next applicable growing season.
Fences and walls shall be kept free from peeling paint, rust, spalling, and
broken, cracked or missing elements. Fences and walls shall also be kept plumb,
with no more than a two (2) inch deflection from a vertical position.
   (e)   Exemption for Alleys. No visual screen shall be required along public
alleys except within the Downtown Core Parking District (as established in
Section
457.035), where the required visual screen shall be provided.
   (f)   Landscaping Requirement Reductions and Exemptions. With regard to a
parking lot which otherwise complies with all requirements of Section
457.07, the City Planning Commission shall grant a reduction of or an exemption
from the requirements for shrubs, trees and landscaped areas of division (b) of
Section
457.07 if full compliance with such requirements would result in a loss of
existing parking spaces which cannot be avoided or remediated through re-design
or re-configuration of the parking lot. The Commission shall take such action
in accordance with the following provisions.
      (1)   Evidence to Be Provided by the Applicant. An applicant seeking a
reduction of or an exemption from the requirement for landscape elements of a
visual screen shall present evidence to the City Planning Commission
demonstrating that the potential loss of existing spaces cannot be avoided or
remediated through re-design or re-configuration of the parking lot.
      (2)   City Planning Commission Determination. Upon consideration of
evidence submitted by the applicant as well as any analysis prepared by City
staff, the City Planning Commission shall determine whether strict application
of the visual screen landscaping requirements will result in an unremediable
loss of parking spaces. In determining whether a loss of parking spaces can be
avoided
through re-design or re-striping, the Commission shall assume continued use of
existing parking space and aisle dimensions for the subject property except
where such dimensions are in excess of City standards. The Commission shall
further determine whether the applicant can comply with the visual screen
landscaping requirements through the use of a legal encroachment in one (1) or
more of the public rights- of-way adjoining the parking lot.
      (3)   Minimum Requirement. Any reduction of standards approved by the
City Planning Commission with respect to the required visual screen shall be
the minimum reduction necessary to prevent a loss of parking spaces. The
Commission may require compliance with the visual screen standards through the
use of a legal encroachment in one (1) or more of the public rights-of-way
adjoining the parking lot. At a minimum, the Commission shall require
installation of a metal picket and rail fence meeting all applicable
requirements of this section and, in addition, providing a metal, brick or
stone pier or post, at least two (2) inches square, at a minimum spacing of
eight (8) feet. The Commission shall also require provision of landscaped areas
where such provision will not result in a loss of parking spaces.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4cc937dcc99cd9ae45e5f9bfbf6bc5ab64112b8f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11408.jpg]
 
   (g)   Temporary Uses. Where the City Planning Commission deems a parking lot
to be a temporary use, the barrier and screening requirements of this section
shall be met if the parking lot operator installs anchored concrete wheel stops
supplemented by bollards and chains, as required in division (b)(2) of this
section. The requirement for bollards and chains shall not apply outside of the
Downtown Core Parking District. No surface parking lot shall be deemed
temporary for a period in excess of one (1) year, provided however, that the
City Planning Commission may extend the temporary use for one (1) additional
one (1) year period if, prior to the completion of the initial one (1) year
period, a project agreement with the City is executed which requires
development of the lot within one (1) year or a Building Permit application has
been filed for development of the lot. A parking lot shall also be considered
as a temporary use if there exists a lease, recorded with the Cuyahoga County
Recorder, between the parking lot operator and the owner of the subject
property, and the term of the lease expires within eighteen (18) months after
the compliance date for filing of plans, as specified in division (i) of this
section.
   (h)   Approval. The materials, design, location and construction of the
screens and barriers required by this section shall be approved by the Director
of City Planning Commission, in consultation with the Commissioners of
Research, Planning and Development and Traffic Engineering and shall be in
accordance with the standards promulgated by the Commissioners in compliance
with the provisions of this chapter. Unless otherwise permitted by the
Commissioner of Traffic Engineering, each parking place shall have one (1)
common entrance and one (1) common exit, which may or may not be combined.
   (i)   Compliance Dates. Parking lots legally established prior to June 26,
1991 shall comply with the requirements of this section in accordance with the
following provisions:
      (1)   For lots within the Downtown Core Parking District, plans shall be
filed by May 1, 1992, and installation shall be completed by August 1, 1992.
      (2)   For lots within the Erieview, Downtown Lakefront and Flats Parking
Districts, plans shall be submitted by May 1, 1993, and installation shall be
completed by August 1, 1993.
      (3)   For lots within the Gateway and Warehouse Parking Districts and in
the remainder of the City, plans shall be submitted by May 1, 1994, and
installation shall be completed by August 1, 1994.
(Ord. No. 1233-15. Passed 11-9-15, eff. 11-11-15)
§ 457.071 Downtown Parking Lot Landscaping Encroachment Permits
   The Director of Capital Projects is authorized to issue a permit, revocable
at the will of Council, and assignable by the permittee with consent of the
Director of Capital Projects, to an operator of a parking lot within any of the
following listed downtown block faces, to construct, maintain, and use fencing
and landscaping providing the visual screen and vehicular barrier required by
Section
457.07 of the Codified Ordinances, which will encroach into the public right-
of-way:
Side of Street Street Name Street Segment
Side of Street Street Name Street Segment
West           West 9th    Main Avenue to St. Clair
East           West 9th    Lakeside to St. Clair
West           West 6th    Lakeside to Superior
East           West 6th    Lakeside to Superior
West           West 3rd    Lakeside to Superior
East           West 3rd    Lakeside to Superior
East           East 6th    St. Clair to Superior
West           East 12th   St. Clair to Rockwell
East           East 12th   Lakeside to Rockwell
North          St. Clair   West 9th to West Mall Dr
South          St. Clair   West 9th to Ontario
South          St. Clair   East 6th to East 9th
North          St. Clair   East 13th to East 18th
South          St. Clair   East 13th to East 18th
North          Superior    East 13th to East 18th
South          Superior    East 13th to East 18th
South          Huron       East 6th (alley) to East 9th
 
   (a)   Any fencing or landscaping placed within the public right-of-way as
aforesaid, shall be constructed under plans and specifications approved by both
the Manager of Engineering and Construction and the City Planning Commission,
each to the extent of its respective jurisdiction under other sections of the
Codified Ordinances.
   (b)   Each permit authorized by this section shall be prepared by the
Director of Law, shall require the permittee to pay any taxes, assessments or
other costs resulting from the construction, maintenance, and use authorized by
the permit, and shall be issued only when, in the opinion of the Director of
Law, the City of Cleveland has been properly indemnified against any loss,
including taxes, assessments, and other costs, resulting from the encroachment
permitted.
   (c)   A permit authorized by this section shall be issued only in accordance
with the provisions of division (c) of Section
457.07 regarding actions necessary to avoid a loss of existing parking spaces.
(Ord. No. 1330-A-10. Passed 12-6-10, eff. 12-6-10)
§ 457.08 Employees
   While on duty at the parking facility, each employee shall wear a badge,
provided by the parking facility operator, identifying the individual as an
employee of the subject operator.
(Ord. No. 1552-A-90. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 6-26-91)
§ 457.09 Maintenance of Parking Place and Surroundings, Payment of Fees and
Safety Requirements
   (a)   Each operator of a parking place shall keep all parking spaces,
driveways, and maneuvering areas (i) properly graded for drainage so that all
water is drained within the parking place providing parking spaces; (ii)
surfaced with concrete, asphaltic concrete, asphalt or other surfacing
materials approved by the Director of Building and Housing; and (iii)
maintained in good condition and free of debris and trash.
   (b)   Each operator of a parking place shall keep the sidewalk surrounding
the parking place free from dirt, ice, sleet and snow and shall keep the
sidewalk and driveways in a safe condition for the travel of pedestrians.
   (c)   The loading or unloading of passengers or drivers across or upon a
public sidewalk is expressly prohibited and any operator or employee who by
receiving or delivering motor vehicles other than within the space provided by
such place, aids or assists in blocking any sidewalk or street shall be deemed
to have violated the provisions of this section.
   (d)   In outdoor parking lots the operator shall at all times be required to
keep the lot in good order and condition and free from nuisance, and if the lot
is not a hard surface, to take the necessary precautions to prevent the raising
of dust and dirt by the movement of cars thereon.
   (e)   Each operator of a parking place shall take all reasonable steps to
ensure that all parking fees collected at the parking place are being paid
directly to the operator or the operator’s designee.
   (f)   Each operator of a parking place within the Downtown Core Parking
District, Warehouse Parking District, Erieview Parking District, and Gateway
Parking District, as established in division (b) Section
457.035 of the Codified Ordinances, shall comply with the safety measures
detailed in its license application, approved by the Chief of Police, or their
designee, or as may be amended from time to time with the prior approval of the
Chief.
   (g)   The Chief of Police or their designee, upon finding three (3) or more
nuisance activities defined in Section
630.01 of the Codified Ordinances or any other criminal violation have occurred
on separate occasions within any six (6) month, may cause a written notice to
be served on the licensee identifying the nuisance activities and criminal
violations and providing an opportunity to submit revised security measures to
address such activities. If the licensee fails to submit such revised measures,
or the Chief determines that any submitted revised plans are inadequate, the
Chief or their designee may conduct a hearing with the licensee on the matter.
If the parties cannot agree on revised security measures at such hearing, the
City official may require additional security measures after providing notice
in writing and giving a reasonable time to implement the revised security
measures. Failure to comply with such notification shall be grounds for
revocation of the license under Section
457.11 of these Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 726-2025. Passed 8-13-25, eff. 8-18-25)
§ 457.10 Bicycle Parking
   As a condition of the issuance or renewal of an annual license, all parking
lots and garages subject to the provisions of this chapter shall provide spaces
for bicycle parking in accordance with the following regulations.
   (a)   Purpose. The requirements for bicycle parking are established for the
purpose of ensuring adequate and safe facilities to accommodate bicycle parking
and to encourage use of bicycles for travel as an alternative to use of
motorized vehicles.
   (b)   Time of Compliance. For applicable parking lots and garages that were
licensed prior to the initial effective date of this section, required bicycle
parking spaces shall be provided no later than two (2) years after the initial
effective date of this section. For other applicable parking lots and garages,
required bicycle parking spaces shall be provided prior to the issuance of a
license.
   (c)   Number of Bicycle Parking Spaces. Bicycle parking spaces shall be
provided at a rate of one (1) bicycle parking space for each twenty (20)
automobile spaces provided. However, no automobile parking lot or garage shall
be required to provide more than twenty-four (24) bicycle parking spaces.
   (d)   Substitution for Automobile Spaces. The total number of automobile
off-street parking spaces required under the Zoning Code shall be reduced at
the ratio of one (1) automobile off-street parking space for each six (6)
bicycle spaces provided. The total number of required automobile off-street
parking spaces, however, shall not be reduced by more than five percent (5%)
for any parking lot or garage.
   (e)   Bicycle Parking Space Size. Required bicycle parking spaces for
nonresidential uses must have minimum dimensions of two (2) feet in width by
six (6) feet in length.
   (f)   Bicycle Parking Space Location. Required bicycle parking spaces shall
be located at least as close to the entrance of the building as the nearest
non-handicapped automobile parking space. Where automobile parking is provided
in an enclosed area, bicycle parking shall be provided within the enclosure or
in such a way as to provide comparable protection from the elements.
   (g)   Bicycle Racks and Lockers. Each required bicycle parking space shall
be equipped with a bicycle rack or "bicycle locker", as defined in this
section.
      (1)   Design. Bicycle racks and lockers must be securely anchored to the
ground or a building. Bicycle racks must provide a stable frame to which the
bicycle may be conveniently secured, such as the inverted-U, post and loop, or
another type of rack that meets these standards. Bicycle racks that support the
wheel but not the frame of the bike may not be used to fulfill a bicycle
parking requirement. In parking lots and parking garages, physical barriers,
such as posts or bollards, shall be provided so as to prevent a motor vehicle
from striking a parked bicycle.
      (2)   Residential Uses. Neither bicycle racks nor bicycle lockers are
required for bicycle parking associated with residential uses. Required bicycle
parking for residential uses may be provided in garages, storage rooms, or any
other resident-accessible, secure areas.
   (h)   Bike Locker. As used in this section, "bike locker" means a locker or
storage space large enough to house a single bicycle and which may be secured
and accessed by a single user.
   (i)   Alternate Locations and Number of Spaces. For public parking garages
and parking lots legally established prior to June 9, 2008, the Director of the
City Planning Commission may approve locations other that the garage or lot for
the required bicycle parking spaces or less than the required number of bicycle
parking spaces if the Director determines that, under the following
circumstances, alternate locations or number of bicycle parking spaces would
better meet the stated purpose of this section:
      (1)   A single entity controls multiple parking garages or parking lots
that serve the same business or use;
      (2)   The aggregate number of bicycle parking spaces for the multiple
parking garages or parking lots that serve the same business or use will meet
or exceed the bicycle parking requirements under this section;
      (3)   A location on another property or in the public right-of-way
represents the only feasible means to meet the requirement for bicycle parking
spaces. A location in the public right-of-way shall be permitted only if such
location meets all requirements for issuance of an encroachment permit.
(Ord. No. 539-16. Passed 5-16-16, eff. 5-18-16)
§ 457.11 Revocation or Suspension of License
   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses may at any time revoke or
suspend licenses granted under the authority of this chapter, for failure to
comply with the terms of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 522-08. Passed 6-9-08, eff. 6-16-08)
§ 457.12 Appeals
   In case of refusal to issue a license or of revocation or suspension of a
license by the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses, the applicant or
licensee may appeal from such order to the Board of Zoning Appeals established
pursuant to Charter Section
76-6. Notice of such appeal shall be in writing and filed with the Board within
ten (10) days after the making of such order. The Board shall fix a time of
hearing for such appeal not later than ten (10) days after the filing of such
notice, at which hearing all parties interested shall be afforded an
opportunity to be heard. Such Board shall approve, modify or annul such order
from which the appeal has been perfected. Such opinion of the Board shall be
final on all parties thereto. If the Director of the City Planning Commission,
or the Chief of Police, as appropriate, has not notified the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses of his or her determination within the required sixty
(60) day period, the applicant may appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals for a
determination.
(Ord. No. 726-2025. Passed 8-13-25, eff. 8-18-25)
§ 457.99 Penalty
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of Sections
457.01,
457.04 to
457.06,
457.08 or
457.09 shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor and fined not more than one
hundred and fifty dollars ($150.00). In addition to any other method of
enforcement provided for in this chapter, these minor misdemeanors may be
enforced by the issuance of a citation in compliance with Rule 4.1 of the Ohio
Rules of Criminal Procedures. Whoever violates any of the provisions of these
sections, having previously been convicted of a violation of any of these
sections within five (5) years, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(Ord. No. 726-2025. Passed 8-13-25, eff. 8-18-25)
§ 457.991 Civil Penalties, Enforcement and Appeals
   (a)   Any person who violates Section
457.01 shall be subject to a civil penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
for the first offense and a civil penalty of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00)
for each subsequent offense.
   (b)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of Sections
457.04,
457.06,
457.07,
457.08 or
457.09, each constituting a separate offense, shall be subject to a civil
penalty of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense.
   (c)   In addition to Cleveland Police Officers, the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses (“Commissioner”), and any officer or employee designed
by the Commissioner, may enforce Section
457.01.
   (d)   In addition to Cleveland Police Officers, the Director of Building and
Housing, the Commissioner, and any officer or employee designated by them, may
enforce Sections
457.04,
457.06,
457.07,
457.08 and
457.09.
   (e)   The civil penalties prescribed in this section are in addition to any
rights, remedies, or other penalties provided by law.
   (f)   A civil penalty imposed under Section
457.01 may be appealed to the Director of Finance, or designee, and a civil
penalty imposed under Sections
457.04,
457.06,
457.07,
457.08 or
457.09 may be appealed to the Director of Building and Housing, or designee,
within ten (10) days after receipt of the civil penalty. The appropriate
director shall grant the appeal or conduct a hearing within thirty (30) days
and shall have jurisdiction to affirm or reverse the civil penalty. A person
aggrieved by a final decision of a director may further appeal to the Board of
Zoning appeals within thirty (30) days after the director’s written decision.
(Ord. No. 726-2025. Passed 8-13-25, eff. 8-18-25)
CHAPTER 459 – PARKING INFRACTIONS AND PARKING VIOLATIONS BUREAU
459.01   Definitions
459.02   Civil Liability for Parking Infractions; Arrest Prohibited
459.03   Parking Violations Bureau
459.04   Parking Ticket, Service, and Liability
459.05   Answers; Procedures
459.06   Failure to Answer
459.07   Hearing Procedure
459.08   Release of Impounded Vehicles
459.09   Nonliability of Owner
459.10   Parking Ticket Adopted
459.11   Parking Infraction Fines
459.12   Motor Vehicle Registration Hold Due to Nonpayment of Parking
Infraction Judgments
§ 459.01 Definitions
   The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter of the Traffic
Code, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section.
   (a)   “Parking Infraction” means a violation of the following sections of
the Codified Ordinances of Cleveland, Ohio, 1976:
203.08  Parking Waste Collection Vehicles
343.20  Service Station Parking Restrictions
405.023 Continuous Violation Tickets
451.03  Statutory Prohibited Standing or Parking Places
451.04  Manner of Parallel Parking
451.041 Physically Handicapped Parking division (h) only
451.05  Manner of Angle Parking
451.08  Narrow Roadways and Alleys
451.09  Hydrant Side of Street
451.10  Hazardous Traffic Obstructions
451.11  Hospital Grounds
451.12  City Property
451.13  Distance from Theaters
451.15  Fire Lanes on Public and Private Property
451.16  Street Cleaning
451.17  Snow Emergency
451.18  Bus Stops and Taxi Cab Stands
451.19  Motor Carriers
451.20  Truck Zones
451.21  Trucks and Commercial Vehicles
451.22  Between Sidewalk and Setback Line
451.23  Tree Lawn and Private Driveway
451.24  Private Driveway or Private Property
451.25  Abandoned Vehicles
451.28  Reserved Street Parking for U.S. Marshal
451.33  Valet Parking/Passenger Drop off-Pick up Zones Established; Violations,
        divisions (e) and (f) only
453.01  Parking Regulations in Parking Meter Zones
453.02  Parking Violations
455.05  Parking Regulations
455.061 Reserved Parking Spaces at Willard Park Garage
455.07  Violations, divisions (a), (b), (c) and (d) only
461.15  Prohibitions, division (a) only; and
571.37  Parking Areas
 
   (b)   “Vehicles” has the same meaning as in RC 4511.01.
   (c)   “Violations Clerk” means the Clerk of the Cleveland Municipal Court.
   (d)   “Parking Violations Bureau” means the bureau established by the
Council of the City of Cleveland pursuant to RC 4521.04 and Section
459.03 hereof.
   (e)   “Law Enforcement Officer” has the same meaning as in division (k) of
Section
601.01 of these Codified Ordinances and shall also mean employees of the City
whose duties include the issuance of parking infraction tickets while engaged
in such duty.
   (f)   “Notification of Infraction” means the notice mailed to the owner or
operator of a vehicle involved in a parking infraction pursuant to RC 4521.07
and Section
459.06 hereof.
   (g)   “Rush Hour Parking Infraction” means a violation of division (n) of
Section
451.03 of these Codified Ordinances, occurring on the streets and roadways and
during the times specified in Rule Nos. 3, 3-A, 3-B, 4, and 4-A adopted by the
Director of Public Safety, as the same may be amended from time to time.
   (h)   “Court” or “Municipal Court” means the Cleveland Municipal Court,
unless specifically identified as another court, in which case it means the
specifically identified court.
(Ord. No. 645-06, § 2. Passed 6-12-06, eff. 6-16-06)
§ 459.02 Civil Liability for Parking Infractions; Arrest Prohibited
   The commission of a parking infraction, as defined in division (a) of
Section
459.01 of the Codified Ordinances of Cleveland, Ohio, 1976, shall not be
considered a criminal offense for any purpose.
   A person who commits a parking infraction shall not be arrested as a result
of the commission of the violation.
(Ord. No. 1995-84. Passed 9-5-84, eff. 9-6-84)
   Note: Section
3 of Ord. No. 1995-84 provides that Section
459.02 shall take effect on November 1, 1984.
§ 459.03 Parking Violations Bureau
   (a)   The City of Cleveland Parking Violations Bureau is hereby established
pursuant to RC 4521.04. The Parking Violations Bureau shall be within the
office of the Clerk of the Cleveland Municipal Court. The Parking Violations
Bureau has jurisdiction over each parking infraction that occurs within the
territory of the City of Cleveland. Notwithstanding any other provision of law
to the contrary, each parking infraction that occurs within the jurisdiction of
the Parking Violations Bureau and the enforcement of each such parking
infraction shall be handled pursuant to and be governed by the provisions of
this chapter.
   (b)   The operating costs of the Parking Violations Bureau shall be paid by
the City of Cleveland. The Clerk of the Cleveland Municipal Court is hereby
appointed as the Violations Clerk of the Parking Violations Bureau, with
authority to appoint deputy clerks, hearing examiners and necessary clerical
employees. No person shall be employed as a hearing examiner unless the person
is an attorney admitted to the practice of law in this state or formerly was
employed as a law enforcement officer.
   (c)   The fine, penalties, fees, and costs established for a parking
infraction shall be collected, retained and disbursed by the Violations Clerk
if the parking infraction out of which the fine, penalties, fees and costs
arose occurred within the jurisdiction of the Parking Violations Bureau. The
Violations Clerk shall provide tickets for parking infractions to law
enforcement officers in the Division of Police upon requisition of the Chief of
Police and shall also provide tickets for parking infractions upon requisition
of the director or commissioner of any other department or division which has
employees whose duties include the issuance of parking infraction tickets. Any
person requisitioning tickets shall account to the Violations Clerk for all
tickets requisitioned at such times as the Violations Clerk shall request. The
fine, penalties, fees, and costs collected by the Violations Clerk for a
parking infraction shall be disbursed by the Violations Clerk to the City of
Cleveland.
   (d)   The Clerk of Court shall have authority to contract with any non-
governmental entity to provide services in processing, collecting, and
enforcing parking tickets issued by law enforcement officers and civil
judgments and default civil judgments entered pursuant to this chapter. No
contract shall affect the responsibilities of hearing examiners as prescribed
in this chapter, or the ultimate responsibility of the Violations Clerk to
collect, retain, and disburse fines, penalties, fees, and costs for parking
infractions and monies paid in satisfaction of judgments and default judgments
entered pursuant to this chapter. All contracts entered into by the Clerk of
Court shall be subject to approval of City Council.
   (e)   The Director of Law and the Director of Finance are each authorized to
enter into contract on behalf of the Clerk of the Cleveland Municipal Court for
the collection of unpaid parking infraction judgments and default judgments. In
addition to any other fees or charges authorized by these Codified Ordinances
in relation to the commission of a parking infraction, the judgment debtor on
unpaid parking infraction judgments or default judgments may be assessed an
amount equal to the costs paid by the City to any vendor for the costs of
collection of the debt.
(Ord. No. 645-06, § 2. Passed 6-12-06, eff. 6-16-06)
§ 459.04 Parking Ticket, Service, and Liability
   (a)   The parking ticket adopted in Section
459.10 hereof shall be used by law enforcement officers in all cases in which a
person is charged with committing a parking infraction within the City of
Cleveland. The parking ticket shall be the summons and complaint for purposes
of this chapter.
   (b)   A law enforcement officer who issues a parking ticket for a parking
infraction shall complete the ticket by identifying the parking infraction
charged, recording the license plate number, type, and make or model of the
vehicle, and indicating the date, time, and place of the parking infraction
charged. The officer shall sign the ticket and affirm the facts it contains and
file a copy with the Violations Clerk. If the operator of the vehicle is
present, the officer also shall record on the ticket the name of the operator
in a space provided on the ticket for identification of the offender, and then
shall personally serve the parking ticket upon the operator. If the operator of
the vehicle is not present, the officer shall insert the word “owner” in the
space provided on the ticket for identification of the offender, and then shall
constructively serve the parking ticket upon the owner of the vehicle by
affixing the ticket to the vehicle in a conspicuous place.
   Constructive service of a parking ticket upon an owner of a vehicle by
affixation as provided in this division, or by the procedure described in
division (d) of this section, has the same force and effect, and potentially
subjects both the owner and the operator of the vehicle whose act or omission
resulted in the parking infraction, if different, to the same fine, penalties,
fees, and costs for failure to timely answer or to appear, if a hearing is
requested, as if the parking ticket were personally served on both the owner
and operator of the vehicle at the time of the violation.
   (c)   The original of a parking ticket issued pursuant to this section or
any true copy of it shall be considered a record kept in the ordinary course of
business of the City of Cleveland and of the law enforcement agency whose
officer issued it, and shall be prima facie evidence of the facts it contains.
   (d)   An operator of a vehicle who is not the owner of the vehicle, but who
operates it with the express or implied permission of the owner is the agent of
the owner for purposes of the receipt of parking tickets served in accordance
with this section, and personal service of a parking ticket upon the operator
in accordance with this section constitutes constructive service upon the owner
for purposes of this chapter. The operator of a rented or leased vehicle whose
act or omission resulted in an alleged parking infraction shall not be
considered an agent of the owner if the owner is engaged in the business of
renting or leasing vehicles pursuant to a written rental or lease agreement and
if the owner follows the procedures set forth in Section
459.09 hereof.
   (e)   Except as provided in Section
459.09 hereof, when a parking ticket is issued for a parking infraction and is
served pursuant to this section, the operator of the vehicle whose act or
omission resulted in the parking infraction for which the ticket was issued and
the owner of the vehicle involved in the parking infraction, if different, are
jointly liable for the parking infraction and any fine, penalty, fees, and
costs arising out of the parking infraction. Any owner of a vehicle who pays
any fine, penalty, fee, and cost imposed for a parking infraction pursuant to
this chapter may recover the amount paid from the operator of the vehicle whose
act or omission resulted in the parking infraction.
(Ord. No. 1995-84. Passed 9-5-84, eff. 9-6-84)
   Note: Section
3 of Ord. No. 1995-84 provides that Section
459.04 shall take effect on November 1, 1984.
§ 459.05 Answers; Procedures
   (a)   A person who is personally or constructively served with a parking
ticket charging the commission of a parking infraction may answer the charge by
appearing personally before the Parking Violations Bureau or by mail. An answer
shall be made within fifteen (15) days from the date of the infraction, and
shall be in one (1) of the following forms:
      (1)   An admission that the person committed the parking infraction, by
payment of any fine arising out of the parking infraction;
      (2)   An admission that the person committed the parking infraction, with
an explanation of the circumstances surrounding the parking infraction;
      (3)   A denial that the person committed the parking infraction and a
request for a hearing relative to the infraction. If the person desires the
presence, at the hearing, of the law enforcement officer who issued the parking
ticket, the person must request his or her presence in his or her answer.
   (b)   (1)   A person who admits that he or she committed a parking
infraction shall, and a person who admits that he or she committed a parking
infraction with explanation may, when he or she makes his or her answer, pay
the fine arising out of the infraction admitted to the Violations Clerk of the
Parking Violations Bureau.
      (2)   A person who admits that he or she committed a parking infraction
with explanation shall submit evidence to the Parking Violations Bureau that
explains the circumstances surrounding the parking infraction. The evidence may
be submitted in person or, to avoid the necessity of personal appearance, may
be sent as affidavits and other documentary evidence, by mail. The Parking
Violations Bureau, when it receives an answer admitting that a person committed
a parking infraction with explanation, shall promptly determine whether the
explanation mitigates the fact that the person committed the parking infraction
and notify the person, in writing, of its determination.
      If the Parking Violations Bureau determines that the explanation
mitigates the fact that the person committed the parking infraction, the
Parking Violations Bureau shall eliminate or reduce the amount of the fine
arising out of the parking infraction. If the fine is eliminated or reduced and
the person has previously paid the fine, the amount paid in excess of the
revised fine shall be returned to the person; if the fine is eliminated or
reduced and the person has not previously paid the fine, the person shall pay
only the amount of the revised fine. If the Parking Violations Bureau
determines that the explanation does not mitigate the fact that the person
committed the parking infraction, the person owes the entire amount of the fine
arising out of the parking infraction, and if the person has not previously
paid the fine, the person shall pay the entire amount of the fine. If a person
admits that he or she committed a parking infraction with explanation and the
person fails to pay the amount of the fine due within ten (10) days after
receiving notice of the Parking Violations Bureau’s determination, unless the
amount due has previously been paid, the Parking Violations Bureau’s
determination and the amount of the fine due shall be considered a judgment and
shall be treated as if it were a judgment rendered subsequent to a hearing held
pursuant to division (b) of Section
459.07 hereof.
      (3)   A person who denies that he or she committed a parking infraction
shall be granted a hearing concerning the infraction. The Parking Violations
Bureau shall set a date for the hearing and notify the person, in writing, of
the date, time, and place of the hearing. The hearing shall be conducted by a
hearing examiner of the Parking Violations Bureau in accordance with Section
459.07 hereof.
   (c)   If a person who is personally or constructively served with a parking
ticket charging the commission of a parking infraction fails to timely answer
the charge, as provided in division (a) of this section, the Parking Violations
Bureau shall issue the proper notifications of infraction pursuant to Section
459.06 hereof, and proceed according to that Section. Failure to answer the
charge within the fifteen (15) day period provided by division (a) of this
section, shall result in the imposition of an additional penalty of ten dollars
($10.00).
   (d)   The issuance of a parking ticket, the filing of or failure to file an
answer by a person personally or constructively served with the ticket, the
substance of an answer, the payment of any fine, penalty, fee, and cost, and
any other relevant information shall be entered in the records of the Parking
Violations Bureau.
(Ord. No. 645-06, § 2. Passed 6-12-06, eff. 6-16-06)
§ 459.06 Failure to Answer
   (a)   When a person is personally or constructively served with a parking
ticket charging the commission of a parking infraction in accordance with
Section
459.04 hereof and the person fails to answer the charge within the time
specified in Section
459.05 hereof, the Parking Violations Bureau shall send notifications of
infractions as follows:
      (1)   If the person who fails to answer was the operator of the vehicle
involved in the parking infraction at the time of the commission of the parking
infraction and was personally served with the parking ticket, a notification of
infraction shall be sent to that person, and additionally if such person is not
the owner of the vehicle, as determined from the records of the Bureau of Motor
Vehicles, a notification of infraction also shall be sent to the owner at his
or her most recent address appearing in such records;
      (2)   If the person who fails to answer was the owner of the vehicle and
was constructively served with the parking ticket, a notification of infraction
shall be sent to the owner at his or her most recent address appearing in the
records of the Bureau of Motor Vehicles.
   (b)   A notification of infraction shall be sent within twelve (12) months
after the expiration of the time specified in Section
459.05 hereof for the making of an answer, shall be sent by first class mail,
and shall contain all of the following:
      (1)   An identification of the parking infraction with which the person
was charged and the time and date of the parking infraction, which
identification may be a copy of the parking ticket charging the parking
infraction that was personally or constructively served upon the person;
      (2)   An identification of the amount of the fine, penalties, fees, and
costs arising out of the parking infraction that are due;
      (3)   A warning that the person must answer the parking infraction
charged in the ticket within thirty (30) days or a default civil judgment in
the amount of the fine, penalties, fees, and costs due may be entered against
the person;
      (4)   A description of the allowable answers that may be made and
notification that the person will be afforded a hearing before the Parking
Violations Bureau if he or she denies in his or her answer that he or she
committed the parking infraction;
      (5)   An identification of the manners in which and the entity to which
an answer may be made;
      (6)   A warning that if the person fails to appear at a requested
hearing, a default civil judgment in the amount of the fine, penalties, fees,
and costs due may be entered against the person.
      (7)   A warning that renewal or transfer of the registration of the
vehicle involved in the parking infraction, if the vehicle is registered in
this state, may be denied as provided in RC 4521.10 for nonpayment of judgments
or default judgments entered pursuant to this chapter.
   (c)   A person who receives a notification of infraction pursuant to this
section may answer the parking infraction with which he or she is charged that
is identified in the notification of infraction in any of the manners provided
in division (a) of Section
459.05 hereof for answers to parking infractions charged in a parking ticket.
An answer under this section shall be made within thirty (30) days after the
date on which the notification of infraction was mailed, and shall be in one
(1) of the forms specified in divisions (a)(1), (2), and (3) of Section
459.05 hereof for answers to parking infractions charged in a parking ticket,
except that if the answer includes payment of the fine arising out of the
parking infraction any penalty, fee, or cost arising out of such infraction
also shall be paid. The answer shall be governed by the provisions of division
(b) of Section
459.05 hereof for answers relative to parking infractions charged in a parking
ticket, except that any determination of the amount to be paid under an answer
admitting the commission of the parking infraction with explanation also shall
consider any penalty, fee, or cost arising out of such infraction.
   (d)   If a person who is issued a notification of infraction pursuant to RC
4521.07, and division (c) of this section, fails to timely answer, the failure
to answer shall be considered an admission that the person committed the
parking infraction, and a default civil judgment, in the amount of the fine,
penalties, fees, and costs due may be entered against the person. Failure to
answer the parking infraction within thirty (30) days after the date on which
the notification of infraction was mailed shall result in the imposition of an
additional penalty of fifteen dollars ($15.00).
   (e)   The sending of a notification of infraction, the filing of or failure
to file an answer by the person to whom it is sent, the substance of an answer,
the payment of any fine, and any other relevant information shall be entered in
the records of the Parking Violations Bureau.
(Ord. No. 645-06, § 2. Passed 6-12-06, eff. 6-16-06)
§ 459.07 Hearing Procedure
   (a)   If a person who is personally or constructively served with a parking
ticket charging the commission of a parking infraction or who receives a
notification of infraction, in his or her answer to the charge denies that he
or she committed the infraction, the Parking Violations Bureau shall conduct a
hearing to determine if the person committed the parking infraction. Each
hearing shall be conducted by a hearing examiner of the Parking Violations
Bureau. Each hearing shall be conducted in such manner as the hearing examiner
considers appropriate. Rules regarding the admissibility of evidence shall not
be strictly applied in the hearing, but all testimony shall be under oath.
   At the hearing, the City of Cleveland has the burden of proving, by a
preponderance of the evidence, that the person for whom the hearing is being
conducted committed the parking infraction. If the person, in his or her
answer, denied that he or she committed the parking infraction and requested
the presence at the hearing of the law enforcement officer who issued the
parking ticket, the officer shall be required to attend the hearing unless the
hearing examiner determines that the officer’s presence is not required. If the
officer’s presence at the hearing has been requested and the officer is unable
to attend the hearing on the day and at the time scheduled, the hearing
examiner may grant a reasonable continuance. The person for whom the hearing is
being conducted may present any relevant evidence and testimony at the hearing.
The person does not have to attend the hearing if he or she submits documentary
evidence to the hearing examiner prior to the day of the hearing.
   The City of Cleveland shall submit the original parking ticket that was
personally or constructively served on the person or a true copy of that
ticket, and information from the Bureau of Motor Vehicles that identifies the
owner of the vehicle. The ticket and the information in proper form is prima
facie evidence that the registered owner of the vehicle was the person who
committed the parking infraction. The City of Cleveland may present additional
evidence and testimony at the hearing. The City of Cleveland does not have to
be represented at the hearing by an attorney.
   (b)   (1)   If a person for whom a hearing is to be conducted under division
(a) of this section appears at the scheduled hearing or submits evidence in
accordance with that division, the hearing examiner shall consider all evidence
and testimony presented and shall determine whether the City of Cleveland has
established, by a preponderance of evidence, that the person committed the
parking infraction. If the hearing examiner determines that the person
committed the infraction, an order indicating the determination as a judgment
against the person and requiring the person to pay the appropriate fine and any
additional penalties, fees, and costs shall be entered in the records of the
Parking Violations Bureau.
      (2)   If a person for whom a hearing is to be conducted under division
(a) of this section fails to appear at the scheduled hearing and fails to
submit evidence in accordance with that division, the hearing examiner shall,
if he or she determines from any evidence and testimony presented at the
hearing, by a preponderance of the evidence that the person committed the
parking infraction, enter a default judgment against the person and require the
person to pay the appropriate fine and any additional penalties, fees, and
costs. A default judgment entered under this division shall be entered in the
records of the Parking Violations Bureau.
      (3)   If a person who is sent a notification of infraction pursuant to
Section
459.06 hereof does not timely answer, as provided in division (c) of that
section, the hearing examiner of the Parking Violations Bureau shall, if he or
she determines from any evidence and testimony presented to him or her by the
local authority, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the person committed
the parking infraction, enter a default judgment against the person and require
the person to pay the appropriate fine and any additional penalties, fees, and
costs. A default judgment entered under this division shall be entered in the
records of the Parking Violations Bureau.
      (4)   If the hearing examiner does not determine, by a preponderance of
the evidence, that a person in any of the classes described in division (b)(1),
(2), or (3) of this section committed the parking infraction, the hearing
examiner shall enter judgment against the City of Cleveland, shall dismiss the
charge of the parking infraction against the person, and shall enter the
judgment and dismissal in the records of the Parking Violations Bureau.
      (5)   A default judgment entered under this section may be vacated by the
hearing examiner who entered it if all of the following apply:
         A.   The person against whom the default judgment was entered files a
motion with the Parking Violations Bureau within one (1) year of the date of
entry of the judgment;
         B.   The motion sets forth a sufficient defense to the parking
infraction out of which the judgment arose;
         C.   The motion sets forth excusable neglect as to the person’s
failure to attend the hearing or answer the notification of infraction.
   (c)   Payment of any judgment or default judgment entered against a person
pursuant to this section shall be made to the Violations Clerk of the Parking
Violations Bureau in which the judgment was entered within ten (10) days of the
date of entry. All money paid in satisfaction of a judgment of default judgment
shall be disbursed by the Violations Clerk to the City of Cleveland and the
Violations Clerk shall enter the fact of payment of the money and its
disbursement in the records of the Parking Violations Bureau. If payment is not
made within this time period, the judgment or default judgment may be filed
with the Office of the Clerk of Court, Civil Division, and when so filed, shall
have the same force and effect as a money judgment in a civil action rendered
in the Court.
   As required by division (C) of RC 4521.08, judgments and default judgments
filed with the Cleveland Municipal Court, Office of the Clerk of Court, Civil
Division, shall be maintained in a separate index and judgment roll from other
judgments rendered in that Court. Computer printouts, microfilm, microdot,
microfiche, or other similar data recording techniques may be utilized to
record such judgments. When a judgment or default judgment is filed with the
Court, execution may be levied, and such other measures may be taken for its
collection as are authorized for the collection of an unpaid money judgment in
a civil action rendered in that Court. The Municipal Court may assess costs
against the judgment debtor, in an amount not exceeding ten dollars ($10.00)
for each parking infraction, to be paid upon satisfaction of the judgment.
   (d)   Any person against whom a judgment or default judgment is entered
pursuant to this section and the City of Cleveland if judgment is entered
against the City pursuant to this section may appeal the judgment or default
judgment to the Cleveland Municipal Court by filing notices of appeal with the
Parking Violations Bureau and the Municipal Court within fifteen (15) days of
the date of entry of the judgment and by the payment of such reasonable costs
as the Court requires. Upon the filing of an appeal, the Court shall schedule a
hearing date and notify the parties of the date, time, and place of the
hearing. The hearing shall be held by the Court in accordance with the rules of
the Court. Service of a notice of appeal under this division by a person does
not stay enforcement and collection of the judgment or default judgment from
which appeal is taken by the person unless the person who files the appeal
posts bond with the Parking Violations Bureau in the amount of the judgment,
plus court costs, at or before service of the notice of appeal.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the judgment on appeal of the
Municipal Court is final, and no other appeal of the judgment of the Parking
Violations Bureau and no appeal of the judgment of the Municipal Court may be
taken.
   (e)   A judgment or default judgment entered pursuant to this section may be
filed with the Municipal Court, Office of the Clerk of Court, Civil Division,
under division (c) of this section at any time within three (3) years after the
date of issuance of the parking ticket charging the parking infraction out of
which the judgment arose. This division applies to any ticket issued for an
offense that would be a parking infraction on or after the effective date of RC
4521.08, if the ticket was issued within three (3) years prior to the effective
date of this section and a warrant has not been issued and served on the
operator or owner of the vehicle involved in that offense.
(Ord. No. 446-90. Passed 6-4-90, eff. 6-8-90)
§ 459.08 Release of Impounded Vehicles
   (a)   Any vehicle which has been impounded pursuant to divisions (j) or (1)
of Section
405.02 of these Codified Ordinances shall be released to the owner or other
person lawfully entitled to possession upon the occurrence of one (1) of the
following:
      (1)   If an answer to the summons and complaint is made and the answer
admits the commission of the infraction, payment of the fines and penalties
prescribed by Sections
459.11,
459.05, and
459.06 hereof, towing, storage, and impound fees, and administrative fees and
costs shall be made with respect to the infraction for which the vehicle was
impounded.
      (2)   If an answer to the summons and complaint is made and the answer
admits with explanation the commission of the infraction, payment shall be made
or a bond shall be posted or cash shall be deposited equal in amount to the
payment specified in division (a)(1) of this section.
      (3)   If an answer to the summons and complaint is made and the answer
denies the commission of the infraction, a bond shall be posted or cash shall
be deposited equal in amount to the payment specified in division (a)(1) of
this section.
      (4)   If no answer to the summons and complaint is made a bond shall be
posted or cash shall be deposited equal in amount to the payment specified in
division (a)(1) of this section, plus all potential additional penalties under
Sections
459.05 and
459.06.
   (b)   No vehicle shall be released pursuant to this section unless the
person claiming ownership or lawful possession pays:
      (1)   All unpaid parking infraction judgments and default judgments and
all unpaid notices of liability under Section
413.031 for red light or speeding violations, provided that the notices of
liability under Section
413.031 are not on appeal, that are owed by the person claiming the vehicle;
and
      (2)   All unpaid judgments or default judgments for parking infraction
offenses and all unpaid notices of liability under Section
413.031 for red light or speeding violations, provided that the notices of
liability under Section
413.031 are not on appeal, that were committed with any vehicle that had the
same license plate number as the vehicle being claimed.
   (c)   No vehicle shall be released pursuant to this section unless the
person claiming ownership or lawful possession produces proof of identity and
ownership.
   (d)   Any bond posted or cash deposited for the release of a vehicle under
this section shall not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
(Ord. No. 645-06, § 2. Passed 6-12-06, eff. 6-16-06)
§ 459.09 Nonliability of Owner
   (a)   An owner of a vehicle is not jointly liable with an operator of the
vehicle whose act or omission resulted in a parking infraction for the parking
infraction or any fine, penalty, fee, processing fee, or cost arising out of
the parking infraction under this chapter if either of the following apply:
      (1)   The owner answers the charge of the parking infraction under
Sections
459.05 or
459.06 hereof, the answer denies that he or she committed the infraction and
requests a hearing concerning the infraction, the owner additionally asserts
and provides reasonable evidence at that time to prove that the vehicle, at the
time of the commission of the parking infraction, was being used by the
operator without the owner’s express or implied consent, and the Parking
Violations Bureau determines that the vehicle was being used without the
owner’s express or implied consent at that time. If the Parking Violations
Bureau does not so determine, it shall conduct the hearing concerning the
infraction according to Section
459.07 hereof.
      (2)   The owner answers the charge of the parking infraction under
Sections
459.05 or
459.06 hereof, the answer denies that he or she committed the parking
infraction, the owner additionally submits evidence at that time that proves
that, at the time of the alleged commission of the infraction, the owner was
engaged in the business of renting or leasing vehicles under written rental or
lease agreements, and the owner additionally submits evidence that proves that,
at the time of the alleged commission of the parking infraction, the vehicle in
question was in the care, custody, or control of a person other than the owner
pursuant to a written rental or lease agreement. If the owner does not so
prove, the Parking Violations Bureau shall conduct a hearing relative to the
infraction according to Section
459.07 hereof.
      (3)   The owner, at a hearing concerning the parking infraction conducted
in accordance with Section
459.07 hereof, proves that the vehicle, at the time of the parking infraction,
was being used by the operator without the owner’s express or implied consent
or proves the facts described in division (a)(2) of this section.
   (b)   An owner of a vehicle who is engaged in the business of renting or
leasing vehicles under written rental or lease agreements, but who does not
satisfy the additional requirements of division (a)(2) of this section is not
liable for any penalties or processing fees arising out of a parking infraction
involving the vehicle if at the time of the commission of the parking
infraction, the vehicle was in the care, custody, or control of a person other
than the owner pursuant to a written rental or lease agreement, and if the
owner answers the charge of the parking infraction by denying that he or she
committed the parking infraction or by paying the fine arising out of the
parking infraction within thirty (30) days after actual receipt of the parking
ticket charging the infraction or, if the owner did not receive the parking
ticket, within thirty (30) days after receipt of the notification of
infraction.
   Proof that the vehicle was in the care, custody, or control of a person
other than the owner pursuant to a written rental or lease agreement at the
time of the alleged parking infraction shall be established by sending a true
copy of the rental or lease agreement or an affidavit to that effect to the
Parking Violations Bureau within thirty (30) days after the date of receipt by
the owner of the parking ticket charging the infraction or, if the owner did
not receive the parking ticket, within thirty (30) days after receipt of the
notification of infraction. The submission of a true copy of a written rental
or lease agreement or affidavit shall be prima facie evidence that a vehicle
was in the care, custody, or control of a person other than the owner. The
affidavit authorized by this section shall be accompanied by a postage paid,
self-addressed envelope, shall be in a form the registrar of motor vehicles
shall prescribe, and shall include space for the Parking Violations Bureau to
indicate receipt of the affidavit. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of the
affidavit, the Parking Violations Bureau shall return a receipted copy of the
affidavit to the rental or lease company. In addition, any information required
by division (a)(2) of this section may be provided on magnetic tape or another
computer readable media in a format acceptable to the City of Cleveland or the
Violations Clerk.
(Ord. No. 446-90. Passed 6-4-90, eff. 6-8-90)
§ 459.10 Parking Ticket Adopted
   The parking ticket to be used as the summons and complaint by law
enforcement officers in all cases in which a person is charged with a parking
infraction within the City of Cleveland shall be in substantially the following
form:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4cc937dcc99cd9ae45e5f9bfbf6bc5ab64112b8f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11410.jpg]
 
(Ord. No. 2796-90. Passed 3-4-91, eff. 3-4-91)
   Note: Pursuant to Section
4 of Ord. No. 2796-90, Section
459.10, as amended by Ord. No. 2796-90, took effect on March 11, 1991.
§ 459.11 Parking Infraction Fines
   (a)   The fine for committing a parking infraction, unless another fine is
established by divisions (b), (c), (d) or (e) of this section, is hereby
established to be twenty-five dollars ($25.00), except that the fine for a rush
hour parking infraction shall be thirty-five dollars ($35.00).
   (b)   The fine for violating each of the following sections of the Codified
Ordinances of Cleveland. Ohio, 1976, whether or not committed during rush hour,
is hereby established to be fifty dollars ($50.00):
 
451.03  Statutory Prohibited Standing or Parking Places, division (d), division
        (e) and division (j) only
451.15  Fire Lanes on Public and Private Property, division (b) and division
        (c) only
451.22  Between Sidewalk and Setback Line
451.241 Parking Vehicles on Vacant Lots Prohibited, division (b) only
451.25  Abandoned Vehicles
451.17  Snow Emergency
451.18  Bus Stops and Taxicab Stands, division (b) only
 
   (c)   The fine for violating each of the following section of the Codified
Ordinances of Cleveland, Ohio, 1976, whether or not committed during rush hour,
is hereby established to be one hundred dollars ($100.00):
 
451.21 Trucks and Commercial Vehicles, division (b) only
 
   (d)   The fine for violating the following section of the Codified
Ordinances of Cleveland, Ohio, 1976, whether or not committed during rush hour,
is hereby established to be two hundred dollars ($200.00):
 
451.23 Tree Lawn and Private Driveway, division (a) only
 
   (e)   The fine for violating the following section of the Codified
Ordinances of Cleveland, Ohio, 1976, whether or not committed during rush hour,
is hereby established to be two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00):
 
451.041 Physically Handicapped Parking, division (b) only
 
(Ord. No. 593-2024. Passed 6-3-24, eff. 6-7-24)
§ 459.12 Motor Vehicle Registration Hold Due to Nonpayment of Parking
Infraction Judgments
   (a)   If three (3) or more judgments or default judgments have been entered
against a person pursuant to Section
459.07 hereof and the person has not paid the judgments or default judgments
within ten (10) days of the date of entry of the third judgment, the Parking
Violations Bureau may give notice of that fact to the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles for purposes of preventing registration or transfer of registration of
any vehicle owned or leased by the person as provided in RC 4521.10. The
notice, if given, shall be given not earlier than sixteen (16) days nor later
than three (3) years after the date of entry of the third judgment, and shall
be in a form and manner, and contain such information, as the registrar
prescribes.
   (b)   When a notice as provided in division (a) of this section is given to
the registrar and the judgments or default judgments are subsequently paid,
dismissed, or reversed on appeal, or it is discovered that the notice was given
in error and is therefore canceled, the Parking Violations Bureau shall
immediately notify the registrar of such payment, dismissal, reversal, or
cancellation. The notification shall be in a form and manner, and contain such
information, as the registrar prescribes. If the initial notice was not given
in error, the Parking Violations Bureau shall charge the person a five dollar
($5.00) processing fee for each judgment or default judgment to cover the costs
of the Bureau of Motor Vehicles in administering this section. Upon payment of
the fee, the Parking Violations Bureau shall give to the person a release to be
presented at the time of registering or transferring the registration of a
motor vehicle owned or leased by him or her. All fees collected under this
division shall be transmitted monthly to the registrar for deposit in the state
highway safety fund established by RC 4501.06.
(Ord. No. 446-90. Passed 6-4-90, eff. 6-8-90)
   Note: Section 4 of Ord. No. 446-90 provides that within 1 year of the
effective date of this section, the Violations Clerk of the Parking Violations
Bureau may, at any time prior to giving notice to the registrar of motor
vehicles pursuant to division (a) of Section
459.12, establish payment plans upon terms determined by the Violations Clerk
for the payment of parking infraction judgments or default judgments.
CHAPTER 461 – RESIDENTIAL PERMIT PARKING PROGRAM
461.01   Legislative Purpose
461.02   Legislative Findings
461.03   Definitions
461.04   Designation of Residential Permit Parking Areas
461.05   Designation Criteria
461.06   Designation Process
461.07   Recommendation of the Director of the Department of Public Safety
461.08   Issuance of Permits
461.09   Visitor Permits
461.10   Posting of Residential Permit Parking Area
461.11   Display of Permits
461.12   Permit Parking Exemption
461.13   Application for and Duration of Permit
461.14   Permit Fees
461.15   Prohibitions
461.16   Revocation of Permit
461.17   Severability
461.99   Penalty
   Note: Chapter
461 was enacted by Ordinance No. 942-83, passed 6-4-84, effective 6-6-84 and
renumbered by Ordinance No. 1856-84, passed 10-29-84, effective 10-31-84.
§ 461.01 Legislative Purpose
   This chapter is enacted in response to the serious adverse effects caused
certain areas and neighborhoods of the City of Cleveland by motor vehicle
congestion, particularly the long-term parking of motor vehicles on the streets
of such areas and neighborhoods by non- residents thereof, together with a lack
of driveways and garages in certain neighborhoods. As set forth in more
specific detail in Section
461.02 of this chapter, such long-term parking by non-residents threatens the
health, safety and welfare of many of the residents of the City of Cleveland.
In order to protect and promote the integrity of these areas and neighborhoods,
it is necessary to enact parking regulations, restricting unlimited parking by
non-residents therein, while providing the opportunity for residents to park
near their homes. Uniform parking regulations restricting residents and non-
residents alike would not serve the public interest. Rather, such regulation
would contribute to neighborhood decline while ignoring the public transit
alternatives to automobile travel available to non-residents. For the reasons
set forth in the chapter, a system of preferential resident parking is enacted
hereby for the City of Cleveland.
(Ord. No. 942-83. Passed 6-4-84. Renumbered by Ord. No. 1856-84. Passed 10-29-
84)
§ 461.02 Legislative Findings
   (a)   General Finding. The Council finds as a result of public testimony
evidence generated by both professional urban planning studies and derived from
other sources, that the continued vitality of the City depends on the
preservation of safe, healthy and attractive neighborhoods and other
residential areas therein. The Council further finds that the flight of
residents and property owners from major metropolitan cities can be traced in
part to the deterioration of such cities as attractive and comfortable places
in which to reside. The Council further finds that one (1) factor that has
contributed to this deterioration in the city is the excessive and burdensome
practice of non-residents of certain areas and neighborhoods parking their
motor vehicles for extended periods of time therein. Since there is in the city
at any time a large surplus of motor vehicles over available on- and off-street
parking spaces, this condition detracts from a healthy and complete urban
environment. A system of preferential resident parking will serve to reduce a
number of strains on residents of the city and thus promote the general public
welfare.
   (b)   Specific Findings. The following specific legislative findings of the
Council in support of preferential resident parking are set forth as
illustrations of the need compelling the enactment of this chapter. They are
intended as illustrations only and do not exhaust the subject of the factual
basis supporting its adoption:
      (1)   The safety, health and welfare of the residents of the city can be
greatly enhanced by maintenance of the attractiveness, convenience and
livability of its neighborhoods and other residential areas;
      (2)   It is a fact of modern living in the city that a large portion of
Cleveland residents possess automobiles and as a result are daily faced with
the need to store these automobiles in or near their residences;
      (3)   Certain neighborhoods and areas of the city do not have sufficient
on- or off-street space to accommodate the convenient parking of motor vehicles
by residents thereof in the vicinity of their homes;
      (4)   Such areas as described in (3) above are often further burdened by
influxes of motor vehicles owned by non-residents which compete for the
inadequate available on-street parking spaces;
      (5)   There further exists certain parking “attractors” within the city,
i.e., hospital and university complexes, mass transit stations and terminals,
and locations convenient for commuter parking, which further exacerbate
resident parking problems;
      (6)   Unnecessary vehicles miles, noise, pollution and strains on
interpersonal relationships caused by the conditions set forth herein work
unacceptable hardships on residents of these neighborhoods and other
residential areas by causing the deterioration of air quality, safety,
tranquility and other values available in an urban residential environment;
      (7)   If allowed to continue unchecked, these adverse effects on the
residents of the city will contribute to a further decline of the living
conditions therein, a reduction in the attractiveness of residing within said
city, and consequent injury to the general public welfare;
      (8)   A system of preferential resident parking as enacted in this
chapter will serve to promote the safety, health and welfare of all the
residents of the city by reducing unnecessary personal motor vehicle travel,
noise and pollution, and by promoting improvements in air quality, the
convenience and attractiveness of urban residential living, and the increased
use of public mass transit facilities available now and in the future. The
public welfare will also be served by ensuring a more stable and valuable
property tax base in order to generate the revenues necessary to provide
essential public services.
(Ord. No. 942-83. Passed 6-4-84. Renumbered by Ord. No. 1856-84. Passed 10-29-
84)
§ 461.03 Definitions
   (a)   “Residential area” shall mean a contiguous or nearly contiguous area
containing public streets and highways or parts thereof where residents dwell;
   (b)   “Legal resident” shall mean a person who either owns or leases real
estate as set forth in subsections (d) and (e) of this section;
   (c)   “Residential permit parking area” shall mean a residential area
designated as herein provided wherein resident motor vehicles displaying a
valid permit as described herein shall be exempt from parking time restrictions
established pursuant to this chapter;
   (d)   “Owns” shall mean that a person has at least a one-quarter (1/4)
interest in a parcel of real property within a residential permit parking area;
   (e)   “Lease” shall mean that a person pays rent or other remuneration for
use of a parcel of real property as his or her residence or place of business;
   (f)   “Motor vehicle” shall include an automobile, truck, motorcycle or
other motor-driven form of transportation not in excess of six thousand (6,000)
pounds gross weight;
   (g)   “Person” shall mean a natural person.
(Ord. No. 942-83. Passed 6-4-84. Renumbered by Ord. No. 1856-84. Passed 10-29-
84)
§ 461.04 Designation of Residential Permit Parking Areas
   The Council shall, upon recommendation of the Councilmen and the Director of
the Department of Public Safety, consider for designation as residential permit
parking areas those residential areas meeting and satisfying the objective
criteria therefor established in this chapter. It may in its discretion then
designate by resolution certain residential areas as residential permit parking
areas in which resident motor vehicles displaying a valid parking permit may
stand or be parked without limitation by parking time restrictions established
by this chapter. Said resolution shall also state the applicable time
limitation and period of the day for its application.
(Ord. No. 942-83. Passed 6-4-84. Renumbered by Ord. No. 1856-84. Passed 10-29-
84)
§ 461.05 Designation Criteria
   (a)   A residential area shall be deemed eligible for consideration as a
residential permit parking area if based on surveys and studies prepared at the
direction of the Director of the Department of Public Safety, or his or her
designee, objective criteria establish that the residential area is overcrowded
with commuter vehicles for any extended period during the day or night, or
weekends, or during holidays. Such objective criteria shall include a minimum
numerical standard for assessing overcrowded parking throughout the City.
   (b)   In determining whether a residential area identified as eligible for
residential permit parking may be designated as a residential permit parking
area, the Director of the Department of Public Safety and the Council shall
take into account factors which include, but are not limited to the following:
      (1)   The extent to which legal on-street parking spaces are occupied by
motor vehicles during the period proposed for parking restriction;
      (2)   The extent to which vehicles parking in the area during the period
proposed for parking restrictions are commuter vehicles rather than resident
vehicles;
      (3)   The extent to which residents of the residential area cannot obtain
adequate curbside parking adjacent to or near their residences because of
widespread use of available curbside parking spaces by non-resident motorists;
      (4)   The extent to which motor vehicles registered to persons resident
in the residential area cannot be accommodated by the number of available off-
street parking spaces;
      (5)   The extent of noise, pollution, hazardous conditions and
deterioration of the residential environment as a result of traffic congestion
and insufficient parking in the area;
      (6)   The extent to which the designation of a residential permit parking
area would be likely to reduce traffic congestion and the other problems
referred to in subsection (b)(5);
      (7)   The extent of need for parking in the residential area for use by
the general public; and
      (8)   The possibility of defraying the administrative costs in connection
with the designation of a residential permit parking area.
(Ord. No. 942-83. Passed 6-4-84. Renumbered by Ord. No. 1856-84. Passed 10-29-
84)
§ 461.06 Designation Process
   (a)   Upon receipt of verified petition by residents of at least two hundred
fifty (250) dwelling units in the residential area proposed for designation or
residents living in eighty percent (80%) of the living units in the area
proposed for designation, the Director of the Department of Public Safety or
his or her designee shall undertake or cause to be undertaken such surveys or
studies as are deemed necessary to determine whether a residential area is
eligible for residential permit parking. Such surveys or studies shall be
completed within ninety (90) days of receipt of a petition calling for such
surveys or studies to be undertaken, unless otherwise provided by the Council.
   (b)   Within thirty (30) days of the completion of surveys and studies to
determine whether designation criteria are met, the Director of the Department
of Public Safety or his or her designee shall notice as herein provided a
public hearing or hearings in or as close to the neighborhood as possible on
the subject of the eligibility of the residential area under consideration for
residential permit parking. Said hearing or hearings shall be conducted for the
purpose of ascertaining boundaries for the proposed residential permit parking
area, as well as the appropriate time limitation on parking and the period of
the day for its application.
   Notice of the public hearing or hearings provided for herein shall be
published in the City Record and one (1) or more newspapers of general
circulation in the City at least ten (10) days before the hearing date and
circularized generally in the neighborhood. The notice shall clearly state the
purposes of the hearing, the location and boundaries tentatively considered for
the proposed residential permit parking area and, if applicable, the permit fee
to be charged therefor. During such hearing or hearings, any interested person
shall be entitled to appear and be heard, subject to appropriate rules of order
adopted by the Director of the Department of Public Safety or his or her
designee.
(Ord. No. 942-83. Passed 6-4-84. Renumbered by Ord. No. 1856-84. Passed 10-29-
84)
§ 461.07 Recommendation of the Director of the Department of Public Safety
   (a)   Within sixty (60) days of the completion of the hearing or hearings
conducted with regard to a particular residential area, the Director of the
Department of Public Safety shall recommend by written report to the Council,
based on the record of such hearing or hearings and the surveys and studies
performed, whether to designate the residential area under consideration as a
residential permit parking area.
   (b)   In the report of the Director of the Department of Public Safety, he
or she shall set forth the evidence generated as a result of surveys and
studies performed, significant subjects and concerns raised at the public
hearing or hearings conducted, the findings relative to those designation
criteria listed in Section
461.05 deemed applicable to the residential area and conclusions as to whether
the findings justify preferential residential parking for that particular area,
a proposed time limitation and period of the day for its application.
   (c)   The designation process and designation criteria set forth in this
chapter shall also be utilized by the Director of the Department of Public
Safety and the Council in determining whether to remove designation as a
residential permit parking area from a particular residential area.
(Ord. No. 942-83. Passed 6-4-84. Renumbered by Ord. No. 1856-84. Passed 10-29-
84)
§ 461.08 Issuance of Permits
   (a)   Parking permits shall be issued by the Commissioner of Assessments and
Licenses. Each such permit shall be designated by the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses to state or reflect thereon the particular residential
permit parking area, as well as the license number of the motor vehicle for
which it is issued. No more than one (1) parking permit shall be issued to each
motor vehicle for which application is made. The Director of the Department of
Public Safety is authorized to issue such rules and regulations, not
inconsistent with this chapter, governing the manner in which persons shall
qualify for parking permits.
   (b)   Unless otherwise specified in the resolution designating a residential
permit parking area, parking permits may be issued for motor vehicles only upon
application of the following persons:
      (1)   A legal resident of the residential permit parking area who has a
motor vehicle registered in his or her name, or has a motor vehicle for his or
her exclusive use and under his or her control;
      (2)   A person who owns or leases commercial property and actively
engages in business activity within a residential permit parking area. However,
no more than one (1) parking permit may be issued for each business
establishment for a motor vehicle registered to or under the control of such a
person.
   (c)   Proof of residency or ownership shall be demonstrated in a manner
determined by the Director of the Department of Public Safety.
   (d)   Proof of motor vehicle ownership or vehicle use and control shall be
demonstrated in a manner determined by the Director of the Department of Public
Safety.
(Ord. No. 1368-05. Passed 12-5-05, eff. 12-12-05)
§ 461.09 Visitor Permits
   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses is authorized upon application
to issue parking permits to residents of a residential permit parking area for
use of bona fide transient visitors therein. Such a visitor permit shall have
all the rights and privileges of a regular permit. A visitor permit shall be
valid for no more than fourteen (14) days from the date of issuance. No
resident of a residential permit parking area shall be issued more than two (2)
visitor permits at any one (1) time.
(Ord. No. 942-83. Passed 6-4-84. Renumbered by Ord. No. 1856-84. Passed 10-29-
84)
§ 461.10 Posting of Residential Permit Parking Area
   Upon the adoption by the Council of a resolution designating a residential
permit parking area, the Director of the Department of Public Safety shall
cause appropriate signs to be erected in the area, indicating prominently
thereon the time limitation, period of the day for its application, and
conditions under which permit parking shall be exempt therefrom.
(Ord. No. 942-83. Passed 6-4-84. Renumbered by Ord. No. 1856-84. Passed 10-29-
84)
§ 461.11 Display of Permits
   Permits shall be displayed in a manner determined by the Chief of Police.
(Ord. No. 942-83. Passed 6-4-84. Renumbered by Ord. No. 1856-84. Passed 10-29-
84)
§ 461.12 Permit Parking Exemption
   A resident motor vehicle on which is displayed a valid parking permit as
provided for herein shall be permitted to stand or be parking in the
residential permit parking area for which the permit has been issued without
being limited by time restrictions established pursuant to this chapter. Said
resident motor vehicle shall not be exempt from parking restrictions or
prohibitions established pursuant to authority other than this chapter. All
other motor vehicles parked within a residential permit parking area shall be
subject to the time restrictions adopted as provided in this chapter, as well
as the penalties provided for herein.
   A residential parking permit shall not guarantee or reserve to the holder
thereof an on-street parking space within the designated residential permit
parking area.
(Ord. No. 942-83. Passed 6-4-84. Renumbered by Ord. No. 1856-84. Passed 10-29-
84)
§ 461.13 Application for and Duration of Permit
   Each parking permit issued by the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses
shall be valid for one (1) year from the date established by the Commissioner
of Assessments and Licenses. Permits may be renewed annually upon re-
application in the manner required by the Commissioner of Assessments and
Licenses. Each application or re-application for a parking permit shall contain
information sufficient to identify the applicant, his or her residence address
or address of real property owned or leased within a residential permit parking
area, and the license number of the motor vehicle for which application is
made, and such other information that may be deemed relevant by the
Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses.
(Ord. No. 942-83. Passed 6-4-84. Renumbered by Ord. No. 1856-84. Passed 10-29-
84)
§ 461.14 Permit Fees
   The fee for a residential parking permit shall be ten dollars ($10.00) if
purchased in the first six (6) months of the permit year or five dollars
($5.00) if purchased in the last six (6) months of the permit year for each
vehicle applied for by an eligible applicant. There shall be a one dollar
($1.00) transfer charge for those with permits in one (1) residential permit
parking area who move to another residential permit parking area and apply for
a permit in the new area of residence. In such cases, the new permit shall
expire at the same time as the former permit would have.
(Ord. No. 2393-02. Passed 2-3-03, eff. 2-3-03)
§ 461.15 Prohibitions
   (a)   It shall be unlawful, unless expressly provided to the contrary
herein, for any person to stand or park a motor vehicle of a gross weight
exceeding fifty (50) pounds for a period exceeding the time limitation
established pursuant hereto.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for a person to falsely represent himself or
herself as eligible for a parking permit or to furnish false information in an
application therefor to the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for a person holding a valid parking permit
issued pursuant hereto to permit the use or display of such permit on a motor
vehicle other than that for which the permit is issued. Such conduct shall
constitute an unlawful act, both by the person holding the valid parking permit
and the person who so uses or displays the permit on a motor vehicle other than
that for which it is issued.
   (d)   It shall be unlawful for a person to copy, produce, or otherwise bring
into existence a facsimile or counterfeit parking permit or permits without
written authorization from the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses. It
shall further be unlawful for a person to knowingly use or display a facsimile
or counterfeit parking permit in order to evade time limitations on parking
applicable in a residential permit parking area.
(Ord. No. 942-83. Passed 6-4-84. Renumbered by Ord. No. 1856-84. Passed 10-29-
84)
§ 461.16 Revocation of Permit
   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses is authorized to revoke the
residential parking permit of any person found to be in violation of this
chapter and, upon written notification thereof, the person shall surrender such
permit to the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses. Failure, when so
requested, to surrender a residential parking permit so revoked shall
constitute a violation of law and of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 942-83. Passed 6-4-84. Renumbered by Ord. No. 1856-84. Passed 10-29-
84)
§ 461.17 Severability
   The provisions of this chapter are severable and if any provision, clause,
sentence, subsection, section, word or part thereof is held illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional, or inapplicable to any person or circumstance, such
illegality, invalidity, or unconstitutionality, or inapplicability shall not
affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, clauses, sentences,
subsections, sections, words or parts of the chapter of their application to
other persons or circumstances. It is hereby declared to be the legislative
intent that this chapter would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional provision, clause, sentence, subsection, section, word or part
had not been included therein, or if such person or circumstance to which the
chapter or part thereof is held inapplicable had been specifically exempted
therefrom.
(Ord. No. 942-83. Passed 6-4-84. Renumbered by Ord. No. 1856-84. Passed 10-29-
84)
§ 461.99 Penalty
   (a)   Whoever violates any provision of divisions (c) or (d) of Section
461.15 is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
   (b)   Whoever violates any provision of division (b) of Section
461.15 is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(Ord. No. 1398-89. Passed 6-19-89, eff. 6-28-89)
CHAPTER 463 – VALET SERVICES
463.01   Definitions
463.02   License Required; Fee
463.03   Denial, Suspension, or Revocation
463.04   Identification Badges
463.05   Rules and Regulations
463.06   Civil Penalties for Violations
463.07   Application
463.08   Appeals
463.99   Penalty
§ 463.01 Definitions
   (a)   “Motor vehicle” means any vehicle as defined in division (B) of RC
4501.01.
   (b)   “Operator” means a person who conducts a parking service, whether in
the capacity of owner, principal, agent, lessee, mortgagee in possession,
licensee, or any other capacity.
   (c)   “Parking facility” means any lot, land, building, garage, structure,
enclosure, premises, parcel, yard, indoor or outdoor area, or any portion
thereof, except a public way, within the City offering three (3) or more
parking spaces.
   (d)   “Parking fee” means the total consideration required to be paid by a
patron to a parking service in exchange for parking occupancy. The total
consideration shall be valued in money, and shall include the value of all
receipts including, but not limited to, cash, credits, property or services of
any kind or nature, whether or not such consideration was actually received by
the operator of the parking service. A required charge shall not avoid
classification as a parking fee by its designation as an ancillary charge for
any other purported purpose separate from parking occupancy.
   (e)   “Parking occupancy” or “occupancy” means the use, or the right of use,
of parking space in or on a parking facility for parking, housing, or storing a
motor vehicle or other related act thereof, whether such use is by way of
lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use, or other agreement.
   (f)   “Parking service” means the act of offering parking space in or on a
parking facility for purposes of occupancy by a patron in exchange for a
parking fee. The term includes, but is not limited to, valet services, self-
park services, honor lot parking, parking garages, attended parking lots, or
any other form of service or facility offering parking space in or on a parking
facility for purposes of occupancy by a patron in exchange for a parking fee.
   (g)   “Parking space” means any space where or in which a single motor
vehicle may be parked, housed, stored, or kept at any one (1) time, regardless
if that space is designated or designed for such use.
   (h)   “Patron” means a person who pays a parking fee to an operator in
exchange for parking occupancy by the person or another by way of validation or
otherwise.
   (i)   “Person” means any natural person, partnership, joint venture, joint
stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver,
administrator, executor, assignee, trustee in bankruptcy, firm, company,
association, club, syndicate, society, municipal corporation, the State of
Ohio, political subdivision of the State of Ohio, the United States,
instrumentality of the United States, or any group or combination acting as a
unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit or otherwise.
   (j)   “Valet” or “valet service” means a parking service requiring the
surrender of custody or control of a patron’s motor vehicle to the operator for
the purpose of parking occupancy at a location different from the place of
surrender.
(Ord. No. 1749-09. Passed 12-7-09, eff. 12-9-09)
§ 463.02 License Required; Fee
   (a)   License Required. No person shall engage in the business of providing
a valet service within the City unless and until licensed in accordance with
this chapter.
   (b)   License Application. Every applicant for a license to operate a valet
service shall make application in writing to the Commissioner of Assessments
and Licenses, which shall include an application fee of fifty-five dollars
($55.00) and set forth or include the following:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant, and if a partnership, the
names and addresses of all partners, and if a corporation, the name, date and
state under which incorporated, and the names and addresses of the officers of
the applicant and its statutory agent, if any;
      (2)   The name, address, and parking place license number issued pursuant
to Chapter
457 of the Codified Ordinances of each parking facility used in connection with
the applicant valet service’s operations;
      (3)   A sworn statement of compliance with Chapter
196 of the Codified Ordinances;
      (4)   A certificate of insurance evidencing insurance coverage as
prescribed by division (c) of this section;
      (5)   Such other information as the Commissioner deems pertinent or
necessary to carry into effect the provisions of this chapter.
   (c)   Insurance Required. Each applicant shall furnish, at the time of
application, a policy or certificate of insurance, by an insurance carrier
licensed to do business in the State, acceptable to and approved by the
Commissioner and the Director of Law, evidencing the applicant as the insured
on a comprehensive general liability insurance policy in an amount not less
than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00). The insured shall provide the
City with written notice of cancellation no less than ten (10) days before the
date the policy is to be cancelled or terminated.
   (d)   Issuance. Upon approval of the application, the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses shall issue the license and, as evidence thereof, a
certificate bearing the license number and applicant information. The license,
or a copy of the license, shall be required to be maintained on the premises of
operation and made immediately available to patrons and/or representatives of
the City upon request.
   (e)   Term. All licenses issued under this chapter shall be valid for the
calendar year for which such license is issued, expiring on the thirty-first
day of December of the year for which such license is issued, unless sooner
revoked by the Commissioner.
   (f)   License Non-Transferable. No license issued pursuant to this chapter
shall be assigned or transferrable to any other person.
   (g)   Renewal. The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses shall accept
renewal applications at least fifteen (15) days before the expiration of the
license being renewed.
(Ord. No. 1749-09. Passed 12-7-09, eff. 12-9-09)
§ 463.03 Denial, Suspension, or Revocation
   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses may deny, suspend, or revoke
any license granted under this chapter upon the Commissioner’s determination of
a violation of this chapter, a rule or regulation promulgated hereunder, or
where the applicant or license holder has failed to comply with the provisions
of, or remit all amounts due under, Chapter
196 of the Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 1749-09. Passed 12-7-09, eff. 12-9-09)
§ 463.04 Identification Badges
   No person who operates a valet service shall fail to cause each employee or
other person who performs valet services to wear in a conspicuous place on his
or her person an identification badge that displays the name and license number
of the valet service along with a unique badge serial number assigned by the
valet service.
(Ord. No. 1749-09. Passed 12-7-09, eff. 12-9-09)
§ 463.05 Rules and Regulations
   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses is authorized to promulgate
such rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the provisions of this
chapter, as he or she shall deem necessary to carry out the intent of this
chapter. Such rules and regulations shall become effective ten (10) days after
their publication in the City Record or at such later time as may be specified
by the Commissioner.
(Ord. No. 1749-09. Passed 12-7-09, eff. 12-9-09)
§ 463.06 Civil Penalties for Violations
   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses shall assess fines in
accordance with the rules and regulations issued under the authority of Section
463.05 for violations of the rules and regulations. The authority to assess
fines under this section does not limit or affect any criminal offense, or the
authority of the Commissioner to suspend or revoke a license, or any other
means of enforcement of this chapter as provided herein. The amount of the fine
shall be in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per
violation.
(Ord. No. 1749-09. Passed 12-7-09, eff. 12-9-09)
§ 463.07 Application
   (a)   Effective Date. This chapter shall be effective as of January 1, 2010.
The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses shall accept applications for
license as provided in this chapter beginning at least fifteen (15) days before
the effective date.
   (b)   Other Sections Unaffected. The license required by this chapter shall
be in addition to any other license required under these Codified Ordinances
and specifically shall not limit, abrogate, or impair the operation or
necessity of any valet zone permit established and required by section
451.33 of these Codified Ordinances.
   (c)   Savings Clause. If any sentence, clause, section or part of this
chapter is found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such
unconstitutionality, illegality or invalidity shall affect only such clause,
sentence, section or part of this chapter so found and shall not affect or
impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or other
parts of this chapter. It is the intention of Council that this chapter would
have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence,
clause, section or part thereof not been included in this chapter.
(Ord. No. 1749-09. Passed 12-7-09, eff. 12-9-09)
§ 463.08 Appeals
   Licensure shall be under the control of the Commissioner of Assessments and
Licenses. In case of the refusal to issue a license or the revocation or
suspension of a license by the Commissioner, or the assessment of a civil
penalty pursuant to section 463.06, the applicant or licensee may appeal such
determination to the Board of Zoning Appeals established pursuant to Charter
section 76-6, provided that written appeal is filed with the Board Secretary
within ten (10) days of the date the decision being appealed was made. The
Board shall conduct a hearing and render a decision in accordance with City
ordinances and regulations governing its conduct and procedure. The
Commissioner or any proper party may appeal the Board’s decision pursuant to RC
Chapter 2506 or as otherwise provided by law.
(Ord. No. 1749-09. Passed 12-7-09, eff. 12-9-09)
§ 463.99 Penalty
   Any person found guilty of violating division (a) of section 463.02 or
section 463.04 of this chapter is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on the first
offense and is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on the second and
any subsequent offense. Each day of a continuing violation is a separate
offense.
(Ord. No. 1749-09. Passed 12-7-09, eff. 12-9-09)
TITLE IX: PEDESTRIANS, BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES
   Chapter
471   Pedestrians
   Chapter
473   Bicycles, Motorcycles, Mobility Devices
CHAPTER 471 – PEDESTRIANS
471.01   Right-of-way in Crosswalk
471.02   Right-of-way of Blind Person
471.03   Crossing Roadway Outside Crosswalk
471.04   Moving upon Right Half of Crosswalk
471.041   Persons Operating Motorized Wheelchairs
471.05   Walking Along Highways
471.06   Use of Highway for Soliciting; Riding in Cargo Storage Area, on
Tailgate or on Outside of Vehicle
471.061   To Repeatedly Stop, Hail Down, or Beckon to Vehicles Prohibited;
Exceptions; Penalties
471.07   Right-of-way on Sidewalk
471.08   Yielding to Public Safety Vehicle
471.09   Intoxicated or Drugged Pedestrian on Highway
471.10   On Bridges or Railroad Crossings
471.11   Using Ordinary Care
471.12   Designation of Pedestrian Ways; Prohibition of Private Vehicular
Traffic
Cross-reference:
   Obedience to traffic control devices, CO
413.01,
413.03
   Pedestrian control signals, CO
413.05
   Pedestrian defined, CO
401.37
   Pedestrian’s right-of-way at airports, CO
571.42
   Pedestrians prohibited on freeways, CO
403.12
Statutory reference:
   See sectional histories for similar State law
§ 471.01 Right-of-way in Crosswalk
   (a)   When traffic control signals are not in place, not in operation or are
not clearly assigning the right-of-way, the driver of a vehicle, trackless
trolley, or streetcar shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if
need be to so yield or if required by Section
413.11, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the
pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling,
or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the
roadway as to be in danger.
   (b)   No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and
walk or run into the path of a vehicle, trackless trolley, or streetcar which
is so close as to constitute an immediate hazard.
   (c)   Division (a) of this section does not apply under the conditions
stated division (b) of Section
471.03.
   (d)   Whenever any vehicle, trackless trolley, or streetcar is stopped at a
marked crosswalk or at any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a
pedestrian to cross the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle, trackless
trolley, or streetcar approaching from the rear shall not overtake and pass the
stopped vehicle.
(RC 4511.46; Ord. No. 657-17. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 471.02 Right-of-way of Blind Person
   (a)   As used in this section, “blind person” or “blind pedestrian” means a
person having not more than twenty/two hundred (20/200) visual acuity in the
better eye with correcting lenses or visual acuity greater than twenty/two
hundred (20/200) but with a limitation in the fields of vision such that the
widest diameter of the visual field subtends an angle no greater than twenty
(20) degrees.
   The driver of every vehicle shall yield the right-of- way to every blind
pedestrian guided by a guide dog, or carrying a cane which is predominantly
white or metallic in color, with or without a red tip.
   (b)   No person, other than a blind person, while on any public highway,
street, alley or other public thoroughfare shall carry a white or metallic
cane, with or without a red tip.
(RC 4511.47; Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 471.03 Crossing Roadway Outside Crosswalk
   (a)   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield
the right-of-way to all vehicles, trackless trolleys, or streetcars upon the
roadway.
   (b)   Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel
or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way
to all traffic upon the roadway.
   (c)   Between adjacent intersections at which traffic control signals are in
operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a marked
crosswalk.
   (d)   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally unless
authorized by official traffic control devices; and, when authorized to cross
diagonally, pedestrians shall cross only in accordance with the official
traffic control devices pertaining to such crossing movements.
   (e)   This section does not relieve the operator of a vehicle, streetcar, or
trackless trolley from exercising due care to avoid colliding with any
pedestrian upon any roadway.
(RC 4511.48; Ord. No. 657-17. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 471.04 Moving upon Right Half of Crosswalk
   Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of
crosswalks.
(RC 4511.49; Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 471.041 Persons Operating Motorized Wheelchairs
   Every person operating a motorized wheelchair or an Electric Personal
Assistive Mobility Device shall have all of the rights and duties applicable to
a pedestrian that are contained in this chapter, except those provisions which
by their nature can have no application.
(Ord. No. 1869-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 471.05 Walking Along Highways
   (a)   Where a sidewalk is provided and its use is practicable, it shall be
unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
   (b)   Where a sidewalk is not available, any pedestrian walking along and
upon a highway shall walk only on a shoulder, as far as practicable from the
edge of the roadway.
   (c)   Where neither a sidewalk nor a shoulder is available, any pedestrian
walking along and upon a highway shall walk as near as practicable to an
outside edge of the roadway, and, if on a two (2) way roadway, shall walk only
on the left side of the roadway.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in Sections
413.03 and
471.01, any pedestrian upon a roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all
vehicles upon the roadway.
(RC 4511.50; Ord. No. 657-17. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 471.06 Use of Highway for Soliciting; Riding in Cargo Storage Area, on
Tailgate or on Outside of Vehicle
   (a)   No person while on a roadway outside a safety zone shall solicit a
ride from the driver of any vehicle. This division does not apply in the case
of emergency or when the solicitation is due to the person engaging
transportation for hire.
   (b)   No person shall stand on a street or highway, or on any other portion
of the right-of-way, including the berm, treelawn, shoulder, and sidewalk, and
repeatedly stop, beckon to, or attempt to stop vehicular traffic by hailing,
waving arms, or making other bodily gestures.
   This division shall not be construed to prohibit a person from stopping,
beckoning to, or attempting to stop vehicles due to emergency, or to warn
drivers of danger, or to engage transportation or hire.
   (c)   No person shall hang onto, or ride on the outside of any motor
vehicle, streetcar, or trackless trolley while it is moving upon a roadway,
except mechanics or test engineers making repairs or adjustments, or workers
performing specialized highway or street maintenance or construction under the
authority of a public agency.
   (d)   No operator shall knowingly permit any person to hang onto, or ride on
the outside of any motor vehicle, streetcar, or trackless trolley while it is
moving upon a roadway, except mechanics or test engineers making repairs or
adjustments, or workers performing specialized highway or street maintenance or
construction under the authority of a public agency.
   (e)   No driver of a truck, trailer, or semitrailer shall knowingly permit
any person who has not attained the age of sixteen (16) years to ride in the
unenclosed or unroofed cargo storage area of his or her vehicle if the vehicle
is traveling faster than twenty-five (25) miles per hour, unless either of the
following applies:
      (1)   The cargo storage area of the vehicle is equipped with a properly
secured seat to which is attached a seat safety belt that is in compliance with
federal standards for an occupant restraining device as defined in division (A)
(2) of RC 4513.263, the seat and seat safety belt were installed at the time
the vehicle was originally assembled, and the person riding in the cargo
storage area is in the seat and is wearing the seat safety belt;
      (2)   An emergency exists that threatens the life of the driver or the
person being transported in the cargo storage area of the truck, trailer, or
semitrailer.
   (f)   No driver of a truck, trailer, or semitrailer shall permit any person,
except for those workers performing specialized highway or street maintenance
or construction under authority of a public agency, to ride in the cargo
storage area or on a tailgate of his or her vehicle while the tailgate is
unlatched.
   (g)   No person shall leave or enter a vehicle that is in motion except in
an emergency necessitating such action.
   (h)   As used in this section, "street" or "highway" have the same meaning
as in division (BB) of RC Section 4511.01.
   (i)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree on the first offense, a misdemeanor of the
third degree on the second offense, and a misdemeanor of the first degree on
the third and each subsequent offense. Whoever violates any other division of
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on the first offense; a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a second offense; and a misdemeanor of the
third degree on the third and each subsequent offense.
(RC 4511.51; Ord. No. 593-17. Passed 6-5-17, eff. 6-7-17)
§ 471.061 To Repeatedly Stop, Hail Down, or Beckon to Vehicles Prohibited;
Exceptions; Penalties
   (a)   No person shall repeatedly stop, beckon to, or attempt to stop
vehicles by hailing, waving arms, or making other bodily gestures, in or about
any public place, or any place open to the public, or any private place visible
from a public place, in combination with the following conduct:
   To repeatedly leave the place in a vehicle that the person has stopped,
hailed down or beckoned to, and to return a short time later, in less than an
hour, to the same or another public place, or any place open to the public, or
any private place visible from a public place, to repeat the same behaviors.
   (b)   No person shall repeatedly stop, beckon to, or attempt to stop
vehicles by hailing, waving arms, or making other bodily gestures, by waving
arms, or making other bodily gestures, in or about any public place, or any
place open to the public, or any private place visible from a public place, in
combination with the following conduct:
      (1)   To transfer small objects or packages in exchange for currency or
any other thing of value; or
      (2)   To carry small objects or packages in the mouth and to transfer
such objects or packages to another person for currency or any other thing of
value, or to swallow or attempt to swallow the objects or packages if
approached by a law enforcement officer.
   (c)   This section does not apply to any person who stops, beckons to, or
attempts to stop vehicles due to emergency, or to warn drivers of danger, or to
engage transportation for hire.
   (d)   The requisite culpability or intent for the offenses defined in this
section is knowingly. As used in this section, “knowingly” has the same meaning
as in Section
601.07.
   (e)   Whoever violates divisions (a) or (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree on the first offense, and a misdemeanor of the
first degree on each subsequent offense.
(Ord. No. 1217-02. Passed 6-10-02; eff. 6-14-02)
§ 471.07 Right-of-way on Sidewalk
   The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian on a
sidewalk.
(RC 4511.441; Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 471.08 Yielding to Public Safety Vehicle
   (a)   Upon the immediate approach of a public safety vehicle as stated in
Section
431.21, every pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to the public safety
vehicle.
   (b)   This section shall not relieve the driver of a public safety vehicle
from the duty to exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian.
(RC 4511.452; Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 471.09 Intoxicated or Drugged Pedestrian on Highway
   A pedestrian who is under the influence of alcohol, any drug of abuse, or
any combination of them, to a degree that renders the pedestrian a hazard shall
not walk or be upon a highway.
(RC 4511.481; Ord. No. 657-17. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 471.10 On Bridges or Railroad Crossings
   (a)   No pedestrian shall enter or remain upon any bridge or approach
thereto beyond the bridge signal, gate or barrier after a bridge operation
signal indication has been given.
   (b)   No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over or under any crossing
gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing or bridge while the gate or
barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.
(RC 4511.511; Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 471.11 Using Ordinary Care
   (a)   No person shall enter upon, walk in or cross any roadway, in such a
manner as to endanger his or her life or limb. Every person shall at all times
and places exercise ordinary care for his or her own protection and safety.
   (b)   No person shall cross a roadway except at a crosswalk when any
crosswalk is within three hundred (300) feet of the point of crossing.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 471.12 Designation of Pedestrian Ways; Prohibition of Private Vehicular
Traffic
   The following areas are designated as pedestrian ways in which all vehicular
traffic, other than travel by City-owned vehicles is prohibited:
East 6th Street from Prospect Avenue to Huron Road.
(Ord. No. 195-94. Passed 3-14-94, eff. 3-23-94)
CHAPTER 473 – BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES, MOBILITY DEVICES
473.01   Code Application to Bicycles and Mobility Devices
473.02   Operation of Bicycles, Motorcycles, Mobility Devices, and Snowmobiles
473.03   Prohibition Against Attaching to Vehicles
473.04   Riding Bicycles and Motorcycles Abreast – Repealed
473.05   Bicycle and Mobility Device Signal Device, Lights, Reflector, and
Brakes
473.06   Lights and Reflector on Bicycle; Brakes – Repealed
473.07   Operating Bicycles, Mobility Devices, and Motorcycles on Roadway
473.08   Reckless Operation; Control, Course, and Speed
473.09   Riding on Sidewalks
473.10   Parking of Bicycle or Mobility Device
473.11   Licensing Bicycles; Fee and Transfer – Repealed
473.12   Licensing Agents – Repealed
473.13   Bicycle Rental Agencies
473.14   Motorized Bicycle Operation, Equipment, and License
Cross-reference:
   Bicycle defined, CO
401.05
   Bicycles prohibited on freeways, CO
403.12
   Impounding bicycles, CO
405.09
   Motorcycle brakes, CO
437.18
   Motorcycle defined, CO
401.26

   Motorcycle headlight, CO
437.03
   Motorcycle operator’s license required, CO
435.01
   Regulations for bicycle operation in parks, CO
559.58
Statutory reference:
   See sectional histories for similar State law
§ 473.01 Code Application to Bicycles and Mobility Devices
   (a)   The provisions of this Traffic Code that are applicable to bicycles
and mobility devices apply whenever a bicycle or mobility device is operated
upon any highway or upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles
or mobility devices.
   (b)   The provisions of this Traffic Code shall apply to bicycles and
mobility devices, and any person operating a bicycle or mobility device on a
street shall comply with all operational rules and traffic control devices
applicable to vehicular traffic, whenever possible.
   (c)   Except as provided in division (e) of this section, a bicycle or
mobility device operator who violates any provision of this Traffic Code
described in division (a) of this section that is applicable to bicycles and
mobility devices may be issued a ticket, citation, or summons by a law
enforcement officer for the violation in the same manner as the operator of a
motor vehicle would be cited for the same violation. A person who commits any
such violation while operating a bicycle or mobility device shall not have any
points assessed against the person's driver's license, commercial driver's
license, temporary instruction permit, or probationary license under RC
4510.036.
   (d)   Except as provided in division (e) of this section, in the case of a
violation of any provision of this Traffic Code described in division (a) of
this section by a bicycle operator, a mobility device operator, or by a motor
vehicle operator when the trier of fact finds that the violation by the motor
vehicle operator endangered the lives of bicycle riders or mobility device
operators at the time of the violation, the court, notwithstanding any
provision of this Traffic Code or the Revised Code to the contrary, may require
the bicycle operator, mobility device operator or motor vehicle operator to
take and successfully complete a bicycling or mobility device skills course
approved by the court in addition to or in lieu of any penalty otherwise
prescribed by this Traffic Code or the Revised Code for that violation.
   (e)   Divisions (c) and (d) of this section do not apply to violations of RC
4511.19 or Chapter
433.
(Ord. No. 464-2019. Passed 6-3-19, eff. 7-5-19; Am. Ord. No. 396-2020. Passed
6-3-20, eff. 6-9-20)
Statutory reference:
   Similar State law, see RC 4511.52
§ 473.02 Operation of Bicycles, Motorcycles, Mobility Devices, and Snowmobiles
   (a)   For purposes of this section, "snowmobile" has the same meaning as
given that term in RC 4519.01.
   (b)   (1)   No person operating a bicycle, mobility device, or motorcycle
shall ride other than upon or astride the permanent and regular seat attached
thereto, or carry any other person upon such bicycle, mobility device, or
motorcycle other than upon a separate firmly attached and regular seat thereon,
and no person shall ride upon a bicycle, mobility device, or motorcycle other
than upon such a firmly attached and regular seat.
      (2)   A person operating a mobility device without a permanent and
regular seat attached thereto shall not ride other than standing upon the
footboard.
      (3)   No person shall ride upon a motorcycle that is equipped with a
saddle other than while sitting astride the saddle, facing forward, with one
leg on each side of the motorcycle.
      (4)   No person operating a bicycle or a mobility device shall carry any
package, bundle, or article that prevents the driver from keeping at least one
(1) hand upon the handlebars.
      (5)   No person operating an e-scooter should do so on any streets if the
posted speed limit is over thirty-five (35) mph unless in a dedicated bike lane
or shared use path.
      (6)   No person operating an e-scooter shall exceed a speed at greater
than fifteen (15) miles per hour.
      (7)   No bicycle, mobility device or motorcycle shall be used to carry
more persons than the number for which it is designed and equipped. No
motorcycle shall be operated on a street or highway when the handlebars rise
higher than the shoulders of the operator when the operator is seated in the
operator's seat or saddle.
   (c)   (1)   Except as provided in division (c)(2) of this section, no person
shall operate or be a passenger on a snowmobile or motorcycle without using
safety glasses or other protective eye device. Except as provided in division
(c)(2) of this section, no person who is under the age of eighteen (18) years,
or who holds a motorcycle operator's endorsement or license bearing a "novice"
designation that is currently in effect as provided in RC 4507.13, shall
operate a motorcycle on a highway, or be a passenger on a motorcycle, unless
wearing a United States Department of Transportation-approved protective helmet
on the person's head, and no other person shall be a passenger on a motorcycle
operated by such a person unless similarly wearing a protective helmet. The
helmet, safety glasses, or other protective eye device shall conform with rules
adopted by the Director of Public Safety. The provisions of this paragraph or a
violation thereof shall not be used in the trial of any civil action.
      (2)   Division (c)(1) of this section does not apply to a person
operating an autocycle or cab-enclosed motorcycle when the occupant compartment
top is in place enclosing the occupants.
      (3)   A.   No person shall operate a motorcycle with a valid temporary
instruction permit and temporary instruction permit identification card issued
by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles pursuant to RC 4507.05 unless the person, at
the time of such operation, is wearing on the person's head a protective helmet
that has been approved by the United States Department of Transportation that
conforms with rules adopted by the Director.
         B.   No person shall operate a motorcycle with a valid temporary
instruction permit and temporary instruction permit identification card issued
by the Registrar pursuant to RC 4507.05 in any of the following circumstances:
            1.   At any time when lighted lights are required by RC 4513.03(A)
(1);
            2.   While carrying a passenger;
            3.   On any limited access highway or heavily congested roadway.
   (d)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the carrying
of a child in a seat or trailer that is designed for carrying children and is
firmly attached to the bicycle.
   (e)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (b) or (c)(1) or (c)(3) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. If, within one (1) year of the offense, the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one (1) predicate motor vehicle or
traffic offense, whoever violates division (b) or (c)(1) or (c)(3) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one (1)
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two (2) or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates division (b)
or (c)(1) or (c)(3) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(Ord. No. 396-2020. Passed 6-3-20, eff. 6-9-20
Statutory reference:
   Similar State law, see RC 4511.53
§ 473.03 Prohibition Against Attaching to Vehicles
   (a)   No person riding upon any bicycle, mobility device, coaster, roller
skates, sled, or toy vehicle shall attach the same or self to any streetcar,
trackless trolley, or vehicle upon a roadway.
   (b)   No operator shall knowingly permit any person riding upon any bicycle,
mobility device, coaster, roller skates, sled, or toy vehicle to attach the
same or self to any streetcar, trackless trolley, or vehicle while it is moving
upon a roadway.
   (c)   This section does not apply to towing a disabled vehicle.
(Ord. No. 464-2019. Passed 6-3-19, eff. 7-5-19; Am. Ord. No. 396-2020. Passed
6-3-20, eff. 6-9-20)
Statutory reference:
   Similar State law, see RC 4511.54
§ 473.04 Riding Bicycles and Motorcycles Abreast – Repealed
(Ord. No. 658-17. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 473.05 Bicycle and Mobility Device Signal Device, Lights, Reflector, and
Brakes
   (a)   Every bicycle or mobility device when in use at the times specified in
Section
437.02, shall be equipped with the following:
      (1)   A lamp mounted on the front of either the bicycle, mobility device,
or the operator that shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at
least five hundred (500) feet to the front and three hundred (300) feet to the
sides. A generator-powered lamp that emits light only when the bicycle or
mobility device is moving may be used to meet this requirement.
      (2)   A red reflector on the rear that shall be visible from all
distances from one hundred (100) feet to six hundred (600) feet to the rear
when directly in front of lawful lower beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle;
      (3)   A lamp emitting either flashing or steady red light visible from a
distance of five hundred (500) feet to the rear shall be used in addition to
the red reflector. If the red lamp performs as a reflector in that it is
visible as specified in division (a)(2) of this section, the red lamp may serve
as the reflector and a separate reflector is not required.
   (b)   Additional lamps and reflectors may be used in addition to those
required under division (a) of this section, except that red lamps and red
reflectors shall not be used on the front of the bicycle or mobility device and
white lamps and white reflectors shall not be used on the rear of the bicycle
or mobility device.
   (c)   A bicycle or mobility device may be equipped with a device capable of
giving an audible signal, except that a bicycle or mobility device shall not be
equipped with nor shall any person use upon a bicycle or mobility device any
siren or whistle.
   (d)   Every bicycle or mobility device shall be equipped with an adequate
brake when used on a street or highway.
(Ord. No. 464-2019. Passed 6-3-19, eff. 7-5-19; Am. Ord. No. 396-2020. Passed
6-3-20, eff. 6-9-20)
Statutory reference:
   Similar State law, see RC 4511.56
§ 473.06 Lights and Reflector on Bicycle; Brakes – Repealed
(Ord. No. 658-17. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 473.07 Operating Bicycles, Mobility Devices, and Motorcycles on Roadway
   (a)   Every person operating a bicycle or mobility device upon a roadway
shall ride as near to the right side of the roadway where practicable obeying
all traffic rules applicable to vehicles and exercising due care when passing a
standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.
   (b)   Persons riding bicycles mobility devices or motorcycles upon a roadway
shall ride not more than two (2) abreast in a single lane, except on shared-use
paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles,
mobility devices or motorcycles.
   (c)   This section does not require a person operating a bicycle or mobility
device to ride at the edge of the roadway when it is unreasonable or unsafe to
do so. Conditions that may require riding away from the edge of the roadway
include when necessary to avoid fixed or moving objects, parked or moving
vehicles, surface hazards, or if it otherwise is unsafe or impracticable to do
so, including if the lane is too narrow for the bicycle or mobility device and
an overtaking vehicle to travel safely side by side within the lane.
(Ord. No. 396-2020. Passed 6-3-20, eff. 6-9-20)
Statutory reference:
   Similar State law, see RC 4511.55
§ 473.08 Reckless Operation; Control, Course, and Speed
   No person shall operate a bicycle or mobility device:
   (a)   Without due regard for the safety and rights of pedestrians and
drivers and occupants of all other vehicles, and so as to endanger the life,
limb, or property of any person while in the lawful use of the streets or
sidewalks or any other public or private property;
   (b)   Without exercising reasonable and ordinary control over such bicycle
or mobility device;
   (c)   In a weaving or zigzag course unless such irregular course is
necessary for safe operation in compliance with law;
   (d)   Without both hands upon the handle grips except when necessary to give
the required hand and arm signals, or as provided in Section
473.02(d);
   (e)   At a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions
then existing;
   (f)   Without complying with the instructions of any traffic control device
applicable to vehicles unless otherwise directed by a police officer;
   (g)   Without giving the hand and arm signals as provided in Section
431.15 when turning or altering course.
(Ord. No. 464-2019. Passed 6-3-19, eff. 7-5-19; Am. Ord. No. 396-2020. Passed
6-3-20, eff. 6-9-20)
§ 473.09 Riding on Sidewalks
   (a)   No person shall ride a bicycle, mobility device, skateboard or roller
skates upon a sidewalk within a business district.
   (b)   No person shall ride a bicycle, mobility device, skateboard or roller-
skates upon a sidewalk within the City or paved area within a public park owned
by the City when the Chief of Police or Traffic Control Commissioner has
prohibited the riding of a bicycle, mobility device, skateboard or roller-
skates thereon and, with the consent of the member or members of Council in
whose ward(s) the sidewalk or paved area within a public park is located has
erected signs on or along such sidewalks or paved areas setting forth such
prohibition.
   (c)   Whenever a person is riding a bicycle, mobility device, skateboard or
roller skates upon a sidewalk within the City or paved area within a public
park owned by the City, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any
pedestrian and give an audible signal before attempting to overtake and pass
such pedestrian.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
   (e)   This section shall not apply to the Cleveland Divisions of Police,
Emergency Medical Services, and Fire personnel, nor to any private safety/
security personnel, when personnel are acting within the scope of their
official duties while riding a bicycle or mobility device.
(Ord. No. 396-2020. Passed 6-3-20, eff. 6-9-20)
§ 473.10 Parking of Bicycle or Mobility Device
   (a)   No person shall park a bicycle or mobility device on a sidewalk in
such a manner so as to unduly interfere with pedestrian flow. This includes ADA
ramps, areas departing to and from buildings and at transit stops.
   (b)   No person shall park a bicycle or mobility device on a sidewalk in
such a manner as to block crosswalks, curb ramps, transit stops, fire escapes,
fire hydrants, loading zones, disability parking, street furniture, building
entryways, private property, railroad crossings, or vehicular driveways.
   (c)   No person shall park a bicycle or mobility device upon any street
including parking spots and loading zones so as to unduly interfere with
vehicular traffic.
   (d)   All bicycles and mobility devices must be parked in an upright
position.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 464-2019. Passed 6-3-19, eff. 7-5-19; Am. Ord. No. 396-2020. Passed
6-3-20, eff. 6-9-20)
§ 473.11 Licensing Bicycles; Fee and Transfer – Repealed
(Ord. No. 672-12. Passed 6-4-12, eff. 6-8-12)
§ 473.12 Licensing Agents – Repealed
(Ord. No. 672-12. Passed 6-4-12, eff. 6-8-12)
§ 473.13 Bicycle Rental Agencies
   No rental agency shall rent or offer any bicycle for rent unless the bicycle
is licensed and a license plate is attached thereto as provided herein, and
such bicycle is equipped with the lights and other equipment required in this
chapter.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 473.14 Motorized Bicycle Operation, Equipment, and License
   (a)   No person shall operate a motorized bicycle upon a highway or any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking, unless all of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The person is fourteen (14) or fifteen (15) years of age and holds
a valid probationary motorized bicycle license issued after the person has
passed the test provided for in this section, or the person is sixteen (16)
years of age or older and holds either a valid commercial driver’s license
issued under RC Chapter 4506 or a driver’s license issued under RC Chapter 4507
or a valid motorized bicycle license issued after the person has passed the
test provided for in this section, except that if a person is sixteen (16)
years of age, has a valid probationary motorized bicycle license and desires a
motorized bicycle license, the person is not required to comply with the
testing requirements provided for in this section;
      (2)   The motorized bicycle is equipped in accordance with the rules
adopted under division (b) of this section and is in proper working order;
      (3)   The person, if under eighteen (18) years of age, is wearing a
protective helmet on the person’s head with the chin strap properly fastened
and the motorized bicycle is equipped with a rearview mirror.
      (4)   The person operates the motorized bicycle when practicable within
three (3) feet of the right edge of the roadway obeying all traffic rules
applicable to vehicles.
   (b)   The Ohio Director of Public Safety, subject to RC Chapter 119, shall
adopt and promulgate rules concerning protective helmets, the equipment of
motorized bicycles, and the testing and qualifications of persons who do not
hold a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license. The test shall be as near
as practicable to the examination required for a motorcycle operator’s
endorsement under RC 4507.11. The test shall also require the operator to give
an actual demonstration of the operator’s ability to operate and control a
motorized bicycle by driving one (1) under the supervision of an examining
officer.
   (c)   Every motorized bicycle license expires on the birthday of the
applicant in the fourth year after the date it is issued, but in no event shall
any motorized bicycle license be issued for a period longer than four (4)
years.
   (d)   No person operating a motorized bicycle shall carry another person
upon the motorized bicycle.
   (e)   The protective helmet and rearview mirror required by division (a)(3)
of this section shall, on and after January 1, 1985, conform with rules adopted
by the Director under division (b) of this section.
   (f)   Each probationary motorized bicycle license or motorized bicycle
license shall be laminated with a transparent plastic material.
   (g)   Whoever violates division (a), (d) or (e) of this section is guilty of
a minor misdemeanor.
(RC 4511.521; Ord. No. 658-17. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
TITLE XI: WATER TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
481   Definitions, Enforcement, Compliance and Penalty
   Chapter
483   General Provisions
   Chapter
485   Watercraft Operation
   Chapter
487   Equipment
CHAPTER 481 – DEFINITIONS, ENFORCEMENT, COMPLIANCE AND PENALTY
481.01   Definitions
481.02   Police to Enforce Water Traffic Code
481.03   Authority of Police Chief or Officer in Charge of Ports and Harbors
Unit
481.04   Obedience to Order of a Police Officer
481.05   Release from Arrest on Notice to Appear
481.06   Watercraft Number Regulations
481.07   Prohibition Against Commercial Fishing
481.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Equipment violations, CO
487.12
   Watercraft impounding, CO
483.11
§ 481.01 Definitions
   As used in this Water Traffic Code, certain terms are defined as follows:
   (a)   “Waters of Cleveland” means any waters within the jurisdiction of the
City of Cleveland in which any watercraft is or may be operated, and includes
the waters of Lake Erie and the Cuyahoga River. Jurisdiction in Lake Erie
includes all waters within the easterly and westerly City limits and extends
into Lake Erie to the distance of two (2) miles from the natural shore line.
   (b)   “Watercraft” means any of the following when used or capable of being
used for transportation on the water:
      (1)   A boat operated by machinery either permanently or temporarily
affixed;
      (2)   A sailboat other than a sailboard;
      (3)   An inflatable, manually propelled boat having a hull identification
number assigned by and meeting the requirements of the United States Coast
Guard;
      (4)   A canoe or rowboat.
   “Watercraft” does not include ferries as referred to in RC Chapter 4583.
   Watercraft subject to Section
481.06 shall be divided into four (4) classes as follows:
      Class A: Less than sixteen (16) feet in length;
      Class one (1): At least sixteen (16) feet but less than twenty-six (26)
feet in length;
      Class two (2): At least twenty-six (26) feet but less than forty (40)
feet in length;
      Class three (3): At least forty (40) feet but not more than sixty-five
(65) feet in length.
   Any watercraft over sixty-five (65) feet in length shall comply with Federal
regulations.
   (c)   “Rowboat” means any watercraft designed to be rowed or paddled and
which is propelled by human muscular effort by oars, paddles or other
contrivances upon which no mechanical propulsion device, electric motor,
internal combustion engine or sail has been affixed or is used for the
operation of such watercraft, and include a canoe, kayak, raft or paddleboard.
   (d)   “Motorboat” means any powercraft as defined in division (g) hereof not
more than sixty-five (65) feet in length, measured parallel to the center line
from end to end in a straight line from the foremost part of the vessel to the
aftermost. Bowsprints, bumpkins, rudders, outboard motors and brackets and
similar fittings or attachments are not to be included. Length shall be stated
in feet and inches.
   (e)   “Sailboat” means any watercraft equipped with mast and sails,
dependent upon the wind to propel such watercraft in the normal course of
operation of such watercraft.
      (1)   Any sailboat equipped with an inboard engine is deemed a powercraft
with auxiliary sail.
      (2)   Any sailboat equipped with a detachable motor is a sailboat with
auxiliary power.
      (3)   Any sailboat being propelled by mechanical power, whether under
sail or not, is deemed a powercraft and subject to all laws and rules and
regulations governing powercraft operation.
   (f)   “Emergency watercraft” means police, fire and state patrol watercraft
when identified as such and watercraft commandeered by police officers.
   (g)   “Powercraft” means any watercraft propelled by machinery, fuel,
rockets or similar device.
   Powercraft subject to the Cleveland Water Traffic Code shall be divided into
four (4) classes as follows:
      Class A with length less than sixteen (16) feet.
      Class one (1) with length sixteen (16) but less than twenty-six (26)
feet.
      Class two (2) with length twenty-six (26) but less than forty (40) feet.
      Class three (3) with length forty (40) but not more than sixty-five (65)
feet.
   Powercraft over sixty-five (65) feet in length shall comply with Federal
regulations.
   (h)   “Person” includes any individual, firm, partnership, corporation,
company, association or body politic, except the United States and the State of
Ohio, and includes any agent, trustee, executor, receiver, assignee or other
representative thereof.
   (i)   “Owner” includes any person who claims lawful possession of a
watercraft by virtue of legal title or equitable interest therein which
entitles him or her to such possession.
   (j)   “Operator” includes any person who navigates, or has under his or her
control, a watercraft, or watercraft and detachable motor on the waters of the
City.
   (k)   “Visible” means visible on a dark night with clear atmosphere.
   (l)   “Starboard” means right, and reference is to the right or starboard
side of a watercraft when looking forward on such watercraft.
   (m)   “Port” means left, and reference is to the left or port side of a
watercraft when looking forward on such watercraft.
   (n)   “Anchorage” means a designated position where vessels or watercraft
may anchor or moor.
   (o)   “Aquatic event” means any organized water event of limited duration
which is duly sanctioned by the Commanding Officer of the Ninth Coast Guard
District at least thirty (30) days prior to the start of such event and
includes marine regattas and marine parades, which by their nature,
circumstances or location will introduce extra or unusual hazards to the safety
of life on navigable waters.
   (p)   “Authorized emergency vessel” means any authorized watercraft,
patrolboat of the Cleveland Safety Department, Port Control Department, United
States Government, State of Ohio or Cuyahoga County authorized patrol vessels
or watercraft, and watercraft when commandeered by Cleveland police officers.
   (q)   “Diver’s flag” means a red flag five (5) units of measurement on the
hoist by six (6) units of measurement on the fly with a white stripe of one (1)
unit crossing the red diagonally with the flag having a stiffener. This flag
pertains only to skin and SCUBA (Self Contained Underwater Breathing Apparatus)
diving and supplements any nationally recognized diver’s flag or marking.
   (r)   “Master” means the captain, skipper, pilot or any person having charge
of any vessel or watercraft.
   (s)   “Obstruction” means any vessel or watercraft or any matter which may
in any way blockade, interfere with or endanger any vessel or watercraft or
impede navigation or which cannot comply with the pilot rules of the Great
Lakes.
   (t)   “Oil” means any oil or liquid, whether of animal, vegetable or mineral
origin, or a mixture, compound or distillation thereof.
   (u)   “Pier” means any pier, wharf, dock, float, gridiron or other structure
to promote the convenient loading or unloading or other discharge of vessels or
watercraft, or the repair thereof.
   (v)   “Breakwall” means any construction of stone, steel or other material
constructed mainly as a barrier which breaks the force of waves.
   (w)   “Government Breakwall” means the stone breakwall starting from a point
north of Gordon Park which supports the lighthouse referred to as the East-
Light, extending westerly to a point north of the mouth of the entrance of the
Cuyahoga River, starting again at the entrance to the Cleveland Harbor and
extending westerly upon which is erected the Cleveland Harbor entrance
Lighthouse. Reference shall be made as to the East Government Breakwall and the
West Government Breakwall.
   (x)   “Cleveland Harbor” means all water protected by the Government
Breakwall.
   (y)   “Restricted area” means an area that has been designated in accordance
with and as authorized by the laws or regulations of the City to be used for,
or closed to, certain designated purposes, such as swimming, skin diving,
skiing, fishing, aquatic events and any other water activities.
   (z)   “Water ski” means all forms, manners, means or contrivances used by
persons or persons being towed behind a motorboat or watercraft.
   (aa)   “Coast Guard approved” means bearing an approval number assigned by
the United States Coast Guard.
   (bb)   “Wake” means the track, waves, path or disturbance left in the water
by a watercraft, either by means of its movement through the water or by its
power, exhaust or propeller, whether such watercraft is actually moving or not.
   (cc)   “Boat number” means a series of letters and numerals assigned to the
owner by the Ohio Division of Watercraft. The number shall be designated on a
certificate of number issued to each boat owner in accordance with a system of
numbering which shall be uniform throughout the United States and its
territories.
   (dd)   “Water traffic control devices” means all signs, signals and
markings, placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having
jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding marine or water
traffic, including no mooring signs or limited docking signs at public piers,
wharves, docks, floats, etc.
   (ee)   “Personal flotation device” means a type of device designed as
follows:
 
Type Purpose                                                   Buoyancy
                                                               Kilograms Pounds
1    Turns an unconscious person floating in water from face   9         20
     down position to a vertical or slightly face up position.
2    Turns an unconscious person floating in water from face   7         15.4
     down position to a vertical or slightly face up position.
3    Keeps a conscious person in a vertical or slightly face   7         15.4
     up position.
4    Thrown to a person in the water and not worn.             7.5       16.5
 
(Ord. No. 755-A-86. Passed 10-27-86, eff. 10-31-86)
§ 481.02 Police to Enforce Water Traffic Code
   The Division of Police shall enforce the provisions of this Water Traffic
Code. The Chief of Police shall assign such officers and members of the
Division as he or she may determine necessary who shall be charged with the
specific duty of enforcing the provisions of this Water Traffic Code.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 481.03 Authority of Police Chief or Officer in Charge of Ports and Harbors
Unit
   The Chief of Police, or the officer in charge of the Ports and Harbors Unit
is hereby authorized and empowered to:
   (a)   Make and enforce regulations necessary to make effective the
provisions of this Water Traffic Code and to make and enforce temporary
regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions;
   (b)   Enforce all pertinent sections of the Ohio Revised Code and Codified
Ordinances of Cleveland, and in the exercise thereof, have the authority to
stop and board any watercraft for the purpose of inspection and enforcement of
such statutes and ordinances.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 481.04 Obedience to Order of a Police Officer
   No person shall refuse to comply with any lawful order, signal or direction
of any member of the Division of Police in connection with the operation of
watercraft in the waters of Cleveland.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 481.05 Release from Arrest on Notice to Appear
   Whenever any person is arrested for any violation of this Water Traffic
Code, the arresting officer may serve upon him or her a citation and notice to
appear in court. The arrested person, in order to secure release and when
permitted by the arresting officer, must give his or her written promise to
appear in court, as required by the citation and notice served by the arresting
officer. Upon the arrested person’s failure or refusal to sign such written
promise, he or she may be taken into custody of such arresting officer and so
remain or be placed in confinement. The arrestee’s watercraft may be taken into
a place of impoundment at the expense of the arrestee.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 481.06 Watercraft Number Regulations
   (a)   Every watercraft operated on the waters of the City shall be numbered
pursuant to the Ohio State Numbering System, or an approved numbering system of
another state, provided such watercraft has not operated in Cleveland in excess
of ninety (90) days, or in accordance with Federal law, except:
      (1)   Vessels documented by the U.S. Bureau of Customs;
      (2)   Foreign vessels using City waters temporarily;
      (3)   Watercraft owned by the United States or by a state or political
subdivision thereof;
      (4)   Ship’s lifeboats;
      (5)   A boat belonging to a class exempted from numbering by the State
Division of Watercraft.
   (b)   Each watercraft shall be required to have its own identification
number, and the number is not transferable to any other watercraft. The letters
and numerals must be in block characters and at least three (3) inches in
height. They shall be of a color or substance that contrasts with the
background color of the boat and shall provide clear legibility. The numbers
and letters shall read from left to right as they appear on the certificate of
award, and the letter group shall be separated from the numerals by hyphens or
by equivalent spaces.
   (c)   The number shall be displayed on the bow of each side of the
watercraft or as close to it as practicable, depending on the design of the
watercraft. The original certificate of number award must be available on board
the watercraft for inspection at all times when the boat is in use. In
addition, the Ohio tags indicating the license year of the number award shall
be securely affixed by the owner of such watercraft, prior to operation, to the
port and starboard sides six (6) inches toward the stern from the
identification number.
   (d)   A dealer’s number may be transferred from one (1) watercraft to
another in the case of bona fide dealers or manufacturers, and when unsold
watercraft are used for demonstration purposes in accordance with provisions of
dealer or manufacturer permits.
   (e)   The responsibility of having a watercraft numbered rests upon the
person or persons who own the watercraft, and does not include the person or
persons who rent or lease the watercraft, or one who holds a mortgage on a
watercraft.
   (f)   Each certificate of number shall expire on January 1 of each
succeeding year. Application for renewal may be made to any authorized agent of
the Division of Watercraft, who shall issue to the applicant a metal or plastic
tag with the certificate of number award.
   (g)   The owner of any watercraft already covered by a number in full force
and effect which has been awarded to it pursuant to the then operative Federal
law of a Federally approved numbering system to another state shall record such
number with the Administrator of Watercraft prior to operating the watercraft
on the waters of the City in excess of ninety (90) days.
   (h)   Whenever the ownership of a watercraft changes, a new application form
together with the prescribed fee shall be filed with the State Division of
Watercraft, and a new certificate of number shall be assigned in the same
manner as provided for in the original assignment number.
   (i)   The owner shall furnish the Division of Watercraft notice of the
transfer of all or any part of his or her interest other than the creation of a
security interest in watercraft in the State, or of the destruction or
abandonment of such watercraft, except in the case of a transfer of a part
interest which does not affect the owner’s right to operate such watercraft,
such transfer shall not terminate the certificate of number.
   (j)   Any holder of a certificate of number residing in the City shall
notify the City Police Division and the Administrator of the Ohio Division of
Watercraft within fifteen (15) days, if his or her address no longer conforms
to the address appearing on the certificate and shall, as a part of such
notification, furnish the Administrator and the Police Division with his or her
new address.
   (k)   No person shall use an outboard motor on a watercraft required to be
numbered or on a bailed or rented boat, in any waters of Cleveland without
first obtaining a detachable outboard motor license from the Administrator of
Watercraft or an authorized agent. The metal or plastic license tag bearing the
date of the license year for which issued shall be securely attached to the
outboard motor for which issued, prior to its operation on any waters of the
City.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 481.07 Prohibition Against Commercial Fishing
   (a)   No person shall fish commercially within two (2) miles of the
shoreline of Lake Erie within the easterly and westerly boundaries of the City
of Cleveland.
   (b)   Any person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
second degree.
(Ord. No. 1033-A-79. Passed 6-11-79, eff. 6-12-79)
§ 481.99 Penalty
   (a)   Whoever violates any provision of this Water Traffic Code for which no
penalty is otherwise provided is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. Each day’s
violation shall constitute a separate offense. On each subsequent offense
within one (1) year after the first offense, such person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (b)   Whoever violates Section
485.02,
485.03,
485.09 or
485.14 is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
CHAPTER 483 – GENERAL PROVISIONS
483.01   Floating Objects
483.02   Safety Devices on Commercial Piers
483.03   Drifting Debris
483.04   Oil Spillage; Removal and Recovery
483.05   Nuisances; Abatement
483.06   Prohibited Riding Positions
483.07   Operating Unsafe Watercraft
483.08   Throwing Objects at Watercraft
483.09   Boat Livery Records; Safety Equipment on Rental or Charter Watercraft
483.10   Aquatic Events
483.11   Watercraft Abandonment; Impounding, Redemption and Disposal
483.12   Going on Ice Prohibited; Exception
Cross-reference:
   Litter in lakes and watercourses, CO
613.09
   Nuisance investigation and abatement, CO
Ch. 203
   Oily refuse discharge prohibited, CO
613.10
   Water Traffic Code penalty, CO
481.99
   Watercraft pound creation authorized, CO
485.07
§ 483.01 Floating Objects
   All vessels, watercraft, logs, pilings, building material, scows, houseboats
or any other article of value found adrift in Cleveland waters, may be taken in
charge by the Chief of Police or officer designated by him or her and shall be
subject to reclamation by the owner thereof, on payment by him or her to the
City of any expense incurred by the City, and in case of failure to reclaim,
may be sold or disposed of according to law.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 483.02 Safety Devices on Commercial Piers
   Every owner, agent or lessee having charge of any commercial pier shall
furnish and keep for use on such pier at least one (1) serviceable thirty (30)
inch ring life buoy, and one (1) serviceable thirty (30) inch ring life buoy
for every three hundred (300) lineal feet of berthing space to each of which
shall be attached at least two hundred (200) feet of suitable line, one (1) end
of which shall be fastened to the ring buoy. Each ring buoy and line attached
thereto shall be kept in a suitable box or rack on the pier for the use of the
public in case of accident, which box or rack shall be properly labeled and be
at all times kept clear of obstructions. No person shall take away, molest,
injure or destroy the same except for use in saving life and property.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 483.03 Drifting Debris
   No owner, agent or lessee in charge of any pier shall allow the whole, or
any part thereof, to fall into or remain adrift in the navigable City waters or
drift away. Fender piles broken or loose, shall be removed by the owner, agent
or lessee of any pier, and upon failure to do so, the same may be removed by
the City and the expense thereto shall be paid by and recoverable from the
owner, agent or lessee of such pier to the City.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 483.04 Oil Spillage; Removal and Recovery
   No owner, master or other person in charge of a watercraft, and no engineer,
or other person in charge of any engine room or machinery of any watercraft,
and no owner, lessee, agent, employee or other person in charge of or employed
in or about any pier, and no person along or upon the shore of any City waters,
shall spill, throw, pump or otherwise cause oil of any description to be or
float upon the waters of Cleveland. Any person causing oil to be upon the City
waters as aforesaid shall remove the same and upon his or her failure to do so,
the same may be removed by the City and the expense thereto shall be paid by
and recoverable from the person causing such oil to be upon the water. The
payment of such sum, or the maintenance of an action therefor, shall not be
deemed to exempt such person from prosecution for causing such oil spillage.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 483.05 Nuisances; Abatement
   Sunken vessels or watercraft, refuse of all kinds, structures or pieces of
any structure, dock sweeping, dead fish or parts thereof, dead animals or parts
thereof, timber logs, piles, boon sticks, lumber, boxes, empty containers and
oil of any kind floating on the water, and all other substances or articles of
a similar nature are hereby declared to be public nuisances. No person shall
throw or place in or cause or permit to be thrown or placed any of the above
named articles or substances in Cleveland waters, or upon the shores thereof or
in such position that the same may or can be washed into such waters, either by
tides, storms, floods or otherwise. Any person causing or permitting such
nuisances to be placed as aforesaid shall remove the same and upon his or her
failure to do so, the same may be removed by the City, and the expense thereof
shall be paid by and recoverable from the person creating such nuisance. In all
cases such nuisances may be abated in the manner provided by law. The abatement
of any such public nuisances shall not excuse the person responsible therefor
from prosecution hereunder.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 483.06 Prohibited Riding Positions
   (a)   No occupant of any vessel underway on the waters in this City shall
sit, stand or walk upon any portion of the vessel not specifically designed for
that movement, except when immediately necessary for the safe and reasonable
navigation or operation of the vessel. No operator of a vessel underway on the
waters in this City shall allow any occupant of the vessel to sit, stand or
walk on any portion of the vessel underway not specifically designed for that
use, except when immediately necessary for the safe and reasonable navigation
or operation of the vessel.
   (b)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any vessel on the
waters in this City in violation of this section.
(RC 1547.22)
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(RC 1547.99(C); Ord. No. 1282-15. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 483.07 Operating Unsafe Watercraft
   (a)   No person shall operate or cause or knowingly permit to be operated in
City waters any watercraft which is in such unsafe condition as to endanger any
person or his or her property.
   (b)   No person shall use or offer for use on the waters of Cleveland any
inflatable watercraft made of canvas, rubber, synthetic rubber or vinyl plastic
unless such inflatable watercraft is of multiple air cell or compartment
construction and is capable of remaining afloat in the event one (1) air cell
or compartment is punctured or collapsed.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 483.08 Throwing Objects at Watercraft
   No person shall throw at, or attempt to throw or hit any watercraft with any
stone, stick or other missile with intent to injure anyone or damage any
property.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 483.09 Boat Livery Records; Safety Equipment on Rental or Charter Watercraft
   (a)   The owner or proprietor of a boat livery shall cause to be kept a
record of the name and address of the person or persons hiring any watercraft,
the identification number of such watercraft, the departure date and time and
the date and time of return of such watercraft. Such record shall be preserved
for not less than six (6) months after the departure date of such watercraft
and shall be kept available for inspection by any duly authorized agency or
authority. Prior to departure from the premises of such boat livery any such
watercraft shall carry the equipment required by this Water Traffic Code.
   (b)   No person who lets watercraft for hire, or the agent or employee
thereof, shall rent, lease, charter or otherwise permit the use of any
watercraft, unless such person provides the watercraft with the equipment
required by this Water Traffic Code, RC Chapter 1547 and rules issued pursuant
thereto.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 483.10 Aquatic Events
   Any yacht club, boat club or other organization shall notify the Police
Division, in addition to the United States Coast Guard authorities, at least
thirty (30) days in advance of any proposed boat race, regatta, ski exhibition
or aquatic event which will take place in City waters and which might in any
way interfere with the normal use of such waters by other persons or
watercraft.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 483.11 Watercraft Abandonment; Impounding, Redemption and Disposal
   (a)   No person shall abandon any watercraft at any time on the waters of
the City.
   (b)   Any watercraft or outboard motor found unattended in a sunken, beached
or drifting condition shall be deemed abandoned by the owner. In the interest
of public safety such watercraft or outboard motor may be removed and impounded
for safekeeping and disposal in accordance with the provisions of subsections
(c) to (f) hereof.
   (c)   Such watercraft or outboard motor may be impounded by any member of
the Police Division having jurisdiction in the area where such watercraft or
outboard motor is found.
   (d)   The owner of such impounded watercraft or outboard motor, if known or
can be found, shall be notified and the owner shall be permitted to redeem such
watercraft or outboard motor by payment of a storage fee not to exceed three
dollars ($3.00) per day plus the actual towing cost of the watercraft, not to
exceed ten dollars ($10.00).
   (e)   When the owner of such watercraft or outboard motor cannot be found,
the impounded watercraft or outboard motor shall be held at a place of safe
keeping for a period of not less than ninety (90) days nor more than six (6)
months.
   (f)   Any watercraft or outboard motor unclaimed by the owner within such
ninety (90) day period shall be disposed of by destroying the same or by
offering such watercraft or outboard motor for sale at public auction.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 483.12 Going on Ice Prohibited; Exception
   No person shall go upon the ice of the navigable waterways of the City,
except where such ice has been declared safe by the Chief of Police or the
officer in charge of the Ports and Harbors Unit.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
CHAPTER 485 – WATERCRAFT OPERATION
485.01   Rules of the Road
485.02   Reckless Operation; Speed
485.03   Operating Under Influence of Alcohol or Drugs Prohibited; Evidence
485.04   Prima Facie Evidence of Operation Under the Influence
485.05   Following Too Closely
485.06   Emerging from Harbor, Basin, River into Open Water
485.07   Interference to Navigation; Watercraft Pound
485.08   Overloading
485.09   Reporting a Collision or Accident
485.10   Exemptions to Emergency Watercraft
485.11   Obedience to Federal and State Marine Rules of the Road
485.12   Anchoring
485.13   Mooring to Piers or Docks
485.14   Interference, Tampering or Mooring to Navigation Aids
485.15   Prima Facie Evidence of Unlawful Anchoring, Mooring or Tying
485.16   Launching Ramps
485.17   Renting Watercraft to Intoxicated Persons
485.18   Renting Watercraft to Persons Under Sixteen
485.19   Child Operators; Supervising Person; Incapacity of Operator
485.20   Water Skiing
485.21   Swimming
485.22   Skin Diving and SCUBA Diving
Cross-reference:
   Operating unsafe watercraft, CO
483.07
   Prohibited riding positions, CO
483.06
   Vehicular homicide, CO
621.02
   Water Traffic Code definitions, CO
Ch. 481
Statutory reference:
   Operation regulations, RC 1547.05 et seq.
   Water skiing regulations, RC 1547.14 et seq.
§ 485.01 Rules of the Road
   The following rules for preventing collisions shall be followed in the
navigation of all public and private watercraft operating upon the waters of
Cleveland.
   (a)   Every watercraft which is under way propelled by sail alone shall be
considered a sailboat. Every watercraft which is under way propelled by sail
and machinery shall be considered a powercraft. Every watercraft shall be
considered under way when it is not at anchor or made fast to the shore or
aground. In addition to any other situation, risk of collision shall be
determined to exist whenever the compass bearing of the approaching watercraft
remains substantially the same.
   (b)   When two (2) sailboats are approaching one (1) another so as to
involve the risk of collision, one (1) of them shall keep out of the way of the
other, as follows, namely:
      (1)   When one (1) sailboat has the wind on the port side and the other
has the wind on the starboard side, the sailboat with the wind of the port side
shall keep out of the way of the sailboat with the wind on the starboard side;
      (2)   When both sailboats have the wind on the same side, the sailboat
which is to the windward shall keep out of the way of the sailboat which is to
leeward;
      (3)   When a sailboat with the wind on the port side sees a sailboat to
windward and cannot determine with certainty whether the other sailboat has the
wind on the port or the starboard side, it shall keep out of the way of the
other sailboat.
   (c)   When two (2) powercraft are meeting on reciprocal or nearly reciprocal
courses, so as to involve the risk of collision, each shall alter its course to
starboard, so that each shall pass on the port side of the other.
   (d)   When two (2) powercraft are crossing at right angles or obliquely, so
as to involve the risk of collision, the powercraft which has the other on its
own starboard side shall keep out of the way and shall, if possible, avoid
crossing ahead of the other.
   (e)   When a powercraft and a sailboat are proceeding in such directions as
to involve the risk of collision, the powercraft shall yield the right-of-way
to the sailboat, except when the sailboat is overtaking the powercraft.
   (f)   Every watercraft which is directed by these rules to yield the right-
of-way to another watercraft shall, on approaching such other watercraft, if
necessary, slacken its speed, stop, reverse or alter course. Where, by any of
the rules prescribed in the Water Traffic Code, or RC Chapter 1547, one (1) of
two (2) watercraft shall yield the right-of-way, the other shall keep its
course and speed.
   (g)   Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, every watercraft
overtaking another shall yield the right-of-way to the overtaken watercraft.
Every watercraft coming up with another watercraft from any direction more than
twenty-two and one-half (22.5) degrees abaft the other’s beam, that is, as such
a position with reference to the watercraft which it is overtaking that at
night it would be unable to see either of the other’s side or combination bow
lights, is an overtaking watercraft; and no subsequent alteration of bearing
between the two (2) watercraft shall make the overtaking watercraft a crossing
watercraft within the meaning of this section, or relieve it of the duty of
keeping clear of the overtaken watercraft until it is finally passed and clear.
If the overtaking watercraft is in doubt as to whether it is forward of or
abaft this direction from the other watercraft, it should assume that it is an
overtaking watercraft and yield the right-of- way.
   (h)   In rivers and streams or other areas in which there is a water
current, the descending watercraft shall have the right-of-way over a
watercraft which is ascending.
   (i)   When a powercraft and a rowboat are proceeding in such direction as to
involve the risk of collision, such powercraft shall yield the right-of-way to
such rowboat.
   (j)   Watercraft leaving a dock, boat slip or tie-up space shall yield the
right-of-way to all watercraft approaching such dock, boat slip or tie-up
space.
   (k)   At all times the operator of a watercraft shall maintain a proper
lookout required by the ordinary practice of seamen and by the special
circumstances of the case.
   (l)   In obeying and construing this section, due regard shall be had to all
dangers of navigation and collision and to any special circumstances which may
render a departure from the above rules necessary in order to avoid immediate
danger.
(Ord. No. 755-A-86. Passed 10-27-86, eff. 10-31-86)
§ 485.02 Reckless Operation; Speed
   No person shall operate a watercraft or manipulate any water skis, aquaplane
or similar device in a reckless manner or carelessly or heedlessly, or at a
speed greater or less than is reasonable or proper, having due regard to other
watercraft, waves, weather and wind and any other condition then existing, or
at a speed to cause a wake so as to endanger any person, swimmer or property of
a person, having due regard to the presence of other watercraft, or persons or
other subjects in or on the waters of Cleveland, or in disregard of the rights
or safety of any person, watercraft or property, or without due caution.
(Ord. No. 1348-90. Passed 8-23-90, eff. 8-31-90)
§ 485.03 Operating Under Influence of Alcohol or Drugs Prohibited; Evidence
   (a)   No person shall operate or be in physical control of any vessel
underway or shall manipulate any water skis, aquaplane, or similar device on
the waters of this City if, at the time of the operation, control, or
manipulation, any of the following applies:
      (1)    The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or
a combination of them;
      (2)   The person has a concentration of eight-hundredths of one percent
(0.08%) or more by weight of alcohol per unit volume in the person’s whole
blood;
      (3)   The person has a concentration of ninety-six-thousandths of one
percent (0.096%) or more by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s
blood serum or plasma;
      (4)   The person has a concentration of eleven-hundredths of one (0.11)
gram or more by weight of alcohol per one hundred (100) milliliters of the
person’s urine;
      (5)   The person has a concentration of eight-hundredths of one (0.08)
gram or more by weight of alcohol per two hundred ten (210) liters of the
person’s breath.
      (6)   Except as provided in division (h) of this section, the person has
a concentration of any of the following controlled substances or metabolites of
a controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or
urine that equals or exceeds any of the following:
         A.   The person has a concentration of amphetamine in the person’s
urine of at least five hundred (500) nanograms of amphetamine per milliliter of
the person’s urine or has a concentration of amphetamine in the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma of at least one hundred (100) nanograms of
amphetamine per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma.
         B.   The person has a concentration of cocaine in the person’s urine
of at least one hundred fifty (150) nanograms of cocaine per milliliter of the
person’s urine or has a concentration of cocaine in the person’s whole blood or
blood serum or plasma of at least fifty (50) nanograms of cocaine per
milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
         C.   The person has a concentration of cocaine metabolite in the
person’s urine of at least one hundred fifty (150) nanograms of cocaine
metabolite per milliliter of the person’s urine or has a concentration of
cocaine metabolite in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at
least fifty (50) nanograms of cocaine metabolite per milliliter of the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
         D.   The person has a concentration of heroin in the person’s urine of
at least two thousand (2,000) nanograms of heroin per milliliter of the
person’s urine or has a concentration of heroin in the person’s whole blood or
blood serum or plasma of at least fifty (50) nanograms of heroin per milliliter
of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
         E.   The person has a concentration of heroin metabolite (6-monoacetyl
morphine) in the person’s urine of at least ten (10) nanograms of heroin
metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) per milliliter of the person’s urine or has
a concentration of heroin metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) in the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least ten (10) nanograms of heroin
metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) per milliliter of the person’s whole blood
or blood serum or plasma.
         F.   The person has a concentration of L.S.D. in the person’s urine of
at least twenty-five (25) nanograms of L.S.D. per milliliter of the person’s
urine or has a concentration of L.S.D. in the person’s whole blood or blood
serum or plasma of at least ten (10) nanograms of L.S.D. per milliliter of the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
         G.   The person has a concentration of marihuana in the person’s urine
of at least ten (10) nanograms of marihuana per milliliter of the person’s
urine or has a concentration of marihuana in the person’s whole blood or blood
serum or plasma of at least two (2) nanograms of marihuana per milliliter of
the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
         H.   The State Board of Pharmacy has adopted a rule pursuant to RC
4729.041 that specifies the amount of salvia divinorum and the amount of
salvinorin A that constitute concentrations of salvia divinorum and salvinorin
A in a person’s urine, in a person’s whole blood, or in a person’s blood serum
or plasma at or above which the person is impaired for purposes of operating or
being in physical control of any vessel underway or manipulating any water
skis, aquaplane, or similar device on the waters of this state, the rule is in
effect, and the person has a concentration of salvia divinorum or salvinorin A
of at least that amount so specified by rule in the person’s urine, in the
person’s whole blood, or in the person’s blood serum or plasma.
         I.   Either of the following applies:
            1.   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse,
or a combination of them, and, as measured by gas chromatography mass
spectrometry, the person has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in the
person’s urine of at least fifteen (15) nanograms of marihuana metabolite per
milliliter of the person’s urine or has a concentration of marihuana metabolite
in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least five (5)
nanograms of marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or
blood serum or plasma.
            2.   As measured by gas chromatography mass spectrometry, the
person has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in the person’s urine of at
least thirty-five (35) nanograms of marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the
person’s urine or has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least fifty (50) nanograms of
marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum
or plasma.
         J.   The person has a concentration of methamphetamine in the person’s
urine of at least five hundred (500) nanograms of methamphetamine per
milliliter of the person’s urine or has a concentration of methamphetamine in
the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least one hundred (100)
nanograms of methamphetamine per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or
blood serum or plasma.
         K.   The person has a concentration of phencyclidine in the person’s
urine of at least twenty-five (25) nanograms of phencyclidine per milliliter of
the person’s urine or has a concentration of phencyclidine in the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least ten (10) nanograms of
phencyclidine per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma.
   (b)   No person under twenty-one (21) years of age shall operate or be in
physical control of any vessel underway or shall manipulate any water skis,
aquaplane, or similar device on the waters in this state if, at the time of the
operation, control or manipulation, any of the following applies:
      (1)   The person has a concentration of at least two-hundredths of one
percent (0.02%) but less than eight-hundredths of one percent (0.08%) by weight
per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s whole blood;
      (2)   The person has a concentration of at least three-hundredths of one
percent (0.03%) but less than ninety-six-thousandths of one percent (0.096%) by
weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s blood serum or plasma.
      (3)   The person has a concentration of at least twenty-eight one-
thousandths of one (0.028) gram, but less than eleven-hundredths of one (0.11)
gram by weight of alcohol per one hundred (100) milliliters of the person’s
urine;
      (4)   The person has a concentration of at least two-hundredths of one
(0.02) gram, but less than eight-hundredths of one (0.08) gram by weight of
alcohol per two hundred and ten (210) liters of the person’s breath.
   (c)   In any proceeding arising out of one (1) incident, a person may be
charged with a violation of division (a)(1) and a violation of division (b)(1),
(b)(2), (b)(3) or (b)(4) of this section, but the person shall not be convicted
of more than one (1) violation of those divisions.
   (d)   (1)   A.   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding
for a violation of division (a) or (b) of this section or for an equivalent
offense that is watercraft-related, the result of any test of any blood or
urine withdrawn and analyzed at any health care provider, as defined in RC
2317.02, may be admitted with expert testimony to be considered with any other
relevant and competent evidence in determining the guilt or innocence of the
defendant.
         B.   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a
violation of division (a) or (b) of this section or for an equivalent offense
that is watercraft-related, the court may admit evidence on the concentration
of alcohol, drugs of abuse, controlled substances, metabolites of a controlled
substance, or a combination of them in the defendant’s or child’s whole blood,
blood serum or plasma, urine, or breath at the time of the alleged violation as
shown by chemical analysis of the substance withdrawn, or specimen taken within
three hours of the time of the alleged violation. The three- hour time limit
specified in this division regarding the admission of evidence does not extend
or affect the two-hour time limit specified in RC 1547.111(C) as the maximum
period of time during which a person may consent to a chemical test or tests as
described in that section. The court may admit evidence on the concentration of
alcohol, drugs of abuse, or a combination of them as described in this division
when a person submits to a blood, breath, urine, or other bodily substance test
at the request of a law enforcement officer under RC 1547.111 or a blood or
urine sample is obtained pursuant to a search warrant. Only a physician, a
registered nurse, an emergency medical technician-intermediate, an emergency
medical technician-paramedic, or a qualified technician, chemist, or
phlebotomist shall withdraw blood for the purpose of determining the alcohol,
drug, controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled substance, or
combination content of the whole blood, blood serum, or blood plasma. This
limitation does not apply to the taking of breath or urine specimens. A person
authorized to withdraw blood under this division may refuse to withdraw blood
under this division if, in that person’s opinion, the physical welfare of the
defendant or child would be endangered by withdrawing blood.
   The whole blood, blood serum or plasma, urine, or breath withdrawn under
division (d)(1)B. of this section shall be analyzed in accordance with methods
approved by the Director of Health by an individual possessing a valid permit
issued by the Director pursuant to RC 3701.143.
      (2)   In a criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a
violation of division (a) of this section or for an equivalent offense that is
watercraft-related, if there was at the time the bodily substance was taken a
concentration of less than the applicable concentration of alcohol specified
for a violation of division (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4), or (a)(5) of this section
or less than the applicable concentration of a listed controlled substance or a
listed metabolite of a controlled substance specified for a violation of
division (a)(6) of this section, that fact may be considered with other
competent evidence in determining the guilt or innocence of the defendant or in
making an adjudication for the child. This division does not limit or affect a
criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a violation of division
(b) of this section or for a violation of a prohibition that is substantially
equivalent to that division.
      (3)   Upon the request of the person who was tested, the results of the
chemical test shall be made available to the person or the person’s attorney
immediately upon completion of the test analysis. If the chemical test was
administered pursuant to division (d)(1) B. of this section, the person tested
may have a physician, a registered nurse, or a qualified technician, chemist,
or phlebotomist of the person’s own choosing administer a chemical test or
tests in addition to any administered at the direction of a law enforcement
officer, and shall be so advised. The failure or inability to obtain an
additional test by a person shall not preclude the admission of evidence
relating to the test or tests taken at the direction of a law enforcement
officer.
   (e)   (1)   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a
violation of division (a) or (b) of this section, or other chapter of these
Codified Ordinances relating to operating or being in physical control of any
vessel underway or to manipulating any water skis, aquaplane, or similar device
on the waters of this state while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of
abuse, or a combination of them, or other chapter of these Codified Ordinances
relating to operating or being in physical control of any vessel underway or to
manipulating any water skis, aquaplane, or similar device on the waters of this
state with a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a
metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma,
breath, or urine, if a law enforcement officer has administered a field
sobriety test to the operator or person found to be in physical control of the
vessel underway involved in the violation or the person manipulating the water
skis, aquaplane, or similar device involved in the violation and if it is shown
by clear and convincing evidence that the officer administered the test in
substantial compliance with the testing standards for reliable, credible, and
generally accepted field sobriety tests for vehicles that were in effect at the
time the tests were administered, including, but not limited to, any testing
standards then in effect that have been set by the National Highway Traffic
Safety Administration, that by their nature are not clearly inapplicable
regarding the operation or physical control of vessels underway or the
manipulation of water skis, aquaplanes, or similar devices, all of the
following apply:
         A.   The officer may testify concerning the results of the field
sobriety test so administered.
         B.   The prosecution may introduce the results of the field sobriety
test so administered as evidence in any proceedings in the criminal prosecution
or juvenile court proceeding.
         C.   If testimony is presented or evidence is introduced under
division (e)(1) A. or (e)(1)B. of this section and if the testimony or evidence
is admissible under the Rules of Evidence, the court shall admit the testimony
or evidence, and the trier of fact shall give it whatever weight the trier of
fact considers to be appropriate.
      (2)   Division (e)(1) of this section does not limit or preclude a court,
in its determination of whether the arrest of a person was supported by
probable cause or its determination of any other matter in a criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding of a type described in that division,
from considering evidence or testimony that is not otherwise disallowed by
division (e)(1) of this section.
   (f)   (1)   Subject to division (f)(3) of this section, in any criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a violation of division (a) or (b)
of this section or for an equivalent offense that is substantially equivalent
to either of those divisions, the court shall admit as prima facie evidence a
laboratory report from any laboratory personnel issued a permit by the
Department of Health authorizing an analysis as described in this division that
contains an analysis of the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, urine,
or other bodily substance tested and that contains all of the information
specified in this division. The laboratory report shall contain all of the
following:
         A.   The signature, under oath, of any person who performed the
analysis;
         B.   Any findings as to the identity and quantity of alcohol, a drug
of abuse, a controlled substance, a metabolite of a controlled substance, or a
combination of them that was found;
         C.   A copy of a notarized statement by the laboratory director or a
designee of the director that contains the name of each certified analyst or
test performer involved with the report, the analyst’s or test performer’s
employment relationship with the laboratory that issued the report, and a
notation that performing an analysis of the type involved is part of the
analyst’s or test performer’s regular duties;
         D.   An outline of the analyst’s or test performer’s education,
training, and experience in performing the type of analysis involved and a
certification that the laboratory satisfies appropriate quality control
standards in general and, in this particular analysis, under rules of the
Department of Health.
      (2)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law regarding the admission
of evidence, a report of the type described in division (f)(1) of this section
is not admissible against the defendant or child to whom it pertains in any
proceeding, other than a preliminary hearing or a grand jury proceeding, unless
the prosecutor has served a copy of the report on the defendant’s or child’s
attorney or, if the defendant or child has no attorney, on the defendant or
child.
      (3)   A report of the type described in division (f)(1) of this section
shall not be prima facie evidence of the contents, identity, or amount of any
substance if, within seven (7) days after the defendant or child to whom the
report pertains or the defendant’s or child’s attorney receives a copy of the
report, the defendant or child or the defendant’s or child’s attorney demands
the testimony of the person who signed the report. The judge in the case may
extend the seven (7) day time limit in the interest of justice.
   (g)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, any physician,
registered nurse, emergency medical technician-intermediate, emergency medical
technician-paramedic, or qualified technician, chemist, or phlebotomist who
withdraws blood from a person pursuant to this section or RC 1547.111, and a
hospital, first-aid station, or clinic at which blood is withdrawn from a
person pursuant to this section or RC 1547.111, is immune from criminal and
civil liability based upon a claim of assault and battery or any other claim
that is not a claim of malpractice, for any act performed in withdrawing blood
from the person. The immunity provided in this division also extends to an
emergency medical service organization that employs an emergency medical
technician-intermediate, an emergency medical technician-paramedic who
withdraws blood under this section. The immunity provided in this division is
not available to a person who withdraws blood if the person engages in willful
or wanton misconduct.
   (h)   Division (a)(6) of this section does not apply to a person who
operates or is in physical control of a vessel underway or manipulates any
water skis, aquaplane, or similar device while the person has a concentration
of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled
substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or urine that
equals or exceeds the amount specified in that division, if both of the
following apply:
      (1)   The person obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs.
      (2)   The person injected, ingested, or inhaled the controlled substance
in accordance with the health professional’s directions.
   (i)   As used in this section and RC 1547.111:
      (1)   “Equivalent offense” has the same meaning as in RC 4511.181.
      (2)   “National Highway Traffic Safety Administration” has the same
meaning as in RC 4511.19.
      (3)   “Operate” means that a vessel is being used on the waters in this
state when the vessel is not securely affixed to a dock or to shore or to any
permanent structure to which the vessel has the right to affix or that a vessel
is not anchored in a designated anchorage area or boat camping area that is
established by the United States Coast Guard, this state, or a political
subdivision and in which the vessel has the right to anchor.
      (4)   “Controlled substance” and “marihuana” have the same meanings as in
RC 3719.01.
      (5)   “Cocaine” and “L.S.D.” have the same meanings as in RC 2925.01.
      (6)   “Equivalent offense that is watercraft-related” means an equivalent
offense that is one of the following:
         A.   A violation of division (a) or (b) of this section;
         B.   A violation of a municipal ordinance prohibiting a person from
operating or being in physical control of any vessel underway or from
manipulating any water skis, aquaplane, or similar device on the waters of this
state while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination
of them or prohibiting a person from operating or being in physical control of
any vessel underway or from manipulating any water skis, aquaplane, or similar
device on the waters of this state with a prohibited concentration of alcohol,
a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine;
         C.   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance, law of
another state, or law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to
division (a) or (b) of this section;
         D.   A violation of a former law of this state that was substantially
equivalent to division (a) or (b) of this section.
      (7)   “Emergency medical technician-intermediate” and “emergency medical
technician-paramedic” have the same meanings as in RC 4765.01.
(RC 1547.11)
   (j)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree and shall be punished as provided in division (j)(1), (j)(2), or (j)(3)
of this section.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (j)(2) or (j)(3) of this
section, the court shall sentence the offender to a jail term of three (3)
consecutive days and may sentence the offender pursuant to RC 2929.24 to a
longer jail term. In addition, the court shall impose upon the offender a fine
of not less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) nor more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00).
   The court may suspend the execution of the mandatory jail term of three (3)
consecutive days that it is required to impose by division (j)(1) of this
section if the court, in lieu of the suspended jail term, places the offender
under a community control sanction pursuant to RC 2929.25 and requires the
offender to attend, for three (3) consecutive days, a drivers’ intervention
program that is certified pursuant to RC 5119.38. The court also may suspend
the execution of any part of the mandatory jail term of three (3) consecutive
days that it is required to impose by division (j)(1) of this section if the
court places the offender under a community control sanction pursuant to RC
2929.25 for part of the three (3) consecutive days; requires the offender to
attend, for that part of the three (3) consecutive days, a drivers’
intervention program that is certified pursuant to RC 5119.38; and sentences
the offender to a jail term equal to the remainder of the three (3) consecutive
days that the offender does not spend attending the drivers’ intervention
program. The court may require the offender, as a condition of community
control, to attend and satisfactorily complete any treatment or education
programs, in addition to the required attendance at a drivers’ intervention
program, that the operators of the drivers’ intervention program determine that
the offender should attend and to report periodically to the court on the
offender’s progress in the programs. The court also may impose any other
conditions of community control on the offender that it considers necessary.
      (2)   If, within ten (10) years of the offense, the offender has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one (1) violation of RC 1547.11 or one other
equivalent offense, the court shall sentence the offender to a jail term of ten
(10) consecutive days and may sentence the offender pursuant to RC 2929.24 to a
longer jail term. In addition, the court shall impose upon the offender a fine
of not less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) nor more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00).
   In addition to any other sentence that it imposes upon the offender, the
court may require the offender to attend a drivers’ intervention program that
is certified pursuant to RC 5119.38.
   (3)   If, within ten (10) years of the offense, the offender has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to more than one (1) violation or offense
identified in division (j)(2) of this section, the court shall sentence the
offender to a jail term of thirty (30) consecutive days and may sentence the
offender to a longer jail term of not more than one (1) year. In addition, the
court shall impose upon the offender a fine of not less than one hundred fifty
dollars ($150.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
   In addition to any other sentence that it imposes upon the offender, the
court may require the offender to attend a drivers’ intervention program that
is certified pursuant to RC 5119.38.
      (4)   Upon a showing that serving a jail term would seriously affect the
ability of an offender sentenced pursuant to division (j)(1), (j)(2), or (j)(3)
of this section to continue the offender’s employment, the court may authorize
that the offender be granted work release after the offender has served the
mandatory jail term of three (3), ten (10), or thirty (30) consecutive days
that the court is required by division (j)(1), (j)(2), or (j)(3) of this
section to impose. No court shall authorize work release during the mandatory
jail term of three (3), ten (10), or thirty (30) consecutive days that the
court is required by division (j)(1), (j)(2), or (j)(3) of this section to
impose. The duration of the work release shall not exceed the time necessary
each day for the offender to commute to and from the place of employment and
the place in which the jail term is served and the time actually spent under
employment.
      (5)   Notwithstanding any section of the Revised Code that authorizes the
suspension of the imposition or execution of a sentence or the placement of an
offender in any treatment program in lieu of being imprisoned or serving a jail
term, no court shall suspend the mandatory jail term of ten (10) or thirty (30)
consecutive days required to be imposed by division (j)(2) or (j)(3) of this
section or place an offender who is sentenced pursuant to division (j)(2) or
(j)(3) of this section in any treatment program in lieu of being imprisoned or
serving a jail term until after the offender has served the mandatory jail term
of ten (10) or thirty (30) consecutive days required to be imposed pursuant to
division (j)(2) or (j)(3) of this section. Notwithstanding any section of the
Revised Code that authorizes the suspension of the imposition or execution of a
sentence or the placement of an offender in any treatment program in lieu of
being imprisoned or serving a jail term, no court, except as specifically
authorized by division (j)(1) of this section, shall suspend the mandatory jail
term of three (3) consecutive days required to be imposed by division (j)(1) of
this section or place an offender who is sentenced pursuant to division (j)(1)
of this section in any treatment program in lieu of imprisonment until after
the offender has served the mandatory jail term of three consecutive days
required to be imposed pursuant to division (j)(1) of this section.
      (6)   As used in division (j) of this section:
         A.   “Equivalent offense” has the same meaning as in RC 4511.181.
         B.   “Jail term” and “mandatory jail term” have the same meanings as
in RC 2929.01.
(RC 1547.99(G); Ord. No. 659-17. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 485.04 Prima Facie Evidence of Operation Under the Influence
   In any hearing in the Municipal Court of Cleveland on a charge of operating
a watercraft under the influence of alcohol or any drug of abuse, testimony
that a watercraft bearing a certain number award was found to be in violation
hereunder and further testimony that the records of the State show that such
number award was issued to the defendant and further testimony that the
defendant was found on the watercraft or immediate vicinity when the violation
occurred, shall be prima facie evidence of unlawful operation of such
watercraft by the defendant. A certified copy showing such facts from the State
Division of Watercraft shall be proof of such ownership.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 485.05 Following Too Closely
   The operator of a watercraft shall not follow another watercraft more
closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard to the speed of such
watercraft and other marine traffic in the immediate vicinity.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 485.06 Emerging from Harbor, Basin, River into Open Water
   The operator of a watercraft emerging from a boat club basin, boat club
harbor or any other enclosure, or from behind a breakwall, pier or other
obstruction either permanent or temporary or from a river shall, before
entering open water, slow such watercraft to a speed slow enough to enable him
or her to observe marine traffic in such open water, and shall yield the right-
of-way to such other marine traffic so that he or she may safely enter such
open water without hindrance to other watercraft already in such open water.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 485.07 Interference to Navigation; Watercraft Pound
   No person shall operate any watercraft or vessel in a manner which will
unreasonably or unnecessarily interfere with other watercraft or vessels or
with the free and proper navigation of the waterways of the City. Anchoring or
mooring under bridges or in a heavily traveled channel, or in a Coast Guard
established Safety Zone or in an area covered by Special Local Regulations
established by the U.S. Coast Guard, shall constitute such interference if
unreasonable under the prevailing circumstances. The Director of Public Safety
is hereby authorized to create a watercraft pound to which watercraft may be
removed by police officers.
(Ord. No. 1348-90. Passed 8-23-90, eff. 8-31-90)
§ 485.08 Overloading
   No watercraft shall be loaded with passengers or cargo beyond its safe
carrying capacity, nor carry passengers in an unsafe manner, taking into
consideration weather and other existing operating conditions.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 485.09 Reporting a Collision or Accident
   (a)   The operator of a vessel involved in a collision, accident, or other
casualty, so far as the operator can do so without serious danger to the
operator’s own vessel, crew, and passengers, shall render to other persons
affected by the collision, accident, or other casualty such assistance as may
be practicable and as may be necessary in order to save them from or minimize
any danger caused by the collision, accident, or other casualty. The operator
also shall give the operator’s name, address, and identification of the
operator’s vessel in writing to any person injured and to the owner of any
property damaged in the collision, accident, or other casualty.
   (b)   Any person who renders assistance at the scene of a collision,
accident, or other casualty involving a vessel is not liable in a civil action
for damages or injury to persons or property resulting from any act or omission
in rendering assistance or in providing or arranging salvage, towage, medical
treatment, or other assistance, except that the person is liable for willful or
wanton misconduct in rendering assistance. Nothing in this section precludes
recovery from any tortfeasor causing a collision, accident, or other casualty
of damages caused or aggravated by the rendering of assistance.
   (c)   In the case of collision, accident, or other casualty involving a
vessel, the operator thereof, if the collision, accident, or other casualty
results in loss of life, personal injury requiring medical treatment beyond
first aid, or damage to property in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00),
or the total loss of a vessel, shall file with the Police Division a full
description of the collision, accident or other casualty on a form as may be
prescribed.
   (d)   If the operator of the vessel involved in a collision, accident, or
other casualty is incapacitated, the investigating law enforcement officer
shall file the required form as prescribed by the Chief.
(RC 1547.59)
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(RC 1547.99(C); Ord. No. 659-17. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 485.10 Exemptions to Emergency Watercraft
   (a)   The provisions of this chapter regulating the operation of watercraft
shall apply to authorized emergency watercraft, except that an operator of such
emergency watercraft in an emergency may:
      (1)   Exceed the prima facie speed limits so long as he or she operates
with due regard for the safety of all persons in the area and sounds audible
signals by bell, siren or exhaust whistle;
      (2)   Anchor, stop, moor, dock or dive, notwithstanding the provision of
this section.
   (b)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to persons, barges,
derricks, tugs, work watercraft and other equipment while actually engaged in
work within an area designated by the Director of Port Control of the City or
other State and Federal government agencies.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 485.11 Obedience to Federal and State Marine Rules of the Road
   The operator, owner or person in charge of a watercraft in the waters of
Cleveland shall obey the rules of the road as promulgated by the United States
Coast Guard in the Department of Treasury and all laws approved by the State
General Assembly for the Division of Watercraft, Department of Natural
Resources.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 485.12 Anchoring
   No person shall anchor a watercraft for fishing, or anchor or stop or allow
a watercraft to drift for any purpose other than an emergency in any City
waters in such a position as to obstruct a passageway or channel ordinarily
used by other watercraft, which also includes entrances and channels into yacht
club and marina harbors. No person shall anchor or allow a watercraft to drift
or obstruct marine traffic in the Cuyahoga River, or at the mouth of the
Cuyahoga River, or in the channel entrance to the Cleveland Harbor or in the
shipping channel at the East Light where such anchoring or drifting would
hinder commercial and other watercraft from safe and proper use of such
channels. No person shall moor or anchor any watercraft in a designated speed
zone or water ski zone.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 485.13 Mooring to Piers or Docks
   No person shall moor or tie a watercraft to any public pier, public wharf or
public dock when such pier, wharf or dock has been posted by signs erected by
Federal, State or City officials assigned to the Department of Port Control,
prohibiting such mooring. No person shall moor or tie to any such pier, dock or
wharf in excess of a time limit stipulated by such signs.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 485.14 Interference, Tampering or Mooring to Navigation Aids
   (a)   No person shall without lawful authority climb on, swim and hang on,
dive off, tie a watercraft to or attempt to tie a watercraft to, injure, sink,
disconnect from its anchor, damage, deface or interfere with any buoy or other
aid to navigation which is placed, anchored or erected by the United States
Coast Guard, State or City.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly damage, remove or tamper with any signal,
buoy or other aid to navigation.
   (c)   No person, unless in distress and no other watercraft or vessel is
endangered thereby, shall moor to, anchor to or tie up to any marker, aid,
buoy, light or other aid to navigation.
   (d)   No person shall purposely sever the mooring lines, set adrift, injure
or damage in any manner any watercraft which is moored, docked, buoyed or tied
up on the waters of Cleveland.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 485.15 Prima-Facie Evidence of Unlawful Anchoring, Mooring or Tying
   In any hearing of the Municipal Court on a charge of unlawful anchoring,
mooring or tying of watercraft, testimony that a watercraft bearing a certain
number award was found to be unlawfully anchored, moored or tied in violation
of any of the provisions of this Water Traffic Code, and further testimony that
the records of the Administrator of the State Division of Watercraft show that
such number award was issued to the defendant, shall be prima facie evidence
that the watercraft which was so anchored, moored or tied was operated by the
defendant at the time of the violation. A certified copy showing such fact of
registration from the State Division of Watercraft shall be proof of such
ownership.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 485.16 Launching Ramps
   No person shall use a public launching ramp in the City for any other
purpose than to launch a watercraft and shall do so as expeditiously as
possible without prejudice to other person or persons waiting to use such ramp.
No person shall use a ramp for the purpose of repairing a watercraft or its
engine or refuse to move a watercraft or trailer when ordered by a police
officer or person designated to supervise the proper use of such public
launching ramps.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 485.17 Renting Watercraft to Intoxicated Persons
   No person shall let, loan or rent, with or without hire, any watercraft to
any person who is under the influence of alcohol or any drug of abuse, or who,
by reason of having been drinking any alcohol or using drugs, may be
incompetent to take charge of the management of a watercraft.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 485.18 Renting Watercraft to Persons Under Sixteen
   No person shall let, loan or rent with or without hire, any watercraft to
any person under sixteen (16) years of age. However, any person may let, loan
or rent a watercraft to persons under sixteen (16) years of age, when
accompanied in the use of such watercraft by a competent person over sixteen
(16) to take charge of and manage the same. This section does not apply to
regular training programs conducted by competent instructors, Sea Scout groups
or persons under the jurisdiction of their parents or guardians.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 485.19 Child Operators; Supervising Person; Incapacity of Operator
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, no person under sixteen
(16) years of age shall operate a personal watercraft on the waters in this
state. A person who is not less than twelve (12), nor more than fifteen (15)
years of age may operate a personal watercraft if a supervising person eighteen
(18) years of age or older is aboard the personal watercraft and, in the case
of a supervising person born on or after January 1, 1982, if the supervising
person holds a certificate obtained under RC 1547.05 or, in the case of a
rented powercraft, meets the requirements of RC 1547.052.
   (b)   No person under twelve (12) years of age shall operate any vessel on
the waters in this state unless the person is under the direct visual and
audible supervision, during the operation, of a person who is eighteen (18)
years of age or older. This division does not apply to a personal watercraft,
which shall be governed by division (a) of this section, or to a powercraft,
other than a personal watercraft, powered by more than ten (10) horsepower,
which shall be governed by division (c) of this section.
   (c)   No person under twelve (12) years of age shall operate on the waters
in this state a powercraft, other than a personal watercraft, powered by more
than ten (10) horsepower unless the person is under the direct visual and
audible supervision, during the operation, of a person eighteen (18) years of
age or older who is aboard the powercraft and, in the case of such a
supervising person born on or after January 1, 1982, who holds a certificate
obtained under RC 1547.05 or, in the case of a rented powercraft, meets the
requirements of RC 1547.052.
   (d)   No supervising person eighteen (18) years of age or older shall permit
any person who is under the supervising person’s supervision and who is
operating a vessel on the waters in this state to violate any section of this
chapter or a rule adopted under it.
(RC 1547.06)
   (e)   No owner of any watercraft or any person having such in charge or in
control shall authorize or knowingly permit the same to be operated by any
person who by reason of physical or mental disability is incapable of operating
such watercraft under the prevailing circumstances.
   (f)   No person shall operate any watercraft when mentally or physically
incapacitated so as to prevent operation in a safe and competent manner.
(Ord. No. 835-03. Passed 6-10-03, eff. 6-12-03)
§ 485.20 Water Skiing
   (a)   No person shall operate a watercraft and tow or otherwise assist a
person, nor shall any such person be on water skis, aquaplane, surfboard or
similar contrivance in Cleveland waters unless such watercraft is occupied by
at least two (2) competent persons: one (1) who shall be the operator to
observe the traffic pattern toward which such watercraft is approaching and one
(1) who shall be the observer to observe the progress of the person being
towed, provided that this section does not apply to watercraft used in duly
authorized ski exhibitions, tournaments or other aquatic events.
   (b)   No person shall water ski or tow or otherwise assist anyone on water
skis, aquaplane, surfboard or similar contrivance in the following waters or
circumstances:
      (1)   Within two hundred (200) feet from shore or any other permanent or
temporary obstruction, pier, breakwall, boat or yacht club entrance, swimming
beach, anchored watercraft or any other watercraft when such skiing would
constitute a hazard to life or property. However, this subsection does not
apply to watercraft used in duly authorized ski exhibitions, tournaments or
other aquatic events;
      (2)   From sunset to sunrise, provided that this subsection does not
apply to watercraft used in duly authorized ski exhibitions, tournaments or
other aquatic events;
      (3)   In a reckless or dangerous manner or when more than two (2) persons
are being towed simultaneously by the same watercraft. Any person on water
skis, aquaplane, surfboard or similar contrivance shall conduct himself or
herself upon the same in a careful and prudent manner and shall remain at all
times a reasonable and prudent distance from the person and property of others,
provided that this subsection does not apply to watercraft used in duly
authorized ski exhibitions, tournaments or other aquatic events;
      (4)   Unless such person being towed is wearing an adequate and effective
Coast Guard approved Type one (1), two (2) or three (3) personal flotation
device, provided that this subsection does not apply to watercraft used in duly
authorized ski exhibitions, tournaments or other aquatic events authorized by
special permit. A watercraft operator towing a person not wearing a personal
flotation device as prescribed in this section shall be deemed in violation of
this section. All personal flotation devices shall be in good and serviceable
condition and of appropriate size.
   (c)   No person shall install or maintain any structure or inclined platform
known as a water ski jump on the waters of Cleveland, and no person shall use
such structure or platform for water ski jumping, except upon special permit.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 485.21 Swimming
   Swimming in Cleveland waters shall be confined to restricted swimming areas
or to within a distance of fifty (50) feet from the shore or pier not within
any channel or passageway ordinarily used by watercraft. Swimming may be
permitted in other areas when the swimmer is accompanied by an occupied
watercraft and swims within a distance of fifty (50) feet of such accompanying
watercraft. No person shall swim or act in such a manner as to endanger his or
her life or so as to cause injury to another person while swimming in the
Cleveland waters. The operator of any watercraft shall yield the right-of-way
to a swimmer at all times.
   Swimming shall be prohibited at the Cleveland Electric Illuminating Company
and the Municipal Light and Water Plant intakes and water outlets or along the
breakwall adjoining the same or in other areas when signs are posted
prohibiting swimming.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 485.22 Skin Diving and SCUBA Diving
   Skin diving in Cleveland waters shall be confined to restricted swimming
areas or to within a distance of fifty (50) feet from the shore or pier not
within any channel or passageway ordinarily used by watercraft. Skin diving and
SCUBA diving may be permitted in other areas when such diver is accompanied by
an occupied watercraft and the area in which he or she is diving is marked by
an adequately displayed diver’s flag. It shall be a violation for such diver to
surface further than fifty (50) feet of such diver’s flag. The diver’s flag
referred to shall be such as described in Section
481.01(q).
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
CHAPTER 487 – EQUIPMENT
487.01   Excessive Propulsion Power
487.02   Mufflers; Exception
487.03   Whistles and Lights
487.04   Lights for Watercraft
487.05   Flashing Lights
487.06   Personal Flotation Devices
487.07   Flame Arrestors
487.08   Whistles and Bells
487.09   Fire Extinguishers
487.10   Anchor
487.11   Ventilation
487.12   Violation of Required Equipment
487.13   Watercraft Display Flag; Use
Cross-reference:
   Unnecessary noise from exhaust prohibited, CO
605.12
   Water Traffic Code penalty, CO
481.99
Statutory reference:
   Required equipment, RC 1547.26 et seq.
§ 487.01 Excessive Propulsion Power
   No watercraft shall be equipped with any motor or other propulsion machinery
beyond its safe power capacity, taking into consideration the type and
construction of such watercraft and other existing operating conditions.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 487.02 Mufflers; Exception
   All powercraft operating in City waters shall be equipped with an exhaust
muffler or silencer of sufficient size and capacity to effectually muffle and
prevent excessive or unusual noise from the exhaust of any engines installed or
aboard such powercraft. No person shall operate a powercraft with an exhaust
muffler cut-out open or in any other manner which renders the exhaust muffler
ineffective in muffling the sound of the engine exhaust. This section does not
apply when such powercraft is operating in a regularly scheduled and duly
authorized race, regatta or other aquatic event.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 487.03 Whistles and Lights
   No master, owner or any other person in charge of any watercraft, while
lying at any pier, or at anchor or while navigating in City waters,
unnecessarily shall cause any whistle or siren to be blown or sounded, nor
shall any person flash the rays of a searchlight or other blinding light onto
the bridge or into the pilot house of any watercraft under way for any purpose
other than those authorized by law.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 487.04 Lights for Watercraft
   All watercraft subject to this Water Traffic Code shall, in all weather from
sunset to sunrise and at any other time there is not sufficient natural light
to render discernible other watercraft and substantial objects on the water at
a distance of three hundred (300) feet, carry and exhibit the following lights
when under way. During such time no other lights which may be mistaken for
those prescribed shall be exhibited.
   (a)   All Class A and one (1) powercraft shall carry the following lights:
      (1)   A bright white light aft to show all around the horizon; and
      (2)   A combined lantern in the forepart of the vessel and lower than the
white light aft, showing green to starboard and red to port, so fixed as to
throw the light from right ahead to twenty-two and one-half (22.5) degrees, two
(2) points, abaft the beam on their respective sides. Each light thereby
subtending an arc of one hundred twelve and one-half (112.5) degrees, ten (10)
points, measured from the center line of the boat and beginning right ahead.
   (b)   All Class two (2) and three (3) powercraft shall carry the following
lights:
      (1)   A bright white light in the forepart of the vessel as near the
stern as practicable, so constructed as to show an unbroken light over an arc
of the horizon of two hundred twenty-five (225) degrees, twenty (20) points, so
fixed as to throw the light one hundred twelve and one-half (112.5) degrees,
ten (10) points, on each side of the vessel; namely, from right ahead to
twenty-two and one-half (22.5) degrees, two (2) points, abaft the beam on
either side;
      (2)   A bright white light aft to show all around the horizon and higher
than the white light forward; and
      (3)   On the starboard side a green light so constructed as to show an
unbroken light over an arc of the horizon of one hundred twelve and one-half
(112.5) degrees, ten (10) points, so fixed as to throw the light from ahead to
twenty-two and one-half (22.5) degrees, two (2) points, abaft the beam on the
starboard side. On the port side a red light so constructed as to show an
unbroken light over an arc of the horizon of one hundred twelve and one-half
(112.5) degrees, ten (10) points, so fixed as to throw the light from the right
ahead to twenty-two and one-half (22.5) degrees, two (2) points, abaft the beam
on the port side. The side lights shall be fitted with inboard screens of
sufficient height so set as to prevent these lights from being seen across the
bow.
   (c)   Sailboats propelled by machinery whether under sail or not, shall
exhibit the same lights as prescribed for powercrafts of comparable length.
   (d)   Every sailboat, regardless of length, under sail alone shall exhibit:
      (1)   On the starboard side, a green light, so constructed as to throw an
unbroken light over an arc of the horizon of one hundred twelve and one-half
(112.5) degrees, ten (10) points, so fixed to throw the light from right ahead
to twenty-two and one-half (22.5) degrees, two (2) points, abaft the beam on
the starboard side;
      (2)   On the port side, a red light, so constructed to show an unbroken
light over an arc of the horizon one hundred twelve and one-half (112.5)
degrees, ten (10) points, so fixed to throw the light from right ahead to
twenty-two and one-half (22.5) degrees, two (2) points, abaft the beam on the
port side;
      (3)   At her stern a white light, so constructed that it shall show an
unbroken light over an arc of the horizon one hundred thirty-five (135)
degrees, twelve (12) points, so fixed as to show the light sixty-seven and one-
half (67.5) degrees, six (6) points, from right aft on each side of the vessel,
and of such a character as to be visible a distance of at least two (2) miles,
and carried as nearly as practicable on the same level as the side lights, or,
in lieu of the white stern light, a readily accessible lantern or flashlight
showing a white light.
   (e)   Rowboats and canoes shall carry either a white light visible all
around the horizon or a readily accessible lantern or flashlight showing a
white light.
   (f)   All watercraft required to carry a readily accessible flashlight or
lantern shall exhibit such flashlight or lantern in sufficient time to avert a
collision.
   (g)   A white light visible all around the horizon shall be exhibited by
watercraft while at anchor.
   (h)   Every white light prescribed by this section shall be of such
character as to be visible at a distance of at least two (2) miles. Every
colored light prescribed by this section shall be of such character as to be
visible at a distance of at least one (1) mile.
   (i)   In lieu of the lights required by this section, any powercraft may
carry and exhibit lights required by:
      (1)   “Act of February 8, 1895,” 28 Stat. 645, 33 U.S.C. 241, as amended;
      (2)   “Act of September 24, 1963,” 77 Stat. 194, 33 U.S.C. 1061, as
amended;
      (3)   “Act of May 21, 1948,” 62 Stat. 250, 33 U.S.C. 301, as amended.
   (j)   In lieu of the lights required by this section, any sailboat may carry
and exhibit the lights required by either:
      (1)   “Act of February 8, 1895,” 28 Stat. 645, 33 U.S.C. 241, as amended;
      (2)   “Act of May 21, 1948,” 62 Stat. 250, 33 U.S.C. 301, as amended.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 487.05 Flashing Lights
   (a)   No person shall install or use any intermittently flashing light of
any type or color on any vessel in use or operation on the waters in this City,
except in accordance with federal law.
   (b)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any vessel on the
waters in this City in violation of this section.
(RC 1547.03)
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(RC 1547.99(C); Ord. No. 1283-15. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 487.06 Personal Flotation Devices
   (a)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any vessel, other
than a vessel exempted by rules, on the waters in this City:
      (1)   That is sixteen (16) feet or greater in length without carrying
aboard one (1) wearable personal flotation device for each person aboard and
one (1) throwable personal flotation device;
      (2)   That is less than sixteen (16) feet in length, including
paddlecraft of any length, without carrying aboard one (1) wearable personal
flotation device for each person aboard.
   (b)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any commercial vessel
on the waters in this City:
      (1)   That is less than forty (40) feet in length and is not carrying
persons for hire without carrying aboard at least one (1) wearable personal
flotation device for each person aboard;
      (2)   That is carrying persons for hire or is forty (40) feet in length
or longer and is not carrying persons for hire without carrying aboard at least
one (1) type one (1) wearable personal flotation device for each person aboard
that complies with all of the following:
         A.   It is designed to support the person wearing the wearable
personal flotation device in the water in an upright or slightly backward
position and provides support to the head so that the face of an unconscious or
exhausted person is held above the water.
         B.   It is capable of turning the person wearing the wearable personal
flotation device, upon entering the water, to a safe flotation position.
         C.   It is capable of being worn inside out.
         D.   It is capable of supporting a minimum of twenty-two (22) pounds
in fresh water for forty-eight (48) hours.
         E.   It is a highly visible color.
      (3)   That is twenty-six (26) feet in length or longer without carrying
aboard at least one (1) throwable personal flotation device in addition to the
applicable requirements of divisions (b)(1) and (b)(2) of this section.
   (c)   Each personal flotation device carried aboard a vessel, including a
commercial vessel, pursuant to this section shall be Coast Guard approved and
in good and serviceable condition, of appropriate size for the wearer, and
readily accessible to each person aboard the vessel at all times, and used in
accordance with any requirements on its approval label or in accordance with
requirements in its owner’s manual if the approval list refers to such a
manual.
   (d)   A personal flotation device shall not be used in a manner that is
inconsistent with any limitations or restrictions related to federal approval
under 46 C.F.R. 160 or special instructions for use provided by the
manufacturer. Appropriate use shall be indicated on the label of an approved
personal flotation device with one or more of the following designations:
      (1)   Conditional approval;
      (2)   Performance type;
      (3)   Type one (1) personal flotation device;
      (4)   Type two (2) personal flotation device;
      (5)   Type three (3) personal flotation device;
      (6)   Type four (4) personal flotation device;
      (7)   Type five (5) personal flotation device;
      (8)   Throwable personal flotation device;
      (9)   Wearable personal flotation device.
   (e)   As used in this section, “commercial vessel” means any vessel used in
the carriage of any person or property for a valuable consideration whether
flowing directly or indirectly from the owner, partner or agent or any other
person interested in the vessel. “Commercial vessel” does not include any
vessel that is manufactured or used primarily for noncommercial use or that is
leased, rented or chartered to another for noncommercial use.
(RC 1547.25)
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(RC 1547.99(F); Ord. No. 1283-15. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 487.07 Flame Arrestors
   (a)   Every gasoline engine installed in a vessel after April 25, 1940,
except an outboard motor, shall be equipped with an acceptable device to
control backfire flame. The device shall comply with all of the following:
      (1)   Be securely attached to the air intake with a flame-tight
connection;
      (2)   Be in proper working order;
      (3)   Be Coast Guard approved or comply with either SAE J1928 or UL 1111;
      (4)   Be marked to indicate approval or compliance under division (a)(3)
of this section.
(RC 1547.28)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(RC 1547.99(C); Ord. No. 1283-15. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 487.08 Whistles and Bells
   All powercraft of Class one (1) in operation shall carry in working
condition one (1) hand, mouth or power operated whistle capable of producing a
blast of at least two (2) seconds duration and audible at least one-half (1/2)
mile.
   All powercraft of Class two (2) in operation shall carry in working
condition one (1) hand or power operated whistle capable of producing a blast
at least two (2) seconds’ duration and audible at least one (1) mile.
   All powercraft of Class three (3) in operation shall carry one (1) power
operated whistle capable of producing a blast of at least two (2) seconds’
duration and audible at least one (1) mile.
   Every Class two (2) and Class three (3) powercraft in operation shall in
addition be equipped with a bell which when struck produces a clear, bell-like
tone of full, round characteristics.
   No person, except in emergency watercraft, shall use or operate a siren on
the waters of Cleveland, except for emergency purposes.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 487.09 Fire Extinguishers
   (a)   Except those powercraft propelled by an electric motor and those less
than twenty-six (26) feet in length designed for use with an outboard motor, of
open construction and not carrying passengers for hire, all powercraft shall
carry fire extinguishers as prescribed in this section. The fire extinguishers
shall be capable of extinguishing a burning gasoline fire, shall be so placed
as to be readily accessible and in such condition as to be ready for immediate
and effective use, and shall comply with minimum or higher standards for such
extinguishers then prevailing as prescribed by the United States Coast Guard.
   (b)   Class A and class one (1) powercraft shall carry at least one (1) B-
1 fire extinguisher. Class two (2) powercraft shall carry at least two (2) B-
1 fire extinguishers or at least one (1) B-2 fire extinguisher. Class three (3)
powercraft shall carry at least three (3) B-1 fire extinguishers, or at least
one (1) B-1 and one (1) B-2 fire extinguishers. A B-1 fire extinguisher is one
containing a minimum of one and one-fourth (1-1/4) gallons foam, four (4)
pounds carbon dioxide, two (2) pounds dry chemicals, two and one-half (2-1/2)
pounds halon, or another extinguishing material approved by the United States
Coast Guard, in a quantity approved by the United States Coast Guard for such
use. A B-2 fire extinguisher is one containing a minimum of two and one-half
(2-1/2) gallons foam, fifteen (15) pounds carbon dioxide, ten (10) pounds dry
chemical, ten (10) pounds halon, or another extinguishing material approved by
the United States Coast Guard, in a quantity approved by the United States
Coast Guard, for such use.
   (c)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated on the waters in this
municipality any powercraft that does not comply with this section.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. (RC
1547.99(C))
(RC 1547.27 ; Ord. No. 1283-15. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 487.10 Anchor
   (a)   All watercraft, except sailboats less than sixteen (16) feet long
having a cockpit depth of less than twelve (12) inches and except canoes, shall
carry an anchor and line of sufficient weight and length to anchor the
watercraft securely. The Chief of the Division of Watercraft, by rule, may
exempt other types of watercraft from this section after determining that
carrying such an anchor and line would constitute a hazard.
   (b)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any watercraft on the
waters in this City in violation of this section.
(RC 1547.26)
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(RC 1547.99(C); Ord. No. 1283-15. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 487.11 Ventilation
   (a)   All powercraft using gasoline or other liquid fuel having a flashpoint
of less than one hundred ten degrees Fahrenheit (110°F.) shall be provided with
ventilation as follows:
      (1)   At least two (2) ventilators fitted with cowls or their equivalent
for the purpose of properly and efficiently ventilating the bilges of every
engine and fuel tank compartment in order to remove any inflammable or
explosive gases;
      (2)   Any type of ventilating system approved for use by the United
States Coast Guard;
      (3)   The ventilation of the boat is not required where the greater
portion of the bilges of the engine and fuel tank compartment is open to the
natural atmosphere.
(RC 1547.29)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(RC 1547.99(C); Ord. No. 1283-15. Passed 10-16-17, eff. 10-20-17)
§ 487.12 Violation of Required Equipment
   All watercraft shall carry the equipment required by any applicable United
States laws and State laws as now or hereafter amended, and a violation of the
same shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 487.13 Watercraft Display Flag; Use
   The display on a watercraft or by a person of a flag of at least two (2)
feet square and international orange in color indicates that a watercraft or a
person is in distress and in need of help.
   No person shall operate a watercraft upon the waters of Cleveland unless the
watercraft carries such flag, except a canoe or a rowboat upon non-navigable
waterways.
   No person shall display such flag, unless a watercraft or a person is in
distress and in need of help.
(Ord. No. 1684-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
TITLE XIII: HELICOPTERS AND OTHER AIRCRAFT
   Chapter
489   Helicopters
   Chapter
490   Unmanned Aircraft Systems
CHAPTER 489 – HELICOPTERS
489.01   Definitions
489.02   Takeoff and Landing
489.03   Landing Area Specifications
489.04   Permit Required
489.05   Fees
489.06   Exclusions
489.99   Penalty
§ 489.01 Definitions
   As used in this chapter, certain words and terms are defined as follows:
   (a)   "Helicopter" means any airborne vehicle used for the transportation of
personnel or material whose support in flight is derived from a vertical lift
or force produced by the mechanical rotation of an airfoil or wing about an
approximately vertical axis.
   (b)   "Landing area" means that approved location designated by the Director
of Public Safety, or his or her designee, on which and from which a helicopter
is permitted to land and/or take off.
(Ord. No. 564-15. Passed 6-1-15, eff. 6-2-15)
§ 489.02 Takeoff and Landing
   (a)   No person shall land or take off a helicopter anywhere in the City
other than at an approved airport or heliport landing area, except in the case
of an emergency.
   (b)   The Director of Public Safety, or his or her designee, may approve the
landing or take off of a helicopter at an area other than an approved airport
or heliport landing area, on an individual basis, in cases of emergency, public
ceremony, public necessity, or other good cause shown.
(Ord. No. 564-15. Passed 6-1-15, eff. 6-2-15)
§ 489.03 Landing Area Specifications
   Every landing area shall have a hard-surfaced or grassed area, shall be
provided with good drainage and shall be free of dust, gravel or other loose
material. It shall be not less in length, width or diameter than twice the
overall length of any helicopter landing or taking off. In no instance shall
this area be smaller than one hundred fifty (150) feet in diameter or in length
of the shortest dimension of a rectangular area. This area shall be free of
trees, wires, or other obstructions. A rooftop shall not be permitted as a
landing area.
(Ord. No. 564-15. Passed 6-1-15, eff. 6-2-15)
§ 489.04 Permit Required
   No person shall land a helicopter under division (b) of Section
489.02, except in cases of mechanical emergency, without first obtaining a
permit. Terms of the permit, including but not limited to required presence of
fire and police personnel and the permissible amount of time a helicopter may
remain on site, shall be at the complete discretion of the Director of Public
Safety, or his or her designee. A pilot seeking issuance of a helicopter permit
shall file an application with the Director of Public Safety on a form provided
by the Director. Such application form shall require, but not be limited to,
the following information:
   (a)   Name and address of the pilot applying for a permit;
   (b)   Name and address of the organization on behalf of whom the permit is
requested;
   (c)   Name and address of the property owner;
   (d)   Date of landing, time of landing, and time of takeoff;
   (e)   Type of helicopter;
   (f)   Number of passengers; and
   (g)   A diagrammed site survey indicating all potential obstacles in close
proximity to the landing areas.
(Ord. No. 564-15. Passed 6-1-15, eff. 6-2-15)
§ 489.05 Fees
   (a)   The Director of Public Safety is authorized to charge and collect fees
for takeoff and landing permits issued under this Chapter. The takeoff and
landing permit fee shall be in an amount fixed by the Board of Control.
   (b)   When the Director of Public Safety determines it is necessary for the
safety and welfare of citizens that safety personnel be present at any takeoff
or landing made under a permit issued pursuant to this chapter, the Director of
Public Safety may charge and collect fees for the presence of the safety
personnel, separate from the cost of the permit. A fee schedule for safety
personnel deployed under this section shall be established by the Board of
Control, and updated from time-to-time as necessary.
(Ord. No. 564-15. Passed 6-1-15, eff. 6-2-15)
§ 489.06 Exclusions
   This chapter shall not apply to life flight operations (HEMS) or helicopter
flights of the Cleveland Division of Police.
(Ord. No. 564-15. Passed 6-1-15, eff. 6-2-15)
§ 489.99 Penalty
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 564-15. Passed 6-1-15, eff. 6-2-15)
CHAPTER 490 – UNMANNED AIRCRAFT SYSTEMS
490.01   Definitions
490.02   Purpose and Intent
490.03   Restrictions
490.99   Violation; Penalties
§ 490.01 Definitions
   As used in this chapter, certain words and terms are defined as follows:
   (a)   "Unmanned Aircraft" means an aircraft operated without the possibility
of direct human intervention from within or on the aircraft, weighing more than
fifty-five hundredths (0.55) pounds on takeoff, including everything that is on
board or otherwise attached to the aircraft.
   (b)   "Unmanned Aircraft System" or "UAS" means an unmanned aircraft and its
associated elements (including communication links and the components that
control the unmanned aircraft) that are required for the safe and efficient
operation of the unmanned aircraft in the National Airspace System.
(Ord. No. 330-16. Passed 4-25-16, eff. 4-27-16)
§ 490.02 Purpose and Intent
   This chapter is intended to promote public safety. In consideration of this
concern, the city is restricting the use of UAS in certain areas. It is not
intended to restrict legitimate hobbyists operating unmanned aircraft systems
in compliance with FAA rules and regulations. This chapter is not intended to
preempt FAA rules and regulations, but to operate in conjunction with those
rules to promote public safety while recognizing the limitations in the FAA's
enforcement capabilities.
(Ord. No. 330-16. Passed 4-25-16, eff. 4-27-16)
§ 490.03 Restrictions
   (a)   Anyone who launches, operates, or causes to be launched or operated,
any unmanned aircraft system within the limits of Cleveland, Ohio, must be able
to present, immediately upon request by any member of the police or fire force,
a current certificate of aircraft registration issued by the Federal Aviation
Administration for the unmanned aircraft system.
   (b)   No person shall launch, operate, or cause to be launched or operated,
any unmanned aircraft system in any airspace within or over:
      (1)   A five (5) mile radius of Cleveland Hopkins International Airport;
      (2)   A five (5) mile radius of Burke Lakefront Airport; or
      (3)   Any area of the City of Cleveland that the Federal Aviation
Administration determines to be a restricted area, either by way of a Notice to
Airmen (NOTAM), Temporary Flight Restriction, No Drone Zone, or other means.
   (c)   Division (b) of this section shall not apply to any person who has
previous approval from the Federal Aviation Administration to operate a UAS in
a restricted area and is complying with all terms and conditions of their
approval.
(Ord. No. 330-16. Passed 4-25-16, eff. 4-27-16)
§ 490.99 Violation; Penalties
   Whoever violates division (a) of Section
490.03 of this chapter is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. Whoever violates
division (b) of Section
490.03 of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on the
first offense, a misdemeanor of the third degree on the second offense, and a
misdemeanor of the second degree on the third and any subsequent offense. All
violations will be forwarded to the Federal Aviation Administration and
reviewed for possible violations of federal civil and criminal statutes. The
Department of Public Safety will enforce and ensure compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 330-16. Passed 4-25-16, eff. 4-27-16)
PART FIVE: MUNICIPAL UTILITIES AND SERVICES CODE
Title I: Street and Sidewalk Areas
   Chapter
501   Unaccepted Street Improvements
   Chapter
502   Board of Right-of-Way Appeals
   Chapter
503   Street Openings and Maintenance
   Chapter
505   Sidewalk Construction
   Chapter
507   Sidewalk Obstructions and Maintenance
   Chapter
508   Issuance of Temporary Sidewalk Occupancy Permits for Vending Devices in
the Central Business District
   Chapter
509   Trees
   Chapter
510   Use of Public Right-of-Way by Service Providers
   Chapter
511   Hospital Trailblazer Signs
   Chapter
512   Issuance of Temporary Public Right-of-Way Occupancy Permits for Business
Signs
   Chapter
512A   Retail Business Signs in Public Right-of-Way
   Chapter
513   Issuance of Temporary Public Right-of-Way Occupancy Permits for Outdoor
Patios and Parklets
   Chapter
514   Issuance of Temporary Public Right-of-Way Occupancy Permits for
Streetscape Amenities
   Chapter
515   Issuance of Temporary Public Right-of-Way Occupancy Permits for Sidewalk
Sales
   Chapter
516   Decorative Street Painting Program
   Chapter
517   Shared Mobility Device and Bicycle Vendors
Title III: Electricity
   Chapter
521   Wires and Cables
   Chapter
523   Rules and Rates
Title V: Water Supply
   Chapter
531   Water and Fire Service Connections
   Chapter
533   Water Meters
   Chapter
535   Water Rates and Billings
Title VII: Sewers and Sewage Disposal
   Chapter
541   Sewer Connections and Sewer Use Code
   Chapter
543   Sewage Service Charges
Title IX: Municipal Services
   Chapter
551   Waste Collection and Disposal
   Chapter
553   Markets
   Chapter
555   Weights and Measures
   Chapter
557   Cemeteries
   Chapter
559   Parks
   Chapter
561   Landfills – Repealed
Title XI: Port Control
   Chapter
571   City Airport
   Chapter
573   Harbor
   Chapter
575   Docks
   Chapter
577   Bridges and Viaducts
TITLE I: STREET AND SIDEWALK AREAS
   Chapter
501   Unaccepted Street Improvements
   Chapter
502   Board of Right-of-Way Appeals
   Chapter
503   Street Openings and Maintenance
   Chapter
505   Sidewalk Construction
   Chapter
507   Sidewalk Obstructions and Maintenance
   Chapter
508   Issuance of Temporary Sidewalk Occupancy Permits for Vending Devices in
the Central Business District
   Chapter
509   Trees
   Chapter
510   Use of Public Right-of-Way by Service Providers
   Chapter
511   Hospital Trailblazer Signs
   Chapter
512   Issuance of Temporary Public Right-of-Way Occupancy Permits for Business
Signs
   Chapter
512A   Retail Business Signs in Public Right-of-Way
   Chapter
513   Issuance of Temporary Public Right-of-Way Occupancy Permits for Outdoor
Patios and Parklets
   Chapter
514   Issuance of Temporary Public Right-of-Way Occupancy Permits for
Streetscape Amenities
   Chapter
515   Issuance of Temporary Public Right-of-Way Occupancy Permits for Sidewalk
Sales
   Chapter
516   Decorative Street Painting Program
   Chapter
517   Shared Mobility Device and Bicycle Vendors
CHAPTER 501 – UNACCEPTED STREET IMPROVEMENTS
501.01   Procedure for Public and Private Construction of Pavement or Sewer
501.02   Connecting Sewer or Pavement of Undedicated Highway Built without
Permit
501.03   Construction of Roads, Sewers, Pavements and Water Mains
501.031   Construction of Private Roads
501.04   Injuring New Pavement before Completion
501.05   Disposal of Old Pavement; Unguarded Excavations
501.06   Signs Giving Notice of Unaccepted Thoroughfares
501.99   Penalty
   Note: The legislative history of this chapter, except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 63410-A, passed
September 22, 1924.
Cross-reference:
   Street opening permit, CO
503.01
Statutory reference:
   Compulsory service connections, RC 729.06
   Excavation liability, RC 723.49 et seq.
   Power to establish and care for streets, RC 715.19, 717.01, 723.01
   Surface treatment, RC 723.23, 723.31
§ 501.01 Procedure for Public and Private Construction of Pavement or Sewer
   (a)   Where a thoroughfare is dedicated but not accepted, the abutting
owners may secure a pavement or sewer, otherwise than by the ordinary method of
legislation and assessment, provided that all of the owners of the taxable
frontage petition for the improvement.
   (b)   The interested property owners may make their own contracts for the
construction of the sewer or pavement, and pay direct all contractors or others
furnishing material or doing work for the purpose of making the proposed
improvement.
   (c)   The plan for the sewer or pavement shall be made by the Commissioner
of Engineering and Construction and approved by the Director of Public Service.
The City’s specifications shall in all respects govern all construction work,
and the work shall be done under City supervision and inspection. The work
shall be completed within the time fixed by the Commissioner and stated in the
bonds to be furnished as hereinafter mentioned. Upon failure to complete the
work in the time specified, the Director may proceed to complete the work in
accordance with that part of the specifications relating to forfeiture of work
due to improper work or delay.
   (d)   A deposit of ten percent (10%) of the cost of the work as estimated by
the Commissioner shall be deposited with the City Treasurer in advance of
beginning the work, and should it become necessary, so much of the deposit as
may be required shall be used by the City in order that all of the requirements
of the City’s specifications for the work can be properly complied with.
   (e)   The cost of City inspection shall be paid by the interested property
owners, and an amount of money estimated by the Commissioner for such purpose
shall be deposited in advance with the Treasurer.
   (f)   The Commissioner shall be furnished the necessary data required to
prepare the plans for the improvement, and all engineering work necessary in
connection with the construction work shall be furnished by the interested
property owners.
   (g)   An approved surety company bond, acceptable to the Director of Law, in
an amount fixed by the Director of Public Service, but not less than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) in any event, must be furnished to the City,
conditioned to indemnify and save it harmless from and on account of any
damages, injury or loss, resulting from the construction of such sewer or
pavement, either to the City, or to any other person or property, of such
character that the City is liable for, and for the payment of all just and
legal claims for labor performed upon, and for materials and machinery
furnished for the work specified.
   (h)   Upon application provided for under this section, the Director of
Public Service, upon being satisfied that all of the foregoing requirements
have been complied with, shall issue a permit authorizing the construction of
such sewer or pavement.
   (i)   Should the interested property owners not desire to make their own
contracts, or should the thoroughfare be an accepted one, a resolution shall be
passed by Council, authorizing the Director of Public Service to build the
sewer or pavement in accordance with the plan prepared by the Commissioner.
Following the passage of such resolution, the construction work shall be duly
advertised and let according to law, and the work done as provided for in the
specifications. An amount of money sufficient to cover the cost of the work, as
estimated by the Commissioner, shall be deposited with the Treasurer in advance
of the work.
   (j)   All engineering work and inspection necessary in connection with the
construction work in accepted thoroughfares shall be done by the City, the same
as though the regular proceedings for constructing sewers or payments by
assessments had been followed.
   (k)   Any portion of the moneys deposited as herein provided and not
expended, will after the completion of the work in accordance with the
specifications, be returned to those depositing the same.
§ 501.02 Connecting Sewer or Pavement of Undedicated Highway Built without
Permit
   No person shall connect up any pavement or sewer laid or constructed in an
undedicated highway with any pavement or sewer laid in a dedicated highway of
the City, unless the same has been constructed under permits, as provided in
Section
501.01. Any such connection made in violation of this section shall be at once
disconnected by the Director of Public Service at the cost and expense of the
person making the same, which cost and expense shall be recovered by the
Director of Law in a civil action, and the money so recovered paid into the
fund out of which it was disbursed.
§ 501.03 Construction of Roads, Sewers, Pavements and Water Mains
   (a)   Where a thoroughfare is either a proposed street, alley, court, place
or avenue, or an undedicated street, alley, court, place or avenue, the
Director of Public Service may authorize the construction of a sewer or
pavement therein, and the laying of water mains, provided the following
conditions are complied with. A plan showing the arrangement of the lots and
the connection of the street with existing thoroughfares must be furnished to
the Commissioner of Engineering and Construction, together with a profile of
the proposed street showing proposed grade, all of which must be of a character
meeting the approval of the Director of Public Service. The plan for the sewer
or pavement shall be made by the Commissioner and approved by the Director of
Public Service. The City’s specifications shall govern all construction work
and work shall be done under City supervision and inspection, provided that the
laying of water mains shall be done by the City. The interested property owners
shall make their own contracts for the construction of the sewer or pavement
and pay directly all contractors or others furnishing material or doing work
for the purpose of making the proposed improvement. The cost of City inspection
shall be paid by the interested property owners, and at the time of the
issuance of the permit hereinafter referred to, an amount of money estimated by
the Commissioner for such purpose shall be deposited with the City Treasurer.
The cost of installation of water mains shall be borne by the interested
property owners and in the manner as otherwise provided by City ordinances and
the regulations of the Department of Public Service, excepting as herein
modified. A bond acceptable to the Director of Law, in an amount fixed by the
Director of Public Service, but not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
in any event, must be furnished to the City conditioned to indemnify and save
it harmless from and on account of any damage, injury or loss resulting from
the constructing of such sewer or pavement either to the City or to any other
person or property of such character that the City is liable for, and further
conditioned that the proposed or undedicated street, alley, court, place or
avenue shall be dedicated within a time prescribed by the Director of Public
Service and free and clear of all encumbrances. The bond shall also be
conditioned upon the grading, draining and making of such other improvements as
are requisite and prescribed in such streets where sewers and pavements are not
to be installed in advance of dedication. In fixing the amount of the bond the
Director of Public Service shall take into consideration and shall include full
indemnity to the City for all of the matters hereinbefore set forth, and also
the importance and value to the City of the proposed street in its relation to
the surrounding streets and highways. Bond shall be given with some approved
surety company to the satisfaction of the Director of Law. The bond shall be
cancelled by the Director of Law upon the written statement of the Commissioner
that the work has been satisfactorily completed, and upon the dedication of the
thoroughfare in accordance with law and the provisions of this section.
   (b)   Upon application under this section the Director of Public Service,
upon being satisfied that all of the foregoing requirements have been complied
with, shall issue a permit authorizing the construction of such pavement, sewer
or water main.
   (c)   All plats of dedication made in pursuance of the foregoing provisions
shall be deposited with the Commissioner for record, the cost of recording the
same to be paid by the owner and to be covered in his or her bond.
   (d)   Where it is necessary to open up unpaved streets accepted by or under
the control of the City there shall be deposited with the City Treasurer an
amount of money estimated by the Commissioner of Engineering and Construction
sufficient to cover the cost of restoring the streets.
   (e)   The work shall be done under the supervision of the Commissioner of
Streets and paid for out of such deposit.
   (f)   Any balances left in deposited funds after paying inspection or for
the work of restoring the streets done by the City shall be returned to the
person depositing the same upon a written statement from the Commissioner of
Engineering and Construction that the work has been satisfactorily completed.
   (g)   Should it be desirable to build house connections to the curb at the
time of constructing any street sewer hereunder, the same shall be permitted
and permits issued therefor, provided that the work is done under the same
inspection as the street sewer. Should only a limited number of such curb
connections be made or should they be made at any other than at the time of the
construction of the street sewer, special permits must be secured therefor.
   (h)   All necessary information regarding grades, arrangement of lots or
surveys shall be furnished by the owner of the property to the Commissioner
upon request. All necessary field engineering in connection with obtaining
property line and grade of the improvement must be furnished by and at the
expense of the interested property owners. The line and grade for sewers or
pavements must be in conformity with the City system and copies of all notes
must be furnished to the Commissioner upon demand.
   (i)   The center lines of all proposed streets, avenues, roads, etc., shall
be accurately defined by stone monuments placed to the satisfaction of the
Commissioner.
   (j)   Where pavements are laid a guaranty fund, as provided for in the City
specifications shall be deposited as therein required and left fully in control
of the City, so that any defects existing in the pavements before the
expiration of the guaranty period may be fully provided for.
§ 501.031 Construction of Private Roads
   (a)   Definitions. “Private Road” means a privately owned or controlled and
maintained drive, street, road or lane, that provides the primary means of
vehicular ingress and egress to two (2) or more parking lots, unimproved
parcels, or principal buildings, or three (3) or more dwelling houses, whether
that drive, street, road or lane is created by a private right-of-way,
easement, or other device. A private road shall also include the following:
      (1)   An access road where two (2) or more lots, or dwelling houses share
a common access drive or device even if each lot has the required frontage on a
public road;
      (2)   Any and all extensions, additions, or branches of, or to a private
road shall be considered part of the private road that abuts the public road,
except those extensions, additions, or branches that access less than three (3)
dwelling houses, or less than two (2) lots, parcels, or principal buildings.
   (b)   Permit Required. No person shall construct a private road or alter an
existing private road without first obtaining a permit for the construction or
alteration from the Department of Public Service. The periodic cleaning and re-
surfacing of the road shall not be considered an alteration and shall not
require a permit as long as the specifications under which the road was
approved are not compromised.
   (c)   Form of Permit. Before a person may receive a permit the person shall
file with the Director of Public Service an application on the form provided by
the Director. This application shall include any information the Director deems
necessary and shall be accompanied by road plans showing the proposed
construction or alteration. The proposed construction shall comply, at a
minimum, with all Rules and Regulations enacted by the Director. At the time of
the application, applicant shall pay a non-refundable fee in accordance with a
fee schedule fixed from time to time by the Board of Control.
   (d)   Decision on Application. The Director shall approve or deny the permit
within thirty (30) days of receiving a completed application. The Director may
inform permittee that the construction plans do not conform to the City’s Rules
and Regulations. The permittee may change the construction plans and resubmit
them.
   If a permit is denied, permittee may appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals
within thirty (30) days of the denial.
   (e)   Other Regulations. Any private road shall comply with all other
applicable regulations, including the Zoning Code requirements for access and
maintenance of off-street parking spaces.
   (f)   Rules and Regulations. The Director may enact Rules and Regulations
concerning construction of private roads, including, but not limited to,
standards and specifications for the private streets, and regulations for the
construction process. The Rules and Regulations shall require that, at a
minimum, the roads meet City specifications for similar roads. The Rules and
Regulations shall take effect thirty (30) days after their publication in the
City Record.
   (g)   Periodic Inspections; Fee. The Director may make periodic inspections
of the road construction to ensure compliance with the construction plans as
approved, and the applicable Rules and Regulations. At the completion of the
construction, the Director shall make a final inspection of the road and issue
a certificate of completion. The Permittee shall be required to make a deposit
in an amount as determined by the Director of Public Service for periodic
inspections of the road construction. Any amounts not used shall be refunded to
the Permittee.
   (h)   No person shall construct or alter a private road without first
obtaining the permit required in this section.
   (i)   No person shall construct or alter a private road except in accordance
with the permit and approved plans.
   The Director is authorized to charge fees at the time of any inspection
according to an inspection fee schedule fixed from time to time by the Board of
Control.
(Ord. No. 242-05. Passed 4-25-05, eff. 4-29-05)
§ 501.04 Injuring New Pavement before Completion
   No person shall drive upon or do any act that may injure, impair or damage
any pavement until the contractor or party constructing the same has entirely
completed the same and removed the fence or whatever means of notice he or she
may have used that the same was not ready for use, such removal indicating that
the pavement is ready for use by the public.
§ 501.05 Disposal of Old Pavement; Unguarded Excavations
   In removing pavement, etc., the material dug up must be deposited in such
manner as to guard against inconveniences to the public, by obstructing
streets, alleys or sidewalks, nor shall the hole in any street be left open or
unguarded during the night time.
§ 501.06 Signs Giving Notice of Unaccepted Thoroughfares
   Notwithstanding Section
413.07 of the Codified Ordinances, whenever a thoroughfare is dedicated but not
accepted and the abutting premises are being improved, the Commissioner of
Streets shall cause signs to be posted wherever the unaccepted thoroughfare
intersects an accepted street, showing thereon: “This street not accepted by
the City of Cleveland – City of Cleveland not responsible for maintenance.”
(Ord. No. 703-56. Passed 5-28-56, eff. 6-4-56)
§ 501.99 Penalty
   (a)   Whoever violates Section
501.02 shall be fined not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than fifty
dollars ($50.00).
   (b)   Whoever violates division (h) or (i) of Section
501.031 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(Ord. No. 242-05, § 2. Passed 4-25-05, eff. 4-29-05)
CHAPTER 502 – BOARD OF RIGHT-OF-WAY APPEALS
502.01   Board Members
502.02   Jurisdiction
502.03   Protests and Appeals to be Filed in Writing
502.04   Protests and Appeals Filed Prior to Work
502.05   Protests and Appeals Filed After Work is Completed
502.06   Further Appeal
§ 502.01 Board Members
   The Board of Right-of-Way Appeals shall consist of the Director of Capital
Projects, or his or her designee, a member of Council selected by the Council
President, and the Director of Law, or his or her designee.
(Ord. No. 1141-2023. Passed 2-3-25, eff. 2-4-25)
§ 502.02 Jurisdiction
   (a)   The Board of Right-of-Way Appeals shall hear and determine any
protests filed by permittees, property owners, or contractors as to sidewalks,
street, curb or gutter construction, reconstruction or repair, or any written
notices issued pursuant to Charter Section
164.
   (b)   The Board shall also hear and determine any other appeals that the
board is designated to review under the Codified Ordinances of Cleveland, Ohio,
1976.
   (c)   The Board shall have no jurisdiction to review any written City
administrative notices, order or decisions from any person or entity performing
work in the public right-of-way under an agreement with the City, Cuyahoga
County, or State of Ohio.
(Ord. No. 1141-2023. Passed 2-3-25, eff. 2-4-25)
§ 502.03 Protests and Appeals to be Filed in Writing
   Any protests or appeals filed under this chapter shall be filed in writing
with the Director of Capital Projects, who shall notify the person filing such
protest or appeal of the date and place of hearing before the Board of Right-
of-Way Appeals.
(Ord. No. 1141-2023. Passed 2-3-25, eff. 2-4-25)
§ 502.04 Protests and Appeals Filed Prior to Work
   If protests or appeals are filed prior to the doing of the work called for
by a notice issued by an administrative official or agency, the Board of Right-
of-Way Appeals shall have authority to modify, alter or revoke any such notice
as to the amount or type of work required, or the time in which it must be
completed, consistent with the City ordinances and the specifications regarding
sidewalk, street, curbing and gutter construction, reconstruction or repair.
The Board shall also have the authority to waive strict compliance with such
requirements where such compliance would cause undue hardship, provided such
waiver will not cause or continue a public nuisance or an unsafe condition.
Protests filed under this section must be filed no later than thirty (30) days
after the service of the notice. The Board shall issue an order setting for its
findings and, if applicable, indicating the period of time within which the
party must comply therewith.
(Ord. No. 1141-2023. Passed 2-3-25, eff. 2-4-25)
§ 502.05 Protests and Appeals Filed After Work is Completed
   If a protest or appeal is filed after the work provided for in the notice
has been completed by the City, or through its contractor, the authority of the
Board of Right-of-Way Appeals shall be limited to a determination that the
amount of the bill is correct, that the bill has been properly charged against
the appropriate party and that the work as performed was in accordance with the
notice served. If the Board finds that an amount has been incorrectly charged,
but that work has been performed, it may order that such payment be made from
the fund provided for the payment of the City's portion of the right-of-way
work. Protests or appeals filed under this section must be filed no later than
thirty (30) days after the receipt of the bill from the City.
(Ord. No. 1141-2023. Passed 2-3-25, eff. 2-4-25)
§ 502.06 Further Appeal
   A person aggrieved by a final decision of the Board of Right-of-Way Appeals
may further appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals within thirty (30) days after
the Board of Right-of-Way Appeals’ written decision. The Board of Zoning
Appeals shall approve, modify, or annul any orders, notices, or decisions
issued pursuant to these Codified Ordinances from which the appeal has been
perfected.
(Ord. No. 1141-2023. Passed 2-3-25, eff. 2-4-25)
CHAPTER 503 – STREET OPENINGS AND MAINTENANCE
503.01   Street Opening Permits; Right-of-Way Registration; Costs
503.011   Vandalism Repairs: Permit Exception
503.012   Removal of Markings in Public Rights-of- Way
503.013   Street Pavement Preservation
503.014   Restoration of the Public Right-of-Way
503.015   Failure to Restore the Public Right-of-Way
503.02   Charges for Repair and Inspection of Openings – Repealed
503.03   Removal of Unused Posts and Poles
503.031   Abatement of Violations
503.04   Lamp Posts and Trees in the Public Right-of-Way
503.05   Erection of Electrical Fixtures; Permit
503.06   Use of Pole Line by City
503.061   Attachments to Poles
503.07   Construction of Subways, Conduits, Ducts or Pipes; Permit
503.08   City Gas System; Maps; Permit
503.09   Removal of Gas Meters
503.10   Gas Pipes in Streets; Permit
503.11   Notice to Remove Pipes
503.12   Manholes; Barricades; Air Supply
503.99   Penalty
   Note: The legislative history of this chapter, except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 63410-A, passed
September 22, 1924.
Charter reference:
   Duty to keep streets open, in repair and free from nuisance, Charter §
173
   Public improvements by contract or direct labor, Charter §
167
   Sewer, water and gas connections, Charter §
163
Cross-reference:
   Construction and improvement contracts, CO
Ch. 185
   Injuring new pavement before completion, CO
501.04
   Permit to open streets or alleys for water connection extensions, CO
531.47
   Sewer and water connections for property owners abutting newly paved
streets, CO
541.09
   Stone or cement obstructing air or water supply to tree planted in highways,
CO
509.06
   Street cleaning once each thirty (30) days from March 1 to October 31, CO
131.48
   Unguarded street excavations, CO
501.05
   Unnecessary obstructions by railroads, CO
631.06
Statutory reference:
   Digging, excavating and piling earth on streets, RC 5589.10
   Excavation liability, RC 723.49 et seq.
   Power to erect gas and electric works, RC 743.34
§ 503.01 Street Opening Permits; Right-of-Way Registration; Costs
   (a)   No person, including a corporation, private utility or public utility,
shall excavate any pavement in any highway, lane, road, street, alley or
sidewalk of the City, without first obtaining a street opening permit, except
as provided in division (g) of this section, and holding a current Right-of-Way
Certificate of Registration, except as provided in division (a)(2) of this
section.
      (1)   Street Opening Permit. The application for a street opening permit
shall be in the form prescribed by the Director. This application shall state
the name, address and phone number of the applicant, the location, kinds and
extent of the pavement desired to be taken up and the number, purpose and size
of excavations which are desired or necessary. If the permit is for
reconfiguring the public right-of-way, an engineered drawing stamped by a
professional engineer of the State of Ohio much accompany the permit
application. The application shall also include a signed statement that the
permittee shall hold harmless the City of Cleveland, its officers and employees
and shall indemnify the City of Cleveland, its officers and employees for any
claims or damage to property or injury to persons which may be occasioned by
any activity carried on under the terms of the permit. At the time of
application, the applicant shall pay a non-refundable fee in accordance with
the following:
         A.   Street Excavation -
            $313.00 for first 200 sq. ft. and $43.00 for each additional 200
sq. ft. (or portion thereof)
            $195.00 inspection fee for one parcel or a small project
            $260.00 per month inspection fee for a large project
         B.   Sidewalk Excavation -
            $45.00 for 1 to 200 sq. ft or for a single residential parcel
            $90.00 for 201 to 1000 sq. ft.
            $135.00 for 1001 to 5000 sq. ft.
            $225.00 for 5001 sq. ft. or over
            $195.00 inspection fee for one parcel or a small project
            $260.00 per month inspection fee for a large project
         C.   Expedited Reviews - $50.00 additional fee for any requested and
performed expedited reviews.
         D.   Engineering Review Fee for Earth Retention System (ERS) review or
elevated pedestrian bridge review - $4,000.00 fee for complete review per site.
      For purposes of this section, a “small project” means that the adjacent
property for which a permit is being sought is a single residential house,
townhomes or apartments with less than four units, other commercial single
building under 0.5 acres and a “large project” means that the adjacent property
for which a permit being sought is greater in size than a small project.
      (2)   Right-of-Way Certificate of Registration. The application for an
annual Right-of-Way Certificate of Registration shall be in the form prescribed
by the Director, shall state the name of the person, firm or corporation
applying for registration and the name, address, and phone number of the place
of business or places of business of the applicant, and shall include such
additional information that the Director deems necessary. If the applicant is a
firm, co-partnership, corporation, association or any combination, the
application shall contain the names and addresses of all members or officers,
together with a certified copy of the corporation minutes or other certified
evidence that the application has been duly authorized. At the time of
application, the applicant shall pay a non-refundable fee of one hundred
dollars ($100.00). No Right-of-Way Certificate of Registration shall be
required for officials or employees of a public utility or private utility.
   (b)   In the event the scope of the project is revised during the course of
the work, the Manager of Engineering and Construction may recalculate the
street opening permit fee based on the actual size of the excavation in
accordance with the fee schedule.
   (c)   In the event that a street opening permit is not issued or is revoked
before an excavation has been made, the entire fee shall be refunded to the
applicant, except for twenty-five dollars ($25.00) to cover the city’s cost of
processing the application.
   (d)   Prior to being issued a street opening permit, permittee shall submit
a performance bond or have a current performance bond on file either:
      (1)   In the amount of the estimated cost of backfilling and restoring
the excavation to be made by the permittee, as estimated by the Manager of
Engineering and Construction; or
      (2)   An umbrella bond in the amount of two hundred fifty thousand
dollars ($250,000.00). Any person providing an umbrella bond will be deemed to
have met the performance bond requirements of this section for the duration of
the performance bond.
   (e)   After the fee and deposit required by this section have been paid, the
Director may issue the street opening permit applied for. The permit shall
state the exact time the excavation is to be made, the probable length of time
required for the work to be done and the repair made, the character of the
pavement, including its base, and the character of the work necessary for the
satisfactory relaying of the pavement.
   (f)   Permittee shall restore, or cause to restore, all excavations
according to regulations promulgated by the Director of Capital Projects. Any
regulations promulgated by the Director shall be effective thirty (30) days
after publication in the City Record.
      (1)   If the Director determines that the permittee has failed to make
restorations according to the Director’s regulations, the Director may, by
written notice, order the permittee to make restorations according to the
regulations. The permittee shall have thirty (30) calendar days from receipt of
written notice to make the appropriate restorations.
      (2)   If the Director determines that the permittee has failed to make
restorations after thirty (30) days from the permittee’s receipt of notice, the
Director may draw, from the permittee’s performance bond, funds sufficient to
make the restorations according to the Director’s regulations or the Director
may proceed to carry out the restoration in accordance with Section
503.015 of these Codified Ordinances.
   (g)   In an emergency, a person may make an excavation or opening or remove
pavement in any highway, lane, road, street or alley of the City, provided that
the person notifies the Director in writing of the emergency, including a
description of the nature of the emergency, and applies for a street opening
permit within seven (7) calendar days of making the opening. The appropriate
street opening fee shall accompany the application. Any person failing to
notify the Director as provided in this division (g) shall be charged the
regular permit fee plus an additional fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) to
cover the City’s administrative costs of identifying and inspecting the street
opening made without a permit. As used in this division (g), “emergency” means
a condition that (i) poses a clear and immediate danger to life or health or of
a significant loss of property; or (ii) requires immediate repair or
replacement in order to restore service to a user.
   (h)   The street opening permit shall identify the time period in which the
street opening must be closed. The Manager of Engineering and Construction or
his or her designee will determine this time period based upon the size and
nature of the opening.
      (1)   If the work is not started within the time designated in the street
opening permit, the permit may be revoked by the Manager.
      (2)   If the work has been started but not completed within the time
designated in the street opening permit, the permit may be revoked by the
Manager of Engineering and Construction. If the permit is revoked, the Director
may charge all accrued restoration charges to the permittee. Should the
permittee fail to pay all accrued restoration charges within thirty (30)
calendar days of receipt of notice, the Director may draw, from the permittee’s
performance bond, funds sufficient to restore the highway, lane, road, street,
or alley according to the Director’s regulations or the Director may proceed to
carry out the restoration in accordance with Section
503.015 of these Codified Ordinances.
      (3)   The Manager, or the Manager’s designee, may, at his or her
discretion, issue a stop work order for any work being performed without a
valid permit, or suspend a street opening permit for the following reasons:
         A.   The work unreasonably interferes with the performance of work by
another party who received a City permit before the issuance of permittee’s
permit; or
         B.   The suspension of the work is necessary for the City to evaluate,
prevent, or address a hazard or risk to the health, safety, and welfare of the
public; or
         C.   The work performed, or the work being performed, is not within
the scope of the work approved by the permit; or
         D.   The work is creating, or has created, unsafe work conditions; or
         E.   The permittee or his or her agent fails to abide by the
provisions of these Codified Ordinances; or
         F.   The permittee or his or her agent has violated the conditions of
or the rules and regulations governing the permit; or
         G.   The work performed, or the work being performed, fails to comply
with the City’s specifications and standards.
      (4)   A stop order suspending a permit issued under divisions (h)(3)C.
through (h)(3)G. above, shall state the reason(s) for suspension and the
corrective measure(s) to be taken, the date by which the corrective measure(s)
are to be completed, and such additional information as the Manager, or the
Manager’s designee, deems necessary.
      (5)   A permittee whose permit is suspended under division (h)(3) above,
may appeal the Manager’s decision to the Board of Right-of-Way Appeals, in
writing, within ten (10) days of the Manager’s decision.
   (i)   The Director may, at his or her discretion, revoke a street opening
permit at any time under the authority of this chapter if the permittee fails
to comply with the requirements contained in a stop order issued accordance
with division (h)(4) above or any law, rule, or regulation relating to the
performance of work in the public right-of-way or if permittee’s, or its
agent’s, Right-of-Way Registration is revoked.
   (j)   The Director may, at his or her discretion, revoke a Right-of-Way
Certificate of Registration under the authority of this chapter if the holder
fails to comply with the terms of this chapter or any law, rule, or regulation.
Additionally, the Director may, at his or her discretion, suspend or revoke a
Right-of-Way Certificate of Registration for any of the following reasons:
      (1)   The holder is convicted of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude
or a felony during the renewal period of that Certificate of Registration;
      (2)   The holder obtained a Certificate of Registration by fraud,
misrepresentation or deception;
      (3)   The holder engaged in fraud, misrepresentation or deception in the
conduct of business;
      (4)   The holder no longer has a valid policy for the required insurance;
      (5)   The holder used its Certificate of Registration to obtain a permit
for another;
      (6)   The holder repeatedly failed to secure permits, inspections, and
approvals required under Chapter
503;
      (7)   The holder repeatedly installed work in an unworkmanlike manner as
defined by the Construction Standards and Specifications of the City of
Cleveland or not in conformity with permits issued by the City;
      (8)   The holder has received written notifications of violating
Construction Standards and Specifications of the City of Cleveland and has
failed remedy such violations; and
      (9)   There have been repeated incidents of returned checks for
insufficient funds or stop payment without just cause.
   (k)   The Director shall give written notice, as appropriate, to a permittee
of any street opening permit revoked under division (i) above and to a holder
of a Right-of-Way Certificate of Registration suspended or revoked under
division (j) above. Such notice shall state the reason(s) for the suspension or
revocation, as appropriate, and shall further state that the action shall
become final unless, within thirty (30) days of date of the notice, a written
notice of appeal is filed with the Board of Right-of-Way Appeals.
   (l)   If a street opening permit is suspended under division (h)(3) above,
the permittee shall discontinue any work and shall not commence work until the
Manager, or his or her designee, provides written notification lifting the
suspension. If a street opening permit is revoked under division (i) above, a
new permit shall be secured before any further work may proceed.
   (m)   A permittee, in accepting and acting under a street opening permit,
agrees to assume full responsibility for injury and damage to persons and
property incurred because of any settlement of a restored area, and further
agrees to pay all costs involved in reconditioning such areas. If any
settlement in a restored area occurs within a period of one (1) year from date
of completion of the permanent restoration, it shall be considered as
conclusive evidence of defective backfilling. Any expense incurred by the City
in correcting such settlement shall be paid by the permittee.
   (n)   A permittee shall carry on the work authorized by the permit in such
manner as to cause a minimum of interference with traffic. The permittee shall
use a traffic control plan that meets the minimum requirements in the Ohio
Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, as amended, or is otherwise approved
by the Director.
   (o)   For the purposes of this section, “excavation” shall have the same
meaning as in division (a)(12) of Section
510.01 of these Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 1141-2023. Passed 2-3-25, eff. 4-5-25)
§ 503.011 Vandalism Repairs: Permit Exception
   Notwithstanding any provision of the Codified Ordinances to the contrary, no
permit for temporary occupancy or obstruction of the street or sidewalk shall
be required for repairs to premises for damages caused by vandalism pertaining
to windows, doors, entranceways or other vandalism affecting the access to and
immediate security of the premises, but only if said repairs are made within
five (5) days of the vandalism.
(Ord. No. 2644-91. Passed 3-9-92, eff. 3-17-92)
§ 503.012 Removal of Markings in Public Rights- of-Way
   (a)   All markings made within the public rights- of-way of the City in
accordance with RC 3781.25 through 3781.32 shall be removed within ninety (90)
days after placement in the public right-of-way.
   (b)   The contractor or other person whose notification resulted in the
marking of the public right- of-way shall be responsible for removing the
marking in accordance with division (a) of this section.
(Ord. No. 2248-94. Passed 6-19-95, eff. 6-28-95)
§ 503.013 Street Pavement Preservation
   (a)   Purpose and Intent. The purpose and intent of this section is to:
      (1)   Regulate the cumulative and repetitive impacts to the public right-
of-way from the construction, reconstruction, installation, repair and
maintenance of equipment and facilities located in the public right-of-way;
      (2)   Minimize pavement degradation;
      (3)   Maintain the structural integrity of roadway services; and
      (4)   Maintain a smooth riding surface for all modes of traffic.
   (b)   After any public street has been constructed, reconstructed or repaved
under City or other governmental contract or accepted under ordinance passed by
Council, the pavement surface shall not thereafter be cut or opened for a
period of five (5) years.
   (c)   The Director shall grant exceptions to the prohibition contained in
division (b) of this section in order to facilitate development on adjacent
properties, provide for emergency repairs to subsurface facilities, provide for
underground service connection to adjacent properties or to allow the upgrading
of underground facilities in accordance with rules promulgated by the Director
and published in the City Record. When granting exceptions, the Director may
impose conditions appropriate to insure the rapid and complete restoration of
the street and paving surface. Repaving may include surface grinding, base and
sub-base repairs, or other related work as needed, and may include up to full-
width surface paving of the roadway.
   (d)   If the Director determines that final repaving of the street is not
appropriate at that particular time for reasons relating to weather or other
short term problems, the Director may grant a delay until proper conditions
allow repaving.
(Ord. No. 1242-A-07. Passed 10-8-07, eff. 10-11-07)
§ 503.014 Restoration of the Public Right-of-Way
   (a)   As used in this section, “public right-of-way” has the same meaning as
defined in Section
510.01 of these Codified Ordinances.
   (b)   No person, including a corporation, private utility or public utility,
performing, or causing to perform, work in or affecting the public right-of-way
shall fail to restore, at its own expense, the public right-of-way, to either
as good a condition as existed before the work was undertaken or in compliance
with the City of Cleveland Standard Construction Drawings or specifications, as
determined by the Director of Capital Projects or the Director’s designee.
Restoration of the public right-of-way includes, but is not limited to:
      (1)   Re-establishing any traffic striping;
      (2)   Repairing or reconstructing any pavement as deemed necessary by the
Manager of Engineering and Construction;
      (3)   Restoring of any grass or other softscape, such as flowers, plants,
shrubs, and other similar items, within the public right-of-way or outside the
public right-of-way that has been damaged or impacted; and
      (4)   Restoring of any sidewalks.
   (c)   If a person performs work in the public right-of-way or performs work
on private property that impacts the public right-of-way without securing the
necessary permit(s) required under these Codified Ordinances, such person shall
be charged the regular permit fee plus any inspection costs related to the work
and restoration.
(Ord. No. 1141-2023. Passed 2-3-25, eff. 2-4-25)
§ 503.015 Failure to Restore the Public Right-of-Way
   (a)   When the Director of Capital Project, Manager of Engineering and
Construction, or a designee determines that a person has failed to comply with
the provisions of Section
503.014, he or she shall serve or cause to be served upon such person a notice
which states in detail the nature of the violation. The notice shall also
contain an estimate of the cost to repair the public right-of-way and any
appurtenances thereto required for the public right-of-way to be in compliance
with the City of Cleveland Standard Construction Documents and shall notify the
person that he or she may submit payment of the estimated amount, which amount
shall be the full amount, to the City by a certain date and enter into an
agreement with the City to effectuate the repairs. Funds submitted as an
estimated amount shall be deposited in Fund No. 10 SF 058 and said funds are
appropriated for public right-of-way purposes. Upon receipt of the estimated
amount and the agreement, the City will construct or repair the public right-
of-way. If the actual cost of construction or repair is not equal to the
estimated amount, the City will bill the person for any additional cost or
reimburse the person from Fund No. 10 SF 058 for any amount paid to the City
that exceeds the actual cost. The agreement required above shall contain such
terms and provisions as determined by the Director of Law to protect and
benefit the City.
   (b)   The notice described in division (a) above shall further provide that,
within thirty (30) days after service of the notice, the recipient thereof
shall:
      (1)   Remedy the violation;
      (2)   Appeal the Office of Capital Project’s determination to the Board
of Right-of-Way Appeals under Chapter
502 of these Codified Ordinances; or
      (3)   Submit payment and enter into an agreement pursuant to division
(a).
   The notice shall also clearly indicate that if the person fails to take one
(1) of the three (3) steps listed in this division within thirty (30) days
after service of the notice, the person may be found guilty of a fourth degree
misdemeanor.
   (c)   Notwithstanding any other provision contained in this section, any
notice served pursuant to divisions (a) and (b) of this section between
November 15 of one (1) year and February 1 of the succeeding year to an owner
of a parcel of land which is located within the Central Business District shall
provide that the violation shall be remedied or the Office of Capital Project’s
determination appealed within thirty (30) days of the end of that period.
   (d)   Any person who violates the provisions of Section
503.014 of these Codified Ordinances and fails to comply with a notification
used pursuant to divisions (a) and (b) of this section, an appeal an order of
the Board of Right-of-Ways Appeals issued pursuant to Section
502.04 of these Codified Ordinance within the period set forth in said order,
or a decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals issued pursuant to Section
502.06 of these Codified Ordinances, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree. Each day during which noncompliance or a violation continues
shall constitute a separate offense. Provided that the fine set forth herein
shall not, with respect to any one (1) service of notice, exceed three (3)
times the cost of the restoration required in such notice, as estimated by the
Office of Capital Projects. The fine set forth herein is mandatory and shall
not be suspended by the court, in whole or in part. All fines collected for
violations of this section, or an amount equal to the fines collected, shall be
deposited in Fund 10 SF 058 and said funds are appropriated for streets,
sidewalk, curb or gutter repair purposes.
   (e)   If a person fails to comply with a notification, decision, or order
described in division (d) above, the Director of Capital Projects may cause
such restoration to be performed through the appropriate department or office
by either by direct employment of labor, or by contract, at the person’s
expense, plus assess a penalty of fifteen percent (15%).
(Ord. No. 1141-2023. Passed 2-3-25, eff. 2-4-25)
§ 503.02 Charges for Repair and Inspection of Openings – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1170-03. Passed 7-16-03, eff. 7-23-03)
§ 503.03 Removal of Unused Posts and Poles
   No person, firm or corporation shall allow lamp posts, telegraph poles,
telephone poles or other structures projecting above the surface of streets or
sidewalks to remain there for a period of more than thirty (30) days after the
time when such posts, poles or other structures cease to be used for the
purpose for which they were authorized and permitted. However, existing posts,
poles and other structures that may be projecting above the surface of streets
or sidewalks after May 14, 1951, shall not be required to be removed, unless
the Director of Public Service orders them to be removed, in which case they
shall be removed within ninety (90) days after the date of the order.
§ 503.031 Abatement of Violations
   Any post, pole, or other structure left in any street, sidewalk, treelawn,
or other public right-of-way in violation of Section
503.03 may be removed by the Director of Public Service and stored pending
return or disposal of the object. The owner or person responsible for such
object removed pursuant to the authority of this section shall pay all costs
incurred by the City for such removal, transportation, storage and disposal. If
the owner or person responsible does not retrieve the object removed within
fifteen (15) days of notice of removal, such object shall be deemed abandoned
and may be disposed of or sold in the manner provided by Section
181.18 of the Codified Ordinances of Cleveland, Ohio, 1976. Any proceeds of any
sale shall be applied to reimburse the City for its costs.
(Ord. No. 2354-93. Passed 12-13-93, eff. 12-17-93)
§ 503.04 Lamp Posts and Trees in the Public Right-of-Way
   (a)   As used in this section, “public right-of-way” means any sidewalk,
court, alley, street or other area dedicated or otherwise designated for public
use and held by the City.
   (b)   All lamp posts hereafter placed in the public right-of-way shall
comply with the requirements contained in Chapter
514, and may require an encroachment permit under Chapter
3109, as determined by the Manager of Engineering and Construction, of these
Codified Ordinances.
   (c)   All shade or ornamental trees hereafter placed in the public right-of-
way shall comply with the requirements contained in Section
509.13 of these Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 1141-2023. Passed 2-3-25, eff. 2-4-25)
§ 503.05 Erection of Electrical Fixtures; Permit
   No person, firm or corporation shall erect or construct or cause to be
erected or constructed any fixture for any guy line, wires or other electrical
conductors of any description whatever upon the streets, avenues and alleys
within the City, without first having obtained a permit therefor under a valid
and existing ordinance from the Director of Public Service, under the penalty
provided in Section
3103.99(c) of the Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 299-74. Passed 4-1-74, eff. 4-8-74)
§ 503.06 Use of Pole Line by City
   All applications for permits to erect poles in the streets and alleys of the
City shall provide that the City may use the poles to be so erected and attach
thereto the necessary crossarms, wires or other electrical appliances, as may
be deemed necessary for the police and fire signal service of the City. No
permit shall be issued by the Director of Public Service for the erection of
such poles for which the application and permit do not provide for the
privileges required by the City, as herein contained.
(Ord. No. 117-A-49. Passed 2-27-50)
§ 503.061 Attachments to Poles
   (a)   Every person or entity, including the City of Cleveland, who is the
owner or occupant of a pole located within a street or right-of-way in the City
of Cleveland shall permit, upon reasonable terms and conditions and the payment
of reasonable charge to the owner or occupant, the attachment of any wire,
cable, facility or apparatus to its poles by any other person or entity
including the City of Cleveland; provided that:
      (1)   The attaching person or entity is authorized by the City of
Cleveland or otherwise permitted by law to make the attachment; and
      (2)   The attachment will not unreasonably interfere with the services
and operations of the owner or occupant of the pole; and
      (3)   The attachment will not create a safety hazard as defined by the
National Electric Safety Code; and
      (4)   The pole is used only for service within the City of Cleveland, or
the pole supports a conductor having a voltage of less than twenty-two thousand
(22,000) volts.
   (b)   Such terms and conditions, and such charges, as are established in
tariffs approved by the Public Utilities Commission of Ohio or in the case of
the City of Cleveland, those terms, conditions, and charges established
pursuant to Section
523.23 of the Codified Ordinances, as they may be amended from time to time,
shall be deemed to be “reasonable terms and conditions” and “reasonable
charges” for the purposes of subsection (a) above.
(Ord. No. 1989-90. Passed 8-23-90, eff. 8-31-90)
§ 503.07 Construction of Subways, Conduits, Ducts or Pipes; Permit
   (a)   No person, firm or corporation shall lay or construct or cause to be
laid or constructed any subways, conduits, ducts or pipes in the streets,
avenues or alleys within the City without first having obtained a permit
therefor under a valid and existing ordinance from the Director of Public
Service, under the penalty provided in Section
503.99(c).
   (b)   No person, firm or corporation shall lay or construct or cause to be
laid or constructed any subways, conduits, ducts or pipes in any public grounds
or in any real property of the City, without first having obtained a permit
therefor under a valid and existing ordinance from the director of the
department having the supervision and control of such public grounds or real
property, under the penalty provided in Section
503.99(c).
   (c)   Any company or individual so placing wires underground in any street,
alley or public ground of the City shall, upon written notice from the proper
authorities of the City that a sewer or water main is to be repaired or
constructed in such manner as will necessitate the moving or altering of any
conduit of the company or individual, move or alter the same at his, her or its
expense, so as to permit the constructing or repairing of the sewer or water
main where ordered. Should any such person or company fail to comply with such
notice the conduit may be altered or moved by the City and the cost and expense
thereof recovered from the person or company.
(Ord. No. 117-A-49. Passed 2-27-50)
§ 503.08 City Gas System; Maps; Permit
   All companies and persons engaged in the manufacture and sale of gas in the
City to the City or the inhabitants thereof, and occupying the public streets,
lanes, alleys, avenues and grounds of the City, with mains, pipes and apparatus
for the distribution of such gas shall, when requested by the Director of
Public Service, either file in the office of the Director accurate maps and
plans for all such public streets, lanes, alleys, avenues and grounds, showing
the location, depth and size of such mains and pipes, together with all street
boxes, safety valves, gauges and apparatus or every kind in the streets and
public grounds, or shall allow such access to their own records, and shall
furnish such data as shall enable the Director to make or cause to be made such
maps and plans as are hereinbefore described. No permits shall be issued to any
such company or person to lay any pipes, mains or apparatus in any of the
public streets or grounds of the City until such company or person has first
filed with the Director an accurate plan of the streets and public grounds in
which such mains, pipes and apparatus are to be laid, showing the location,
size and depth of the same.
§ 503.09 Removal of Gas Meters
   No gas meter used for measuring gas furnished by any gas company to any
individual, company or corporation within the City, shall be disconnected or
removed by any person not an officer or employee of the gas company owning the
same, without permission in writing from the Director of Public Service.
§ 503.10 Gas Pipes in Streets; Permit
   No person shall hereafter place any main gas pipe along any street, lane,
alley or public ground, nearer than fifteen (15) feet to any shade or
ornamental trees thereon, unless such person shall first obtain from the
Director of Public Service a written permit to do so.
§ 503.11 Notice to Remove Pipes
   The Director of Public Service may give written notice to any gas company,
which has or may hereafter lay down any gas pipe, to remove the same forthwith,
so as to comply with the provisions of Section
503.10.
§ 503.12 Manholes; Barricades; Air Supply
   (a)   Barriers, barricades or standard guard railings shall be provided for
guarding open manholes, hand holes, gratings or excavations. Visual warning
devices shall at all times be provided for such barriers, barricades and guard
railings. Such warning devices shall be visible to vehicular traffic at least
two hundred (200) feet from such openings. Testing equipment shall be provided
and a standard procedure established by the employer, contractor or person in
charge to determine the presence of air contaminants or a deficiency of oxygen.
   Air contaminants or oxygen deficiency shall be controlled, minimized or
purged by one (1) or more of the following methods:
      (1)   Removal at source by local exhaust ventilation;
      (2)   Removal by general ventilation;
      (3)   Removal by dilution ventilation; or
      (4)   Respiratory equipment furnished by the employer which provides
protection equal to or greater than that approved by the U.S. Bureau of Mines,
where there are air contaminants or where there is a deficiency of oxygen in
the air. The air or oxygen supplied to a supplied air helmet shall be of the
positive pressure type. The air supplied air helmets or other supplied air
breathing apparatus shall be filtered.
   Ladders shall be provided for entering or leaving a manhole, vault or other
similar underground area.
   The fixtures to which lamp sockets and plugs are attached will in all cases,
be explosion-proof, vapor-proof, moisture-proof and dust-proof. All extension
cords shall be made of heavy duty cord. All lamps shall be guarded.
   (b)   Where safety equipment is provided as outlined in subsection (a)
hereof, it shall be the responsibility of the employee or employees working at
or in the manhole to use that equipment.
   (c)   No person shall move or remove any barrier, barricades or standard
guard railings, as provided in subsection (a) hereof, except where necessary to
complete any work in and around such opening and only by persons authorized to
work at the site of the opening.
   (d)   The employer, contractor or person in charge of work in and around any
open manholes, hand holes, gratings or excavations, and their agents on the
job, shall at the conclusion of work for that day, where feasible, replace any
covering previously removed during the course of the work, or if not
practicable, then by securely placing a temporary barrier across any such
opening, and provide the visual warning devices required by subsection (a)
hereof.
   (e)   However, the aforementioned provisions requiring the testing for air
contaminants or oxygen shall not apply to any open hand holes, gratings or
excavations that are less than five (5) feet in depth.
(Ord. No. 769-76. Passed 4-12-76, eff. 4-12-76)
§ 503.99 Penalty
   (a)   Whoever violates divisions (a) or (g) of Section
503.01 shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor. Every violation is a separate
offense and every day of violation constitutes a separate offense.
   (b)   Whoever violates Section
503.014 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree and shall be fined
not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00).
   (c)   Whoever violates Section
503.03 shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). The
existence of a single post, pole or other structure in the streets or sidewalks
contrary to the provisions of Section
503.03 constitutes a separate offense. Each day that such post, pole or other
structure is allowed to exist in the streets or sidewalks contrary to the
provisions of Section
503.03 constitutes a separate offense.
   (d)   Whoever violates any provision of Sections
503.05 or
503.07 shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) and imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days
or both. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which an offense occurs or continues.
   (e)   Whoever violates Section
503.09 shall be fined not more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
   (f)   Every day a gas company neglects or fails to comply with the notice
provided for in Section
503.11 it shall be fined ten dollars ($10.00).
   (g)   Whoever violates Section
503.12 shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the first offense. A subsequent offense by
the same party in the same area of responsibility shall be fined not less than
two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
Any further offense by the same party in the same area of responsibility shall
result in imprisonment for not less than three (3) nor more than ten (10) days.
(Ord. No. 1141-2023. Passed 2-3-25, eff. 2-4-25)
CHAPTER 505 – SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION
505.01   Sidewalk and Treelawn Defined; Width Requirements
505.02   Grading
505.03   Changing Sidewalks; Curb Line and Grading; Notice of Noncompliance
505.04   Construction Permit; Establishing Grade; Fees – Repealed
505.05   Repair and Maintenance Restrictions in Central Business District –
Repealed
505.06   Street Opening Permit Required; Nonconforming Work; Damage to Sidewalk
505.07   Board of Sidewalk Appeals – Repealed
505.08   Protests Filed Prior to Work – Repealed
505.09   Protests Filed After Work is Completed – Repealed
505.10   Protests to be Filed in Writing – Repealed
505.11   Duty to Repair Sidewalks, Curbs and Gutters; Duty to Maintain Certain
Sidewalks; Liability
505.12   Failure to Maintain Certain Sidewalks
505.13   Failure to Construct or Repair Sidewalks, Curbs and Gutters; City May
Perform Work
505.14   Non-Complaint Sidewalk Repair Program
505.15   Easements Acceptance and Release for Tree Preservation
505.16   Easement Acquisition
505.99   Penalty
   Note: The legislative history of this chapter, except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 63410-A, passed
September 22, 1924.
Charter reference:
   Assessment bonds for sidewalk construction or repair, Charter §
166
   Regulations for sidewalks, curbings and gutters, Charter §
164, §
165
Cross-reference:
   Precautions for sidewalk openings, CO
507.10
   Sidewalk obstructions: permitted and prohibited, CO
Ch. 507
   Water stop cock or valve boxes in sidewalk flagging or pavement, CO
531.21
Statutory reference:
   Changing established grade, RC 727.07
   Construction or repair at owner’s expense, RC 729.01 et seq.
   Notice to construct or repair, RC 729.03 et seq.
§ 505.01 Sidewalk and Treelawn Defined; Width Requirements
   All sidewalks shall be under the direction of the Director of Capital
Projects. The space between the property line and the face of the curb line on
each side of the paved roadway or curbed streets shall constitute the sidewalk.
Upon unpaved streets, the sidewalk shall be the portion adjoining the property
line on each side to the edge of the street, and shall have a width equal to
one-fifth of the distance between property lines, but in no case shall the
sidewalk be less than four (4) feet in width except in streets or alleys of
sixteen (16) feet or less in width, where the sidewalk shall be the minimum
required by the Professional Right-of-Way Accessibility Guidelines. The space
from either the face of the curb or the edge of pavement to the front edge of
the sidewalk shall constitute the treelawn. The treelawn shall consist of
planted grass per City of Cleveland Construction Drawings or specifications,
except as otherwise approved by the Manager of Engineering and Construction.
(Ord. No. 1141-2023. Passed 2-3-25, eff. 2-4-25)
§ 505.02 Grading
   (a)   All sidewalks hereafter improved by placing walks with a permanent
surfacing on any public highway or street within the City shall be so improved
by constructing walks with stone flagging, concrete, or any other material
approved by the Manager of Engineering and Construction or the Manager’s
designee and in accordance with the City of Cleveland Construction Drawings or
specifications prescribed by the Director of Capital Projects, and shall be of
the width set forth in Section
505.01, or as directed by the Director. The sidewalk shall be so laid that the
top surface shall be properly roughened, so that the same shall be prevented
from becoming slippery when covered with moisture. The roughened finish shall
be of such character as in the judgment of the Director will effectually
prevent at any time the slippery condition of such walks.
   (b)   Any grading necessary between the walks as laid, and the curb line, or
between the walks and the edge of the sidewalk space as herein established,
shall be done at the time of laying the walks, so as to leave the sidewalk
space at the grade hereinafter described.
   (c)   The sidewalks as improved shall coincide with the line described as
follows: beginning at the curb line with the established curb grade as
determined by the Manager or the Manager’s designee; thence extending to the
street line at right angles to the curb line, with a rise in compliance with
the current Professional Right-of-Way Accessibility Guidelines to the foot;
provided, that at street intersections, where the grade of the intersecting
street prevents compliance with the above provisions, the walk shall be laid
under the direction and to the acceptance of the Manager or the Manager’s
designee.
   (d)   The owner of land in front of which a permit to improve the sidewalk
has been given may request the Manager to establish the grade or line on which
the improvement is to be made.
(Ord. No. 1141-2023. Passed 2-3-25, eff. 2-4-25)
§ 505.03 Changing Sidewalks; Curb Line and Grading; Notice of Noncompliance
   (a)   Any sidewalk heretofore laid shall not be raised or lowered without
the approval of the Manager of Engineering and Construction or the Manager’s
designee. All sidewalks hereafter laid shall be in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and under the supervision of the Manager.
   (b)   No curb line or grade for curb shall be changed, except by the
direction and the written consent of the Director of Capital Projects, Manager,
or a designee.
   (c)   Any sidewalk laid on any public street or highway within the City in a
manner inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter shall, upon the
recommendation of the Director, be ordered relaid to the proper grade within
the time specified in the notice.
   (d)   No curb cut shall exist which does not lead to an area for parking on
the abutting property. When the Director, Manager or a designee determines that
a property owner is in violation of this division, he or she shall serve or
cause to be served upon such owner a notice stating the violation and the time
period to remedy the violation.
   (e)   The Director, Manager, or designee shall require a property owner
engaging in a construction or rehabilitation project regulated by Chapter
3115 of these Codified Ordinances to bring all sidewalks into compliance with
the current City standards and specifications, including the establishment or
re-establishment of the curbs, aprons and drive-walks.
   (f)   If a property owner fails to remedy a violation within the time period
specified in an order issued under (c) or a notice issued under division (d) or
(e) of this section, the Director or Manager may proceed to construct, or cause
to be constructed, the necessary curb line or sidewalk improvements, as
appropriate, at the owner’s expense, plus assess a penalty of fifteen percent
(15%) for failing to comply.
(Ord. No. 1141-2023. Passed 2-3-25, eff. 2-4-25)
§ 505.04 Construction Permit; Establishing Grade; Fees – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1141-2023. Passed 2-3-25, eff. 2-4-25)
§ 505.05 Repair and Maintenance Restrictions in Central Business District –
Repealed
(Ord. No. 1141-2023. Passed 2-3-25, eff. 2-4-25)
§ 505.06 Street Opening Permit Required; Nonconforming Work; Damage to Sidewalk
   (a)   Each person, firm or corporation who engages in the work of laying,
relaying or repairing sidewalks upon the City streets shall, before engaging in
any such work or employment, obtain a Street Opening Permit under Section
503.01 of these Codified Ordinances and comply with the requirements contained
therein.
   (b)   When the Director of Capital Projects, Manager of Engineering and
Construction, or a designee determines that a person, firm, or corporation has
performed work on the sidewalk without obtaining a permit required under this
chapter, or has performed such work with or without the required permit(s) that
is not in conformity with the City of Cleveland Standard Construction Drawings
or requirements, he or she shall provide upon such party written notice stating
the violation and the time period to remedy the violation.
   (c)   Any person, firm, or corporation who damages a sidewalk in carrying
out a project, shall obtain a Street Opening Permit under Section
503.01 of these Codified Ordinances and shall restore the sidewalk to its
original condition. When the Director, Manager, or a designee determines that a
person, firm, or corporation has failed to restore a sidewalk, he or she shall
provide upon such party written notice stating the violation and the time
period to remedy the violation.
   (d)   If a person, firm, or corporation fails to remedy a violation within
the time period specified in the notice issued under division (b) or (c) of
this section, the Director or Manager may proceed, or cause to proceed, with
the repair, removal or restoration of the sidewalk at the party’s expense, plus
assess a penalty of fifteen percent (15%) for failing to comply with the
notice.
(Ord. No. 1141-2023. Passed 2-3-25, eff. 2-4-25)
§ 505.07 Board of Sidewalk Appeals – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1141-2023. Passed 2-3-25, eff. 2-4-25)
§ 505.08 Protests Filed Prior to Work – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1141-2023. Passed 2-3-25, eff. 2-4-25)
§ 505.09 Protests Filed After Work is Completed – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1141-2023. Passed 2-3-25, eff. 2-4-25)
§ 505.10 Protests to be Filed in Writing – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1141-2023. Passed 2-3-25, eff. 2-4-25)
§ 505.11 Duty to Repair Sidewalks, Curbs and Gutters; Duty to Maintain Certain
Sidewalks; Liability
   (a)   No owner or occupant of abutting lots or lands shall fail to keep the
sidewalks, curbs, and gutters in repair and free from snow, ice or any
nuisance.
   (b)   In addition to the duty contained in division (a) of this section, no
owner or occupant of abutting lots or lands which are used, in whole or in
part, for the operation of a business, or which previously have been used for
the operation of a business and are now vacant, shall maintain sidewalks with
the characteristics contained in division (a) of Section
505.12. As used in this division, “business” means any enterprise, activity,
profession or undertaking of any nature conducted for profit or ordinarily
conducted for profit, whether by an individual, partnership, association,
corporation or any other entity, but not including the rental of residential
premises.
   (c)   An owner or occupant of abutting lots or lands who fails to comply
with division (a) or, if applicable, division (b) of this section:
      (1)   Shall be liable in money damages to any person who, as a result of
such owner’s or occupant’s failure to comply, sustains bodily injury or
property damage while in the lawful use of the sidewalk (an “injured party”);
and
      (2)   Shall be liable to and reimburse the City for all money paid by the
City on any claim made or judgment obtained against the City by an injured
party.
   (d)   When the Director of Capital Projects determines that an owner fails
to keep the sidewalks, curbs, and gutters in repair because those sidewalks
have one (1) or more of the characteristics set forth in division (a) of
Section
505.12, the Director shall serve or cause to be served upon such owner a notice
which states in detail the nature of the violation. The notice shall also
contain an estimate of the cost to repair the sidewalk, curb, or gutter and
shall notify the owner that he or she may submit payment of the estimated
amount, which amount shall be the full amount unless there exists a properly
authorized program subsidizing these repair costs, to the City by a certain
date and enter into an agreement with the City to effectuate the repairs. Funds
submitted as an estimated amount shall be deposited in Fund No. 10 SF 058 and
said funds are appropriated for streets, sidewalks, curb or gutter repair
purposes. Upon receipt of the estimated amount and the agreement, the City will
construct or repair the sidewalk. If the actual cost of construction or repair
is not equal to the estimated amount, the City will bill the owner for any
additional cost or reimburse the owner from Fund No. 10 SF 058 for any amount
paid to the City that exceeds the actual cost. The agreement required above
shall contain such terms and provisions as determined by the Director of Law to
protect and benefit the City. This notice is not a substitute for the notice
described in division (b) of Section
505.12, but may be issued with that notice.
(Ord. No. 1141-2023. Passed 2-3-25, eff. 2-4-25)
§ 505.12 Failure to Maintain Certain Sidewalks
   (a)   Sidewalks having the following characteristics are determined to be in
need of maintenance:
      (1)   Any block having multiple cracks or any single crack larger than
one-fourth (1/4) inch wide;
      (2)   Adjoining sections of block, or portion thereof, whose edges differ
vertically by one-half (1/2) inch or more;
      (3)   Any block with a transverse slope in excess of two percent (2%) or
the current Professional Right-of-Way Accessibility Guidelines (PROWAG);
      (4)   Any block with a reverse slope (a slope away from the street);
      (5)   Any block with a depression or depressions that impound water to a
depth of one- quarter (1/4) inch or more;
      (6)   Any block with disintegrated or deteriorated areas or missing
pieces or missing particles of aggregate;
      (7)   Any adjoining blocks the expansion or control joints of which are
separated by one-half (1/2) inch or more;
      (8)   Any frontage along the public right-of-way that does not have a
sidewalk or has a sidewalk that is non-compliant with this section;
      (9)   Any block which the Director of Capital Projects or his designee
determines to be hazardous or non-compliant, regardless of whether it has any
of the characteristics set forth in paragraphs (a)(1) through (a)(7) of this
division;
      (10)   Any curb that is missing, broken, deteriorated, or has a reveal of
less than 4" or per the City of Cleveland Standard Construction Drawings or
specifications or as directed by the Manager of Engineering and Construction.
   (b)   When the Director of Capital Projects, Manager, or a designee
determines that an owner is in violation of the provisions of division (b) of
Section
505.11 because the sidewalk or sidewalks abutting said owner’s property have
one (1) or more of the characteristics set forth in division (a) of this
section, he or she shall serve or cause to be served upon such owner a notice
which states in detail the nature of the violation. The notice shall further
provide that within thirty (30) days after service of the notice, the recipient
thereof shall:
      (1)   Remedy the violation;
      (2)   Appeal the determination to the Board of Right-of-Way Appeals under
Chapter
502 of these Codified Ordinances; or
      (3)   Submit payment and enter into an agreement pursuant to division (d)
of Section
505.11.
   The notice shall clearly indicate to the recipient that if the recipient
fails to take one (1) of the three (3) steps listed in this division within
thirty (30) days after service of the notice, the recipient may be found guilty
of a fourth degree misdemeanor.
   (c)   Any owner who violates the provisions of division (b) of this section
or fails to comply with or appeal an order of the Board of Right-of-Way Appeals
issued pursuant to Section
502.04 of these Codified Ordinances within the period set forth in said order
or fails to comply with the decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals issued
pursuant to Section
502.06 of these Codified Ordinances shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree. Each day during which noncompliance or a violation continues
shall constitute a separate offense. Provided that the fine set forth herein
shall not, with respect to any one (1) service of notice, exceed three (3)
times the cost of the sidewalk maintenance required in such notice, as
estimated by the Director of Capital Projects. The fine set forth herein is
mandatory and shall not be suspended by the court, in whole or in part. All
fines collected for violations of this section, or an amount equal to the fines
collected, shall be deposited to Fund No. 10 SF 058 and said funds are
appropriated for streets, sidewalks, curb or gutter repair purposes.
(Ord. No. 1141-2023. Passed 2-3-25, eff. 2-4-25)
§ 505.13 Failure to Construct or Repair Sidewalks, Curbs and Gutters; City May
Perform Work
   (a)   Every person owning any parcel of land abutting upon any sidewalk,
curb or gutter within the City shall construct or repair such sidewalk, curb or
gutter within fifteen (15) days after the service of notice to construct or
repair required by Charter Section
164.
   (b)   If the abutting property owner does not perform such necessary
construction or repair after receipt of notice, the Director of Capital
Projects may proceed to carry out construction or repair pursuant to the
provisions of Charter Section
165.
   (c)   If the Director causes any such sidewalk, curb or gutter to be so
constructed or repaired, said director shall report all expense of construction
or repair plus a penalty of fifteen percent (15%) of the expense for failure to
comply with division (a) of this section to the Director of Finance, who shall
report such expense and penalty to Council. The fifteen percent (15%) penalty
shall thereupon be assessed against the abutting property in the same manner as
all other expenses or penalties arising out of the construction or repair of
the sidewalk, curb or gutter.
(Ord. No. 1141-2023. Passed 2-3-25, eff. 2-4-25)
§ 505.14 Non-Complaint Sidewalk Repair Program
   (a)   The Director of Capital Projects may create a program for the City to
repair, install, or re-install sidewalks, curbs, or apron on residential
property, or commercial property that meet the criteria established in the
Rules and Regulations promulgated under the authority of division (e) of this
section in the right-of-way that are determined by the Office of Capital
Projects to be non-compliant with current City of Cleveland Standard
Construction Drawings, specifications or ordinances, when the City receives
voluntary payment of fifty percent (50%) of the shared costs of the work from
the owner of the property on which the sidewalk is located. Shared costs shall
include, but not be limited to, any cost the City or its contractor incurs,
such as the cost of removing and/or repairing the sidewalk and curbs, except
that shared costs shall not include costs incurred in removing a full tree,
grinding or pruning tree roots, adjusting or reconstructing castings, adjusting
valve boxes, and reseeding lawns. The City shall pay more than the allotted
fifty percent (50%) if the costs of construction unit prices exceeds the
estimated unit pricing given to the residents. The estimated value of the work
submitted to the resident shall be considered the final costs to the resident
regardless of the final construction costs.
   (b)   The Director shall run the sidewalk repair program in any year that
funds are appropriated for the program.
   (c)   The program shall be on a first-come, first-served basis, to the
extent funds are available.
   (d)   The Director shall not authorize a contractor to perform the repairs,
re-installation, or re-establishment on a property until the owner, or another
private person or entity on the owner’s behalf, has paid his or her fifty
percent (50%) share based on the Director’s written estimate of the work.
   (e)   The Director is authorized to promulgate rules for the program. The
rules shall take effect upon publication in the City Record.
(Ord. No. 1141-2023. Passed 2-3-25, eff. 2-4-25)
§ 505.15 Easements Acceptance and Release for Tree Preservation
   (a)   The Director of Capital Projects shall have the authority to accept on
behalf of the City, a grant of an easement and any required appurtenances from
any person, firm, corporation or political subdivision for the purpose of
installing and maintaining sidewalks of conventional or non-conventional
sidewalk installation, while preserving a tree in the right-of-way that would
otherwise be removed. Such grant shall be an easement across the property
owner’s frontage. The Director is further authorized to release on behalf of
the City an easement acquired pursuant to this section no longer needed for the
purposes for which it was acquired, and no sooner than five (5) years following
the completion date of the sidewalk installation. All such easements and
releases of easements must be approved by the Director of Law and filed with
the County Recorder at the City’s expense. The Director is further authorized
to execute on behalf of the City all documents necessary to accept such
easement and appurtenance rights.
   (b)   If for any reason, the tree dies or is removed in the future, the
property owner may construct the sidewalk within the right-of-way and remove
the sidewalk from the easement at the property owner's cost. Such property
owner may request the release of the sidewalk easement at the City's expense.
(Ord. No. 1141-2023. Passed 2-3-25, eff. 2-4-25)
§ 505.16 Easement Acquisition
   The Director of Capital Projects is authorized to purchase easements,
permits, licenses and other interests in real property necessary for the
installation of sidewalks in an effort to preserve trees in the public right-
of-way, provided that the cost of each such easement, permit, license or other
interest in real property does not exceed two hundred and fifty dollars
($250.00).
(Ord. No. 1141-2023. Passed 2-3-25, eff. 2-4-25)
§ 505.99 Penalty
   (a)   Whoever fails to comply with division (a) of Section
505.06 shall be fined not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each violation
and the further sum of five dollars ($5.00) for each day the violation is
continued.
   (b)   Whoever fails to comply with division (c) of Section
505.06 shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation and the further sum of fifty
dollars ($50.00) for each day the violation is continued.
(Ord. No. 1141-2023. Passed 2-3-25, eff. 2-4-25)
CHAPTER 507 – SIDEWALK OBSTRUCTIONS AND MAINTENANCE
507.01   Street Clocks; Permit Required
507.02   Conditions of Street Clock Permit
507.03   Street Clock Nuisances; Removal
507.04   Permit to Drive on Sidewalks
507.05   Deposit for Permit to Drive on Sidewalks
507.06   Sidewalk Obstruction Permits
507.07   Provisions for Sidewalk Use to Display and Transport Goods in Certain
Areas
507.08   Exceptions to Provisions
507.09   Earth and Gravel on Sidewalks; Duties of Abutting Property Owner
507.10   Precautions for Openings in Sidewalks
507.11   Requirements for Gates over Sidewalks
507.12   Provisions for Hoisting over Sidewalks; Exceptions
507.13   Clearing Sidewalks of Snow and Debris
507.14   Slippery Substances on Sidewalk
507.15   Outdoor Retail Sales in Proximity to Public Sidewalks
507.99   Penalty
   Note: The legislative history of this chapter, except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 63410-A, passed
September 22, 1924.
Cross-reference:
   Sidewalk construction: appeals, CO
Ch. 505
   Unloading waste on sidewalks, CO
551.26
§ 507.01 Street Clocks; Permit Required
   No person shall erect any street clock upon the sidewalks of the City except
pursuant to a permit issued by the Director of Public Service.
(Ord. No. 549-54. Passed 11-8-54, eff. 11-12-54)
§ 507.02 Conditions of Street Clock Permit
   Upon the payment of a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) a street clock
permit may be issued by the Director of Public Service, to the owner,
proprietor or manager of any building to erect and maintain upon the sidewalk
in front of such building, if the sidewalk is not less than fifteen (15) feet
in width, a street clock having a dial not less than thirty (30) nor more than
forty (40) inches in diameter supported upon a post of ornamental design, the
total height of which street clock and post shall be not less than fifteen (15)
nor more than twenty (20) feet, and located not more than two (2) feet from the
outer edge of the curb and not less than twenty (20) feet from the curb of any
intersecting street. No such permit shall be issued unless and until the
Planning Commission approves the design and location of the street clock, and
the applicant has filed a bond or policy of insurance satisfactory to the
Director of Law, indemnifying and saving harmless the City from any and all
liability for injury to persons or property arising from the erection and
maintenance of such street clock. Any such permit shall be revocable at the
will of Council and shall not be construed to grant any property right in
derogation of the public rights in the streets of the City.
(Ord. No. 549-54. Passed 11-8-54, eff. 11-12-54)
§ 507.03 Street Clock Nuisances; Removal
   Any street clock erected or maintained in violation of the provisions of
Sections
507.01 or
507.02 shall be deemed a nuisance and shall be abated by the prompt removal
thereof by the Director of Public Service at the cost and expense of the owner
of the abutting property.
(Ord. No. 549-54. Passed 11-8-54, eff. 11-12-54)
§ 507.04 Permit to Drive on Sidewalks
   No person shall drive or cause to be driven or hauled any vehicle of any
kind over any sidewalk other than a driveway without first obtaining a written
permit from the Director of Public Service.
§ 507.05 Deposit for Permit to Drive on Sidewalks
   The permit required under Section
507.04 shall be issued by the Director of Public Service only upon the deposit
of a sum not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00), as he or she shall
determine sufficient to pay any and all claims for damages to the sidewalk,
including the sidewalk in front of the adjoining building or premises. The
deposit or the balance thereof remaining after deducting the cost of any damage
to the sidewalk and that of the adjoining premises shall be returned to the
permit holder.
(Ord. No. 856-49. Passed 6-13-49)
§ 507.06 Sidewalk Obstruction Permits
   (a)   No person shall place or cause to be placed any object or property so
as to obstruct the public’s use of any sidewalk without first obtaining a
sidewalk obstruction permit from the Director of Capital Projects.
   (b)   An application for a sidewalk obstruction permit shall contain the
following information:
      (1)   The name of the applicant;
      (2)   The location of the proposed obstruction;
      (3)   The purpose of the obstruction;
      (4)   The proposed commencement date, time and estimated duration of the
obstruction; and
      (5)   A pedestrian maintenance traffic plan.
   (c)   Upon the approval of the application, the applicant shall pay a non-
refundable fee established from time to time by the Board of Control for the
permit and any inspection costs associated therewith and provide evidence of a
public liability insurance policy issued by an insurer authorized to transact
business in Ohio, in an amount not less than one million dollars
($1,000,000.00), listing the City of Cleveland as an additional insured.
   (d)   The Director may deny or revoke a sidewalk obstruction permit whenever
the Director finds:
      (1)   The applicant has previously violated the provisions of a sidewalk
obstruction permit or has submitted materially false or incomplete information
on any sidewalk obstruction permit application; or
      (2)   The obstruction would unreasonably interfere with another
obstruction for which a permit has been issued; or
      (3)   The time, place or size of the obstruction would unreasonably
interfere with public convenience and safe use of the sidewalk;
      (4)   The obstruction would unreasonably interfere with the movement or
service capability of emergency or service vehicles; or
      (5)   The obstruction would unreasonably interfere with a construction
project.
   (e)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section shall be fined one
hundred dollars ($100.00) for each day the offense occurs or continues.
   (f)   This section shall not apply to any person that has been issued a
permit under the following Chapters of the Codified Ordinances:
      (1)   Chapter
508 relating to sidewalk occupancy for vendors in the Central Business
District;
      (2)   Chapter
513 relating to outdoor restaurants;
      (3)   Chapter
670B relating to pay telephones;
      (4)   Chapter
675 relating to peddlers and produce dealers;
      (5)   Chapter
680 relating to newspaper boxes; or
      (6)   Chapter
3109 relating to encroachment permits.
(Ord. No. 1141-2023. Passed 2-3-25, eff. 2-4-25)
§ 507.07 Provisions for Sidewalk Use to Display and Transport Goods in Certain
Areas
   In the following district: beginning at the shore line of Lake Erie on the
line of E. 20th St., extending southerly along the line of and including E.
20th St., to St. Clair Ave., N.E., easterly along St. Clair Ave., N.E., to E.
21st St., southerly along E. 21st St. to Euclid Ave., easterly along Euclid
Ave. to E. 22nd St., southerly along E. 22nd St. to Broadway, S.E., northerly
on Broadway, S.E., to Central Ave., S.E., westerly on Central Ave., S.E., to
Canal Rd., northerly and westerly on Canal Rd. to Columbus Rd., northerly on
Columbus Rd. to Superior Ave., N.W., thence northerly on W. 10th St. to the
southerly shore of Lake Erie; any person, partnership, firm or corporation
doing business may place and maintain a permanent showcase for the display of
goods, wares and merchandise sold by them. Nothing in this section shall be
construed to prevent the moving of goods, wares or merchandise, across any
sidewalk in the way of trade, or for the use of families, and provided further,
that none of the terms of this section shall be construed to permit
merchandise, goods, shipping cases or other material on any sidewalk at night,
on Sundays or legal holidays, or any time when the person, firm or corporation,
owning or controlling the property fronting on the sidewalk, has closed its
place of business or ceased the actual work of shipping or receiving
merchandise, goods, shipping cases or other material.
§ 507.08 Exceptions to Provisions
   The provisions of Sections
507.04 to
507.07 shall in no way apply to that part of the City known as market
districts, nor to the placing and maintaining of barber poles on the sidewalks
of the City which shall be regulated by the Building Code, nor shall the
provisions of such sections be construed as repealing or modifying any
provisions of the Building Code regulating the use of sidewalks in connection
with building operations.
§ 507.09 Earth and Gravel on Sidewalks; Duties of Abutting Property Owner
   Where the elevation or topography of any lot or parcel of land abutting upon
a sidewalk is such in relation to the sidewalk that earth, stone, sand or
gravel slide, fall or are carried upon such sidewalk by force of gravity or by
action of water, the owner or person in charge or control of such lot or parcel
of land shall within twenty-four (24) hours after the depositing of such matter
upon the sidewalk, remove or cause the same to be removed. If by reason of the
elevation or topography of such lot or parcel of land a recurrence of such
obstruction or nuisance upon the sidewalk is probable or reasonably to be
anticipated, the owner or person in charge or control of such lot or parcel of
land shall construct upon his or her land such suitable retaining wall or other
device as will effectually prevent such recurrence.
§ 507.10 Precautions for Openings in Sidewalks
   No owner, agent, employee or other person shall open or remove, or permit
anyone to open or remove the cover of any coal hole or grating in any sidewalk,
or raise or permit anyone to raise any elevator or lift, or open or permit
anyone to open the doors or other device covering any aperture in any sidewalk
within the City, without first placing upon the sidewalk, all around the coal
hole, elevator, lift, doors or other devices used to cover such aperture, a
railing or other suitable structure or obstruction not less than three (3) feet
high, and sufficient to protect and to warn foot passengers that the aperture
is to be opened. During the whole time the aperture remains open it shall be
protected by the railing, structure or obstruction, as stated herein and the
railing, structure or obstruction shall be immediately removed when the
aperture is closed.
§ 507.11 Requirements for Gates over Sidewalks
   No owner of real property within the corporate limits of the City nor any
agent having control of the same shall permit any gate to be or to remain so
constructed as to enable the same to be swung over or across any portion of the
sidewalk in front of such premises unless such gate is hung on self-closing
hinges or has attached thereto weights, springs or other devices, so that such
gate shall swing back from the sidewalk and not obstruct the same.
§ 507.12 Provisions for Hoisting over Sidewalks; Exceptions
   No person shall raise up from any street, sidewalk, wharf or place of public
resort within the City, any cask, bale of goods or other articles of
merchandise into the second or higher story of any house, store or other
building upon or adjoining the same, and on the outside of the building, and no
person shall deliver from the second or any higher story of any house, store or
other building, on the outside of the same, which adjoins upon any street,
sidewalk, wharf or place of public resort within the City, any cask, bale of
goods or other article of merchandise, except at such times and places, and
under such restrictions and limitations as the Director of Public Service shall
authorize and direct. However, this shall not be construed to extend to raising
any materials or other articles which may be necessary in erecting, repairing
or taking down any building, or for removing any merchandise or other article,
in case of danger by fire or other inevitable casualty.
§ 507.13 Clearing Sidewalks of Snow and Debris
   Every owner, occupant or person having charge of any tenement, building, lot
or land fronting on any avenue, street, alley or other public highway of the
City, shall clear the whole sidewalk in front of the tenement, building, lot or
land, of snow and ice, before 9:00 a.m. of each day; provided, that if the
sidewalk in front of the tenement, building, lot or land is not flagged or
paved, a pathway thereon shall be cleared of ice and snow to the width of at
least five (5) feet. If from any cause it is impossible to remove all the snow
and ice which may adhere to such sidewalk, then every such owner, occupant or
person having charge shall cover the snow or ice as shall so remain with such
coating of ashes, sand or other substance as may be necessary to render travel
safe and convenient. Every owner, occupant or person having charge of any
tenement, building, lot or land fronting upon any avenue, street, alley or
other public highway of the City, shall keep the entire width of the sidewalk,
from curb to lot line, free and clear of all earth, sand, brick, stone,
rubbish, dead trees and dead branches of trees, or other material which from
any cause whatever has accumulated or may accumulate upon the sidewalk above
the established grade of the same, and shall also cut and remove from the
sidewalk between the lot and curb line, all weeds, grass and vegetable growths
that are more than four (4) inches in height. If the owner of any building, lot
or land fails to comply with the provisions of this section, then the Director
of Public Service may remove the snow, ice, earth, sand, brick, stone, rubbish,
dead trees or dead branches of trees, or other material, weeds, grass and
vegetable growths, from the sidewalk in front of the premises of such owner,
and may charge the expense thereof to such owner. If upon being notified, he or
she fails to pay the City the amount of such expense, then the amount may be
certified by the proper City officer to the County Auditor, and the same shall
act as a lien upon the property of such owner, and shall be collected as
provided for in the case of special assessments.
§ 507.14 Slippery Substances on Sidewalk
   No person shall cast, throw, place or deposit on any sidewalk or crosswalk
on any street, avenue or public place within the limits of the City any part or
portion of any fruit or vegetable or other substance which when stepped upon by
any person is liable to cause such person to slip or fall.
§ 507.15 Outdoor Retail Sales in Proximity to Public Sidewalks
   (a)   Purpose. The regulations of this section are established to prevent
obstructions on public sidewalks in areas characterized by high volumes of
pedestrian traffic and the congregation of pedestrians on sidewalks, which
obstructions would be caused by the congregation of customers purchasing
products sold from a building’s windows, doors or other openings.
   (b)   Permit Requirement. Within the Flats Oxbow Business Revitalization
District, as that district is shown on the building zone maps of the City of
Cleveland, no business activity shall be conducted in which retail sales are
made through a building’s windows, doors or other openings, directly to
customers in an outdoor location, if such building opening is located less than
ten (10) feet from a public sidewalk, except pursuant to a permit issued by the
Director of Capital Projects.
   (c)   Permit Issuance Criteria. Such permit shall be issued if the subject
sidewalk is greater than ten (10) feet in width, and if the building opening is
set back a minimum of twenty (20) feet from the outer edge of the curb.
Furthermore, the Director of Capital Projects shall evaluate pedestrian and
vehicular traffic patterns to determine if the use would block, obstruct or
restrict the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles in the lawful use of the
sidewalks or streets and may consider the proximity and location of existing
street furniture, including but not limited to sign posts, lamp posts, parking
meters, bus shelters, benches, phone booths and newspaper vending devices; and
the presence of bus stops, loading zones and taxi stands.
   (d)   Permit Issuance. No business activity regulated under division (b) of
this section shall operate or be established or conducted without a valid
permit issued by the Director of Capital Projects to the owner of the business
or the building from which the activity is conducted. Such permit shall be
revocable by the Director if there is a change in the circumstances upon which
issuance of the permit was based, including a change in pedestrian and
vehicular traffic patterns, street furniture and bus stops, loading zones or
taxi stands that causes free passage to be blocked, obstructed or restricted.
   (e)   Permit Application. An application for a permit shall be submitted to
the Director of Capital Projects on forms provided by the Director. For any
application submitted pursuant to the regulations of this section, the Director
shall either approve or disapprove the application within ninety (90) days of
receipt of a complete application. Each application shall be accompanied by a
site plan, drawn to scale and displaying dimensions, which shows the building
wall, any openings and sales area in relation to the sidewalk, curb and street.
   (f)   Appeals. Any applicant who has been denied a permit pursuant to the
regulations of this section may appeal the denial to the Board of Right-of-Way
Appeals. The Board may approve such application if it determines that no
significant obstruction to pedestrian travel will result from the subject
activity. In making this determination, the Board shall consider, among other
factors, the scale of the retail sales activity, the level of pedestrian
traffic on the sidewalk, and the configuration of the sales area in relation to
the sidewalk and existing street furniture, bus stops, loading zones and taxi
stands.
   (g)   Permit Fee. At the time of application submission, the applicant shall
pay a fee in accordance with a fee schedule fixed from time to time by the
Board of Control, which shall be refunded if the application is not approved.
(Ord. No. 1141-2023. Passed 2-3-25, eff. 2-4-25)
§ 507.99 Penalty
   (a)   Whoever violates Sections
507.01 or
507.02 shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00).
   (b)   Whoever violates Sections
507.04 shall be fined not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than twenty
dollars ($20.00).
   (c)   Whoever violates Sections
507.06,
507.07 or
507.08 shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than twenty-
five dollars ($25.00) for each offense.
   (d)   Whoever violates Section
507.09 shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00).
   (e)   Any owner, agent, employee or other person violating Section
507.10 shall be fined not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than fifty
dollars ($50.00) for each offense.
   (f)   Whoever violates Section
507.11 and
507.12 or who fails or neglects to comply with either of those sections shall
be fined not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense or violation,
and five dollars ($5.00) for each day the violation is continued.
   (g)   Subject to division (h) of this section, whoever violates Section
507.13 or
507.14 or who fails or neglects to comply with any of the provisions thereof
shall be fined not more than five dollars ($5.00) for each offense, and one
dollar ($1.00) for each day the offense is continued.
   (h)   Any owner of lots or lands which are used in whole or in part for the
operation of a business, as defined in Section
505.11, and who violates Section
507.13 or fails or neglects to comply with any of the provisions thereof shall
be fined twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each day the offense occurs or
continues.
   (i)   Whoever violates Section
507.15 is guilty of a minor misdemeanor, and shall be fined one hundred dollars
($100.00). The fine set forth herein is mandatory and shall not be suspended by
the court in whole or in part. Each day upon which a violation occurs or
continues shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such
hereunder. If the offender persists in violating Section
507.15, after reasonable warning or request to desist, the offender is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (j)   In addition to any other method of enforcement provided for in this
chapter, the provisions of division (i) of this section may be enforced by the
issuance of a citation in compliance with Rule 4.1 of the Ohio Rules of
Criminal Procedure.
(Ord. No. 197-96. Passed 6-10-96, eff. 6-19-96)
CHAPTER 508 – ISSUANCE OF TEMPORARY SIDEWALK OCCUPANCY PERMITS FOR VENDING
DEVICES IN THE CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
508.01   Definitions
508.02   Temporary Sidewalk Occupancy Permits
508.03   Application for Permits
508.04   Permit Fee and Duration
508.05   Permitted Locations
508.06   Permits
508.07   Permitted Vending Devices
508.08   Requirements and Conditions of Permit
508.09   Permit Suspension and Revocation
508.10   Regulations
§ 508.01 Definitions
   When used in this chapter, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
   (a)   “Central Business District” means the area defined in Section
325.12 of the Codified Ordinances.
   (b)   “Commissary” means a licensed food facility regulated by a
governmental entity where food is stored, prepared, portioned, or packaged, or
any combination thereof, and where such food is intended for consumption at
another establishment or place.
   (c)   “Community event” means an event specifically approved granting use of
street and sidewalk areas within a specifically defined area for a period of
time not exceeding ten (10) days to a community based organization.
   (d)   “Director” means the Director of Capital Projects or his or her
designee.
   (e)   “Permit” means a temporary sidewalk occupancy permit authorized by
Section
508.02 of the Codified Ordinances.
   (f)   “Permittee” means the person who owns the vending device permitted to
occupy a stationary location on a sidewalk.
   (g)   “Sidewalk” means that portion of the street between the curb lines or
the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property line.
   (h)   “Vending device” means a container for the sale, display or transport
of merchandise by a vendor, or food items by a mobile food shop, which has
wheels and is capable of being moved by one (1) person by muscular power.
   (i)   “Unobstructed Walk” means a clear, continuous paved surface free of
tree grates, elevator grates and all vertical obstructions.
(Ord. No. 210-11. Passed 4-25-11, eff. 4-25-11)
§ 508.02 Temporary Sidewalk Occupancy Permits
   The Director of Public Service is hereby authorized to issue temporary
sidewalk occupancy permits revocable at the will of the Council authorizing the
placement of vending devices at permitted locations on sidewalks in the Central
Business District, subject to the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 1611-83. Passed 6-27-83, eff. 6-27-83)
§ 508.03 Application for Permits
   Application for a permit shall be made to the Director in a form deemed
appropriate by him or her. Such application shall include, but not be limited
to, the following information:
   (a)   Name and address of the applicant;
   (b)   A description of the vending device to be located on the sidewalk;
   (c)   The Ohio license number of the vending device, if applicable;
   (d)   A signed statement that the applicant is the owner of the vending
device;
   (e)   The type of merchandise to be sold;
   (f)   Evidence that all required health licenses have been obtained;
   (g)   Locations for which applications for permits are made will be randomly
selected;
   (h)   A signed statement that the permittee shall hold harmless the City of
Cleveland, its officers and employees and shall indemnify the City of
Cleveland, its officers and employees for any claims or damage to property or
injury to persons which may be occasioned by any activity carried on under the
terms of the permit. Permittee shall furnish and maintain such public
liability, food products liability, and property damage insurance as will
protect permittee and the city from all claims for damage to property or bodily
injury, including death, which may arise from operations under the permit or in
connection therewith. Such insurance shall provide coverage of not less than
fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for bodily injury for each person, one
hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for each occurrence and not less than
one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for property damage per occurrence.
Such insurance shall be without prejudice to coverage otherwise existing
therein, and shall include the City of Cleveland, its officers and employees,
as additional insured. Before conducting business at the location permitted by
the Director, permittee shall include as an additional insured on the policies
of insurance hereinabove required the owner of the property abutting the space
between the prolongations of the boundary lines of the location which run
perpendicular to the curbline to the property line of the same side of the
street.
   A separate application and permit shall be required for each vending device.
(Ord. No. 25-2020. Passed 6-17-20, eff. 6-23-20)
§ 508.04 Permit Fee and Duration
   Each application for a permit shall be accompanied by a fee of two hundred
dollars ($200.00). If the applicant is not issued a permit, the fee shall be
refunded.
   Permits shall be valid for a period of one (1) year, commencing August 1 and
ending July 31.
(Ord. No. 25-2020. Passed 6-17-20, eff. 6-23-20)
§ 508.05 Permitted Locations
   (a)   The Director shall compile a list of permitted locations where the
presence of vending devices on the sidewalk would be compatible with the public
interest in use of street and sidewalk areas as public right-of- way. The
Director may modify the list from time to time as he or she deems necessary.
   (b)   In compiling the list of permitted location the Director may consider
the width of the sidewalk; the proximity and location of existing street
furniture, including but not limited to signposts, lamp posts, parking meters,
bus shelters, benches, phone booths, and newspaper vending devices; the
presence of bus stops, truck loading zones, and taxi stands; pedestrian and
vehicular traffic patterns; and other factors he or she deems relevant.
   (c)   No permitted location shall be within ten (10) feet of another
permitted location.
   (d)   No permitted location shall be designated where the clear, continuous,
unobstructed sidewalk for the passageway of pedestrians is reduced to less than
six (6) feet.
(Ord. No. 210-11. Passed 4-25-11, eff. 4-25-11)
§ 508.06 Permits
   Permits shall be issued in a form so that they may be affixed to the vending
device.
   Each permit shall contain the following information:
   (a)   The name and address of the permittee;
   (b)   A description of the vending device;
   (c)   A description of the permitted location;
   (d)   The expiration date of the permit; and
   (e)   If applicable, the location of the commissary which supplies the
vending device; and any other information the Director deems desirable.
(Ord. No. 1611-83. Passed 6-27-83, eff. 6-27-83)
§ 508.07 Permitted Vending Devices
   The Director shall issue a permit to the applicant only if the applicant’s
vending device meets all of the requirements of this section.
   (a)   The vending device does not occupy more than twenty-four (24) square
feet of sidewalk space; and, as of the effective date of this section, a
license has been approved by the Department of Public Health for the vending
device.
   (b)   If the vending device has a heating apparatus, the vending device
shall have been inspected and approved by the Fire Chief or his or her designee
for compliance with provisions of the City’s Fire Prevention Code and State of
Ohio Fire Code.
(Ord. No. 210-11. Passed 4-25-11, eff. 4-25-11)
§ 508.08 Requirements and Conditions of Permit
   (a)   Permittees and their agents shall comply with all of the requirements
of this section while engaged in business at permitted locations:
      (1)   Each vending device shall be attended at all times by at least one
(1) individual, who shall be licensed pursuant to Chapter
675 and/or 241;
      (2)   The vending device shall be placed on the sidewalk only at the
location set forth in the permit;
      (3)   No vending device shall remain in its permitted location between
the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., and no business shall be conducted from
any permitted location between those hours;
      (4)   Permittees and their agents shall obey any lawful order of a police
officer to remove their vending devices from the sidewalk if necessary to avoid
congestion or obstruction in an emergency;
      (5)   Permittees or their agents selling food items from vending devices
are required to obtain a food shop license under Chapter
241;
      (6)   Vending devices shall not be serviced or cleaned at residences or
any other unapproved premises;
      (7)   Permittees and their agents shall be responsible for keeping the
sidewalk area within twenty-five (25) feet of the permitted location free of
litter. Permittees and their agents shall provide a suitable container for the
placement of paper, wrappers, and other similar items by customers and others;
      (8)   The permit, including a map of the permitted location, shall be
affixed to the vending device at all times that the vending device is located
on the sidewalk;
      (9)   No permittee shall place upon any sidewalk, street or highway any
stand, booth, rack, platform, table, chair, vehicle, or device of any kind,
other than a vending device which complies with the provisions of Section
508.07;
      (10)   Permittees and their agents shall conduct business in compliance
with all applicable provisions of the Codified Ordinances;
      (11)   No permittee or agent thereof shall conduct business in violation
of the provisions of any ordinance providing for a community event.
   (b)   Permits issued by the Director shall be subject to the following
conditions:
      (1)   Each permit shall be personal only and shall not be transferrable
in any manner;
      (2)   Each permit is valid only when used at the location designated in
the permit;
      (3)   The permit as it applies to a given location may be suspended by
the Council or the Director for up to ten (10) days during the holding of a
community event.
(Ord. No. 1657-11. Passed 11-28-11, eff. 11-28-11)
§ 508.09 Permit Suspension and Revocation
   (a)   The Director may suspend or revoke the permit of any permittee if the
permittee or his or her agent fails to abide by the provisions of Section
508.08 or if any required health license has been suspended or revoked.
   (b)   The Director shall give written notice of suspension or revocation of
the permit to the permittee or his or her agent stating the reasons therefor.
If the reason for the suspension or revocation is that a required health
license has been suspended or revoked or that the permittee does not have a
currently effective insurance policy as required by division (h) of Section
508.03, the action shall be effective upon giving such notice to the permittee
or to his or her agent. Otherwise, such notice shall contain the further
provision that the action shall become final and effective ten (10) days
thereafter unless, within five (5) days of receipt of the notice, the permittee
requests a hearing before the Director. The Director shall forthwith hold the
requested hearing, at which time the permittee shall be afforded the
opportunity to give his or her version of the facts which gave rise to the
Director’s action. After the hearing the Director shall determine whether to
proceed with the action or to rescind it.
   The action of the Director may be appealed in accordance with the provisions
of the Charter.
(Ord. No. 210-11. Passed 4-25-11, eff. 4-25-11)
§ 508.10 Regulations
   The Director may promulgate such regulations, not inconsistent with the
provisions of this chapter, establishing procedures for the issuance of
permits.
(Ord. No. 1611-83. Passed 6-27-83, eff. 6-27-83)
CHAPTER 509 – TREES
509.01   Climbing, Breaking, Injuring Trees Prohibited; Exceptions; Permit
509.02   Killing, Removing Trees Prohibited; Exceptions; Permit
509.03   Injurious Substances in Soil around Tree Roots
509.04   Lethal Substances in Soil around Tree Roots
509.05   Injurious Substances Flowing into Tree Soil
509.06   Stone, Cement Obstructing Tree’s Air, Water; Permit
509.07   Power to Preserve or Remove Trees
509.08   Interference with Properties Director and City Employees
509.09   Electrical Wires Injuring Trees
509.10   Electrical Wires Killing Trees
509.11   Attaching Wire, Signs to Trees Restricted
509.12   Animals Prohibited from Injuring Trees
509.13   Tree Planting Permit; Planting Plan
509.14   Protecting Trees During Construction
509.15   Authority of Properties Director over Trees on Private Grounds
509.16   Control of Elm Disease
509.17   Inspection and Destruction of Diseased Trees
509.18   Additional Tests to Determine Presence of Disease
509.19   Property Owner’s Responsibility to Trim or Remove Trees
509.20   Trimming, Preservation and Removal of Trees on Private Property
509.21   Tree Preservation Fund
509.99   Penalty
   Note: The legislative history of this chapter, except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 63410-A, passed
September 22, 1924.
Cross-reference:
   Climbing trees in parks prohibited, CO
559.35
   Destruction of shrubs, trees or crops, CO
623.06
   Location of shade trees on streets, CO
503.04
Statutory reference:
   Assessments for tree planting or maintenance, RC 727.011
   Power to regulate shade trees and shrubbery, RC 715.20
§ 509.01 Climbing, Breaking, Injuring Trees Prohibited; Exceptions; Permit
   No person, firm or corporation without a written permit from the Director of
Public Properties shall cut, break, climb or injure any tree or portion of tree
planted or growing in any public highway within the City or cause, authorize or
procure any person to cut, break, climb or injure any such tree or portion
thereof; cut, break, climb or injure any tree or plant, or injure, misuse or
remove, or cause, authorize or procure any person to injure, misuse or remove
any device set for the protection of any tree or plant in any public highway of
the City. Any person, firm or corporation desiring for any lawful purpose to
cut, prune, treat, with a view to its preservation from disease or insect, or
trim any tree in any public highway of the City, may apply to the Director, and
if in the judgment of the Director the desired cutting, pruning, treatment or
trimming appears necessary and the proposed method and workmanship thereof are
such as the Director approves, the Director may thereupon issue a written
permit for such work. Any work done under such written permit must be performed
in strict accordance with the terms thereof.
§ 509.02 Killing, Removing Trees Prohibited; Exceptions; Permit
   No person, firm or corporation shall kill or remove, or cause, authorize or
procure the death or removal of any tree planted or growing in any public
highway within the City. Any person, firm or corporation desiring for any
lawful purpose to take down or remove any tree in any public highway of the
City may apply to the Director of Public Properties, and if in the judgment of
the Director, the desired taking down or removal appears necessary, the
Director may thereupon issue a written permit therefor. Any work done under
such written permit must be performed in strict accordance with the terms
thereof.
§ 509.03 Injurious Substances in Soil around Tree Roots
   No person, firm or corporation owning or using, or having control or charge
of gas or other substance deleterious to tree life, shall allow such gas or
other substance to come into contact with the soil surrounding the roots of any
tree in any public highway in the City in such manner as may injure such tree
or plant.
§ 509.04 Lethal Substances in Soil around Tree Roots
   No person, firm or corporation owning or using, or having control or charge
of gas or other substance deleterious to tree life, shall allow such gas or
other substance to come into contact with the soil surrounding the roots of any
tree in any public highway in the City in such manner as shall kill or destroy
such tree or plant.
§ 509.05 Injurious Substances Flowing into Tree Soil
   No person, firm or corporation shall cause, authorize or procure any brine
water, oil, liquid dye or other substance deleterious to tree life to lie,
leak, pour, flow or drip on or into the soil about the base of any tree in any
public highway in the City, or onto the sidewalk, road or pavement therein at a
point whence such substance may be lying on, or by flowing, dripping or seeping
into such soil, or in any other manner whatever, injure such tree; or cause or
procure such lying, leaking, flowing, dripping, seeping or injuring.
§ 509.06 Stone, Cement Obstructing Tree’s Air, Water; Permit
   No person, firm or corporation, except with the written permit of the
Director of Public Properties, shall place or maintain upon the ground in any
public highway within the City, any stone, cement or other material or
substance in such manner as may obstruct the free access of air and water to
the roots of any tree or ornamental plant in such highway. Unless otherwise
provided for in such written permit, there must be maintained about the base of
the trunk of each shade tree in the public highways of the City at least six
(6) square feet of open ground for a tree three (3) inches in diameter, and for
every two (2) inches of increase of such diameter there must be an increase of
at least one (1) square foot of open ground.
§ 509.07 Power to Preserve or Remove Trees
   The Director of Public Properties shall have the right to plant, trim,
preserve and remove all trees within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues,
lands, lanes, squares and public grounds as may be necessary to insure safety,
or to preserve the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. The Director,
under the power given herein, may cause any tree which is in an unsafe
condition, or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers or other
improvements, or is affected by any injurious scale or other pest, to be
removed.
§ 509.08 Interference with Properties Director and City Employees
   No person, firm or corporation shall interfere, cause, authorize or procure
any interference with the Director of Public Properties, or any of his or her
employees, agents or servants, while they are engaged in and about the
planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying or removing of any tree in
any public highway within the City, or in removing any device attached to a
tree or in such removing of stone, cement, sidewalk or other material or
substance as may be necessary for the protection and care of any such tree in
accordance with the requirements set forth in Section
509.06, as to the area of open ground to be maintained about the base of the
trunk of each shade tree in the public highways of the City.
§ 509.09 Electrical Wires Injuring Trees
   No person, firm or corporation shall cause, authorize or procure a wire or
other conductor, charged with electricity, to come into contact with any tree
in a public highway in the City, in such manner as may injure or abrade such
tree or plant.
§ 509.10 Electrical Wires Killing Trees
   No person, firm or corporation shall cause or authorize or procure a wire or
other conductor charged with electricity, to come into contact with any tree in
any public highway in the City in such manner as shall destroy or kill such
tree or plant.
§ 509.11 Attaching Wire, Signs to Trees Restricted
   No person, firm or corporation shall attach or keep attached to any tree in
any public highway in the City or to the guard or stake intended for the
protection of such tree, any rope, wire, sign or any other device whatsoever,
except for the purpose of protecting it or the public.
§ 509.12 Animals Prohibited from Injuring Trees
   No person, firm or corporation shall tie any horse or any other animal to
any tree in any public highway within the City or having charge of such horse
or other animal, allow or cause or procure it to injure any such tree; nor
shall any person in charge of such horse or other animal cause or allow it to
stand so that it can injure such tree.
§ 509.13 Tree Planting Permit; Planting Plan
   (a)   No person, firm or corporation shall plant or set out any shade tree
or cause or authorize or procure any person to plant or set out any shade tree,
in or on any part of any public highway within the City, without first
obtaining from the Director of Public Properties a written permit to do so or
without complying in all respects with the conditions set forth in such written
permit.
   (b)   Before any permit shall be issued for planting more than twenty-five
(25) trees on any one (1) permit, the Director may request from the applicant a
detailed declaration of intentions either in the form of a planting plan or
written statement in duplicate. All planting plans shall be drawn on tracing
cloth in ink. One (1) copy of each plan or statement of intentions shall, when
approved by the Director, be returned to the applicant and the other copy shall
be kept on file by the Director.
   (c)   All planting plans shall show accurately:
      (1)   The proposed street width, together with its subdivisions of
pavement, curb, gutter, parking strip and sidewalk areas, to a definite
indicated scale;
      (2)   The proposed location of each and every proposed tree together with
the location of each existing within the proposed street lines in scaled
relation to the other features of the plan;
      (3)   The variety of each and every tree proposed to be planted and of
those already existing within the proposed street lines, either indicated on
the plan or referenced with a number to key list;
      (4)   The distance between trees in any one (1) row in feet;
      (5)   The nature of the soil in the planting space, to a depth of three
(3) feet, and all existing and proposed surface or subsoil drainage system.
   (d)   All statements filed in lieu of a planting plan shall contain the same
information as required on the plan.
§ 509.14 Protecting Trees During Construction
   (a)   No person in charge of the erection, repair, alteration or removal of
any building or structure within the City shall fail to properly preserve,
maintain, and protect, pursuant to the general requirements of Section
341.052, public trees that are in the vicinity of the building or structure
from damage that may be caused by or may be a result of the erection, repair,
alteration or removal of the building or structure.
   (b)   No person in charge of the erection, repair, alteration or removal of
any building or structure within the City shall remove any public tree in the
vicinity of the building or structure without prior written approval of the
Commissioner of Urban Forestry or a designee and then only if one (1) or more
of the situations under division (b) of Section
341.052 apply.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 509.15 Authority of Properties Director over Trees on Private Grounds
   The Director of Public Properties shall have power to enter upon any private
grounds in the City and cause to be sprayed or otherwise treated any tree or
shrub infected or infested by any parasite or insect pest when it shall be
necessary in the opinion of the Director to do so, to prevent the breeding or
scattering of any parasite or animal pest, and to prevent danger therefrom to
shade trees and shrubbery planted in the streets, alleys and public grounds of
the City. Whenever in the opinion of the Director, trimming, treatment or
removal of any such tree or shrub located on private grounds shall be deemed
wise, the Director shall have power to trim, treat or remove any such shrub.
§ 509.16 Control of Elm Disease
   Council finds and determines that the Dutch Elm disease and the virus
disease Phloem Necrosis commonly known as Elm Blight threaten shade trees in
the streets and public grounds and places of the City, and that in order to
preserve such trees it is necessary to discover and control these diseases.
(Ord. No. 1779-48. Passed 10-18-48)
§ 509.17 Inspection and Destruction of Diseased Trees
   The Commissioner of Shade Trees is authorized to inspect any tree within the
City reported or supposed to be infected with the Dutch Elm disease or the
virus disease Phloem Necrosis commonly known as Elm Blight. If upon such
inspection the Commissioner determines that such tree is infected with either
of the diseases, he or she shall, if the tree is in any public street, ground
or place within the City, immediately remove and burn the same in such manner
as to prevent as fully as possible the spread of such disease. If such tree is
located on private property, the Commissioner shall immediately serve upon the
owner of such property a written notice that such tree is so infected and that
the same must be removed and burned under the supervision of the Commissioner
within five (5) days of the service of notice. If such owner cannot be found, a
copy of the notice shall be posted upon the infected tree. If the tree is not
so removed and burned within five (5) days after the service or posting of
notice, the Commissioner shall cause the tree to be so removed and burned. The
cost of removal and burning shall be reported to the owner of the property, if
he or she can be found, and also Council. If the cost is not paid within thirty
(30) days of such report, Council may assess the same as in other cases of the
abatement of nuisances.
(Ord. No. 1779-48. Passed 10-18-48)
§ 509.18 Additional Tests to Determine Presence of Disease
   If upon the inspection of any tree within the City reported or supposed to
be infected as aforesaid, it is impossible to determine with certainty the
existence of either of the diseases in such tree, it is hereby determined that
in such event specimens from the tree shall be forwarded for complete
examination, diagnosis and report to either the Ohio State Experimental Station
at Wooster, Ohio, or to the United States Department of Agriculture Station at
Deltsville, Maryland. The action of the Commissioner of Shade Trees under this
section shall await and be determined by the report received from such
examination and diagnosis.
(Ord. No. 1779-48. Passed 10-18-48)
§ 509.19 Property Owner’s Responsibility to Trim or Remove Trees
   The owner or agent of any lot or parcel of land fronting on any street,
avenue or public ground in the City, in which shade trees are planted and
growing, shall trim or cause to be trimmed, the branches from the trees in or
in front of their respective lots or lands, near which any street lamp is
placed, so as not to obstruct the passage of light from such lamp to the street
or sidewalk adjacent, and shall trim all branches overhanging any sidewalk or
roadway, so as to have a clear height of eight (8) feet above the surface of
the sidewalk, and a clear height of ten (10) feet above the surface of the
roadway, unobstructed by branches, and shall remove from the trees all dead,
decaying and broken limbs or branches that overhang the sidewalk or street, or
are liable to fall thereon. When any trees are dead the owner thereof shall
take up, or cause to be taken up, the dead trees and remove the same from the
lot or parcel of land. If any owner or agent of any lot or land in which shade
trees are planted fails or refuses to comply with the requirements of this
section, after being duly notified to do so, the Shade Tree Commissioner shall
cause the same to be done at the expense of the owner of the property in or in
front of which the trees may be located, which expense, together with the cost
of suit, may be collected by a suit in Municipal Court.
§ 509.20 Trimming, Preservation and Removal of Trees on Private Property
   (a)   The Commissioner of Shade Trees shall have the authority and he or she
shall order the trimming, preservation or removal of any dead or diseased tree
or branch or limb thereof located upon private property when he or she finds
that such action is necessary to prevent injury to person or damage to
property, or to prevent the spread of disease to trees located upon or adjacent
to public land or a dedicated street.
   (b)   Such order of the Commissioner shall be in writing and shall be served
either personally or by certified mail upon the owner of such private property.
If service is by certified mail it shall be sent to the last known residence of
the owner.
   (c)   When the owner to whom such an order is directed fails to comply
within the time specified in such order, the Commissioner shall cause the
condition to be remedied at the cost of the person to whom the order is
directed. The Commissioner or persons designated by him or her to remedy the
condition complained of in the order shall be authorized to enter upon private
premises for the purpose of carrying out such order.
(Ord. No. 2096-66. Passed 12-12-66, eff. 12-14-66)
§ 509.21 Tree Preservation Fund
   The Director of Finance shall establish a Tree Preservation Fund for the
purpose of supporting the preservation, protection, maintenance, purchase and
planting of trees in the City. Civil fines and funds collected as a result of
damage to trees or removal of trees in violation of, or to adhere to,
applicable sections of this Code, shall be deposited in the Tree Preservation
Fund for disbursement as set forth in this section. Any person, firm, or
corporation may make contributions to the Tree Preservation Fund and the
Director of Finance is authorized to accept contributions to the Tree
Preservation Fund for the purposes set forth in this section.
(Ord. No. 1121-18. Passed 12-3-18, eff. 12-5-18)
§ 509.99 Penalty
   (a)   Any person, firm or corporation which violates Sections
509.01,
509.05,
509.09, or
509.11 shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each
offense.
   (b)   Any person, firm or corporation which violates Sections
509.03,
509.06,
509.08,
509.12 or
509.13 shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
offense.
   (c)   Any person, firm or corporation which violates Sections
509.02,
509.04 or
509.10 shall be fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each
offense.
   (d)   Civil Penalties.
      (1)   Any person, firm, or corporation that fails to properly preserve,
maintain, and protect a public tree during construction as required under
division (a) of Section
509.14, shall be charged one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per area of damage to
the roots or the above ground portion of the tree. If the damage can be
repaired or reduced following Best Management Standards and ANSI Standards for
Arboriculture, as may be amended from time to time, the party responsible for
the damage shall hire an ISA-Certified Arborist to repair or reduce the damage
at the cost of the responsible party. If the damage to the tree is adequately
repaired by the ISA-Certified Arborist, in the discretion of the Commissioner
of Urban Forestry (“Commissioner”) or designee, the Commissioner may waive the
civil fine.
      (2)   Any person, firm, or corporation that removes any public tree in
violation of division (b) of Section
509.14 shall be charged a civil fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for
each tree removed in addition to the full cost of the removed tree based on the
replacement cost of the tree as established using the Trunk Formula Method
outlined in The Guide for Plant Appraisal by the Council of Tree and Landscape
Appraisers, as may be amended from time to time, or other tree replacement
analysis provided by similar publication.
      (3)   The Commissioner or designee shall have the authority to charge the
civil fines set forth in division (d) of this section. All civil fines
collected pursuant to this division (d) shall be deposited in the Tree
Preservation Fund.
   (e)   Every violation by the same person, firm or corporation of Sections
509.01 to
509.13 which continues on any day succeeding the first violation, constitutes
an additional violation for each of such succeeding days.
   (f)   In addition to civil liability for the cost of any work performed by
the Commissioner or designee, any person who fails to comply with an order of
the Commissioner to trim, preserve or remove any dead or diseased tree, or
branch or limb of the dead or diseased tree, dangerous to person or property or
to prevent the spread of disease to trees upon public property or streets
within the time specified in the order shall be fined not more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days, or
both.
   (g)   A person, firm or corporation that receives a civil fine under
division (d) of this section may appeal to the Commissioner within ten (10)
business days of the date of the notice of the civil fine. The Commissioner
shall have jurisdiction to affirm, reverse, or modify the decision and shall do
so within ten (10) days of the date of the appeal. A person aggrieved by a
final decision of the Commissioner may further appeal to the Board of Zoning
Appeals within thirty (30) days after the Commissioner’s decision.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
CHAPTER 510 – USE OF PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY BY SERVICE PROVIDERS
510.01   Scope of Chapter; Definitions
510.02   Registration of Service Providers that Occupy or Use the Public Right-
of-Way for Facilities; Fee
510.03   Initial and Annual Registration of Existing Service Providers; Fee
510.04   General Public Right-of-Way Use Regulations
510.05   Location, Relocation and Removal of Facilities
510.06   AGF Installation Permits; Fee
510.07   Recovery of City Costs
510.08   Miscellaneous Provisions
510.99   Penalties and Other Remedies
§ 510.01 Scope of Chapter; Definitions
   (a)   The purpose and intent of this chapter is to:
      (1)   Manage Occupancy or Use of the Public Right-of-Way by Service
Providers on a competitively neutral basis;
      (2)   Conserve the limited physical capacity of the Public Right-of-Way
held in trust by the City for the benefit of the public;
      (3)   Administer the impact of access to the Public Right-of-Way by
Service Providers to promote efficiency, discourage uneconomic duplication of
Facilities, and lessen the public inconvenience arising out of uncoordinated
work in the Public Right-of-Way;
      (4)   Promote cooperation among Service Providers and the City in the use
and occupation of the Public Right-of-Way, to minimize public inconvenience
during work in the Public Right-of-Way, and to eliminate wasteful, unnecessary
or unsightly duplication of facilities;
      (5)   Assure that the City fairly and responsibly protects the public
health, safety and welfare;
      (6)   Abate the public nuisance specifically determined to exist by the
Council and created by the unregulated placement of Above Ground Facilities and
Above Ground Facilities Clusters in the Public Right- of-Way that interfere
with the safe and unobstructed use of the Public Right-of-Way by traffic,
pedestrians and adjoining and abutting property owners;
      (7)   Enable the City to discharge its public trust consistent with
rapidly evolving federal and State regulatory policies, industry competition
and technological development; and
      (8)   Manage, regulate and administer the Public Right-of-Way in the City
with regard to matters of local concern in the exercise of the City’s powers of
local self-government granted by Section 3 of Article XVIII of the Ohio
Constitution.
   (b)   For the purpose, interpretation and enforcement of this chapter, the
following words and phrases shall have the following meanings, unless the
context of the sentence in which they are used shall indicate otherwise:
      (1)   “Above Ground Facilities” or “AGF” means that portion of a System
located on and up to eight (8) feet above the surface of the Public Right-of-
Way outside of the Public Street but excluding Overhead Facilities.
      (2)   “Above Ground Facilities Cluster” or “AGF Cluster” means a grouping
of more than one (1) structure constituting Above Ground Facilities of a
Service Provider on a shared concrete pad.
      (3)   “Above Ground Facilities Installation Permit” or “AGF Installation
Permit” means a permit issued under Section
510.06 of this chapter.
      (4)   “Affiliate” means a Person that (directly or indirectly) owns or
controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control
with another Person.
      (5)   “Cable Service” means “cable service” as defined in the Cable
Communications Policy Act of 1984, codified at 47 U.S.C. 532 et seq., as
amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992
and the Telecommunications Act of 1996, as each might be further amended.
      (6)   “Capital Improvement” means an addition made to enhance the value
or extend the useful life of an existing System or Facilities, including
Construction, Reconstruction, installation, rehabilitation, renovation,
improvement, enlargement and extension of Facilities, but not including
Ordinary Maintenance and New Service Connections.
      (7)   “City” means the City of Cleveland, Ohio.
      (8)   “City Block” means the portion of the Public Right-of-Way between
two (2) adjacent intersections of two (2) sets of intersecting streets.
      (9)   “City Property” means and includes all real property owned by the
City, other than Public Streets and Public Easements as those terms are defined
in this section, and all property held in a proprietary capacity by the City.
      (10)   “Construct,” “Constructing” or “Construction” means installing,
repairing, replacing or removing any Facility, regardless of the methods
employed, but not including Ordinary Maintenance.
      (11)   “Director” means the Director of Public Service or the Director’s
designee.
      (12)   “Excavate,” “Excavating” or “Excavation” means cutting, sawing,
breaking, drilling into, boring under, or otherwise altering any Public Street
or sidewalk pavement, and/or digging, drilling into or boring under any unpaved
portion of the Public Right-of-Way, including any other work or activity which
disturbs the existing surface or subsurface structure, composition, or soil
compaction, for the purpose of carrying on any Construction activity.
      (13)   “Excess Capacity” means the volume or capacity in any existing or
future duct, conduit, manhole, or other Facility in the Public Right-of-Way
that is or will be available for use for additional Facilities as determined by
the owner of the Facility.
      (14)   “Facilities” or “Facility” means the plant, equipment and
property, including but not limited to, cables, fibers, wires, pipes, conduits,
ducts, pedestals, antennae, electronics, poles, pipes, mains, plant, equipment
and other appurtenances located under, on or above the surface of the ground in
the Public Right-of-Way of the City and used or to be used to operate a System
to transmit, receive, distribute, provide or offer a Service.
      (15)   “Franchise Ordinance or Agreement” means an ordinance or agreement
granted by the Council under Sections
181 through 188 of the City’s Charter.
      (16)   “Location and Design Manual” or “L&D Manual” means the Location
and Design Manual promulgated by the State Department of Transportation, as it
may be updated or revised from time to time.
      (17)   “New Service Connections” means the physical connection made
between a Service Provider’s Facilities in the Public Right-of-Way and private
property for the purpose of providing new Service to a customer.
      (18)   “Occupancy,” “Occupy” or “Use” means, with respect to the Public
Right-of-Way, to place a tangible thing in the Public Right-of-Way for any
purpose, including, but not limited to, Constructing, repairing, positioning,
maintaining or operating lines, poles, pipes, conduits, ducts, equipment or
other structures, appurtenances or Facilities necessary to operate a System for
the delivery of Services.
      (19)   “Ordinary Maintenance” means (a) Construction commonly
accomplished in or on an existing Facility for the purpose of preventing
deterioration or performance deficiencies, maintaining appearance, or securing
original level of performance or (b) repair, upkeep, replacement or restoration
of existing Facilities located in the Public Right-of-Way that does not include
excavation of the Public Right-of- Way and does not alter the size of the
cabinet surrounding the existing Facilities.
      (20)   “Other Ways” means the highways, streets, alleys, Utility
Easements or other rights-of-way within the City, but under the jurisdiction
and control of a governmental entity other than the City.
      (21)   “Overhead Facilities” means utility poles that extend more than
eight (8) feet above the surface of the Public Right-of-Way and wires, cables
and other equipment running between and on the poles more than eight (8) feet
above the surface of the Public Right-of- Way including the underground
supports and foundations for the Facilities.
      (22)   “Person” means and includes corporations, companies, associations,
joint stock companies or associations, firms, partnerships, limited liability
companies, trusts and individuals and includes their lessors, trustees and
receivers.
      (23)   “Private Service Provider” means any Person who directly or
indirectly owns, controls, operates or manages Facilities within the Public
Right- of-Way used or to be used for the purpose of operating a System to
transmit, receive, distribute or provide Services between or among private
buildings or facilities where there is no offer of Service to the public.
      (24)   “Public Easement” means any easement under the jurisdiction and
control of the City and acquired, established, dedicated or devoted for public
purposes, including utility purposes.
      (25)   “Public Property” means any real and personal property owned or
controlled by the City, other than the Public Right-of-Way.
      (26)   “Public Right-of-Way” means the surface of, and the space within,
through, on, across, above or below, the paved or unpaved portion of any Public
Street, public road, public highway, public freeway, public lane, public path,
public alley, public court, public sidewalk, public boulevard, public parkway,
public drive, Public Easement and any other land dedicated or otherwise
designated for a compatible public use, which is controlled by the City but
excludes Public Property and private easements.
      (27)   “Public Service Provider” means any Person that directly or
indirectly owns, controls, operates or manages Facilities within the City’s
Public Right-of-Way, used or to be used for the purpose of operating a System
offering Service to the public within the City or outside of the City’s
boundaries.
      (28)   “Public Street” means the paved portion of any street, road,
boulevard, drives, highway, freeway, parkway, lane court, alley or other Public
Right-of-Way in which the City has an interest in law or equity and which has
been acquired, established, dedicated or devoted to street purposes, excluding
tree lawns, amenity areas, and sidewalks.
      (29)   “PUCO” or “Public Utilities Commission of Ohio” means the State
Administrative agency, or lawful successor, authorized to regulate and oversee
certain Public or Private Service Providers and Services in the State.
      (30)   “Reconstruct” or “Reconstruction” means substantial physical
change to or Capital Improvement of all or a portion of an existing System or
Facilities including a change in location, or additional locations, of
Facilities along the same right- of-way involving Construction in Public
Streets, Utility Easements, or Public Right-of-Way.
      (31)   “Regulated Service Provider” means a Service Provider operating
under a tariff from the PUCO or a Service Provider owned by a political
subdivision of the State.
      (32)   “Service” means the offering of water, sewer, electric, gas,
telephone, telecommunications, cable television, Video Service, information or
other utility-like service for a fee directly to the public, or to the classes
of users as to be effectively available to the public, regardless of the
Facilities used.
      (33)   “Service Provider” means any Public Service Provider and/or
Private Service Provider.
      (34)   “State” means the State of Ohio.
      (35)   “Surplus Overhead Space” means that portion of the Usable Overhead
Space on a utility pole that is or will be available for use by other Service
Providers as determined by the owner of the pole, and which has the necessary
clearance from the Facilities of existing Service Providers using the pole, as
required by the orders and regulations of PUCO and other applicable State and
local orders or other applicable codes or regulations, to allow its use by a
Service Provider for a pole attachment.
      (36)   “Surplus Underground Space” means that portion of the Usable
Underground Space which has the necessary clearance from the Underground
Facilities of existing Service Providers as determined by the Director in
accordance with applicable codes and regulations to allow its use for
additional Underground Facilities by a Service Provider.
      (37)   “System” means a network of Facilities for the transmission and/or
distribution of a Service.
      (38)   “Underground Facilities” means that portion of a System located
under the surface of the ground, excluding the underground foundations or
supports for Overhead Facilities.
      (39)   “Usable Overhead Space” means the total distance between the top
of a utility pole and the lowest possible attachment point that provides the
minimum allowable vertical clearance as specified in the orders and regulations
of the PUCO or other applicable codes or regulations.
      (40)   “Usable Underground Space” means the space below the surface of
the Public Right-of-Way that is needed for the installation and maintenance of
Underground Facilities by a Service Provider without interfering with Occupancy
of existing Underground Facilities by Service Providers in the Public Right-of-
Way as determined by the Director in accordance with applicable codes and
regulations.
      (41)   “Utility Easement” means any easement owned by a Service Provider
and acquired, established, dedicated or devoted for the purpose of providing
Service to the public.
      (42)   “Video Service” means the provision of video programming using
equipment located at least in part in the Public Right-of-Way, regardless of
the technology used to deliver that programming.
(Ord. No. 1242-A-07. Passed 10-8-07, eff. 10-11-07)
§ 510.02 Registration of Service Providers that Occupy or Use the Public Right-
of-Way for Facilities; Fee
   (a)   Registration Required to Occupy Public Right-of-Way. No Service
Provider shall Occupy or Use the Public Right-of-Way without registering with
the City prior to commencing to do so.
   (b)   Initial Registration Presumed.
      (1)   A Service Provider with existing Facilities that lawfully Occupy
the Public Right-of- Way on the effective date of this chapter shall be
presumed to have initial registration with the City for its existing Facilities
to Occupy or Use the Public Right-of-Way.
      (2)   Initial presumed registration for Occupancy or Use of the Public
Right-of-Way is limited to the Service Provider’s existing Facilities on the
effective date of this chapter.
      (3)   Any Service Provider with presumed initial registration to Occupy
or Use the Public Right- of-Way for existing Facilities under this division (b)
shall comply with the applicable registration requirements under division (a)
of Section
510.03 within ninety (90) days of the effective date of this chapter.
   (c)   Registration to Occupy or Use Public Right- of-Way.
      (1)   The following Service Providers shall register with the City to
Occupy or Use the Public Right-of-Way on a form provided by the Director. Any
Service Provider who:
         A.   Does not have an existing System or Facilities that lawfully
Occupy the Public Right-of-Way on the effective date of this chapter and
desires to Construct a System or Facilities in the Public Right-of-Way; or
         B.   Has initial presumed registration under division (b) of this
section but is planning:
            1.   A Capital Improvement or Reconstruction of existing
Facilities; or
            2.   To Construct an additional System anywhere in the City.
      (2)   The form for Service Providers to register to Occupy or Use the
Public Right-of-way under this section or under division (a) of Section
510.03 shall contain the following information:
         A.   The identity, legal status and federal tax identification number
of the Service Provider, including all Affiliates of the Service Provider that
will Use or Occupy the Public Right-of- Way or are in any way responsible for
Facilities in the Public Right-of-Way;
         B.   The name, address, telephone number and e-mail address of the
local officer, agent or employee responsible for the accuracy of the
registration and available at all reasonable times to be notified in case of
emergency;
         C.   A general description of the Services provided or to be provided
by the Service Provider over its System or Facilities in the Public Right-of-
Way;
         D.   A description of the type of transmission medium used, or to be
used, by the Service Provider to operate a System in the Public Right-of-Way;
         E.   To the extent available, a description of the Service Provider’s
existing Facilities in the Public Right-of-Way that generally identifies the
location and route of the Facilities in detail acceptable to the Director after
consultation with the Service Provider;
         F.   A preliminary Construction schedule and proposed completion date
for all Capital Improvements planned, as of the date of registration, for the
twelve (12) month period following the date of registration;
         G.   If the Service Provider is not a Regulated Service Provider, a
description of the Service Provider’s access and line extension policies;
         H.   Evidence that the Service Provider has complied, or will comply,
with the insurance requirement contained in division (e) of this section;
         I.   Evidence that the Service Provider has received authorization
from the State, as required by law, to operate a System and provide Services in
the City;
         J.   Other and further information as may reasonably be requested by
the Director related to the City’s five (5) year capital plan.
      (3)   The City shall confirm, in writing, a Service Provider’s completed
registration to Occupy or Use the Public Right-of-Way within thirty (30) days
of the date on which the registration form is filed with the City.
         A.   Except to the extent prohibited by Federal or state law, the City
may withhold or delay confirmation of a Service Provider’s completed
registration to Occupy or Use the Public Right-of-Way based on the Service
Provider’s failure to possess the financial, technical and managerial resources
necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare, or for other
reasons based on the health, safety and welfare of the City and under Ohio law.
         B.   If the City withholds or delays a Service Provider’s registration
to Occupy or Use the Public Right-of-Way, the City shall provide its reasons in
writing for withholding or delaying registration, and shall provide any
information that the Service Provider may reasonably request necessary for the
Service Provider to obtain a completed registration to Occupy or Use the Public
Right-of-Way.
      (4)   The City’s registration of a Service Provider to Occupy or Use the
Public Right-of-Way shall be in the form of a Right-of-Way Occupancy
Certificate which shall specify the specific terms of the City’s registration
for the Service Provider to Occupy or Use the Public Right-of-Way.
      (5)   Each Service Provider registering to Occupy or Use the Public
Right-of-Way shall pay a fee as determined by the Director, and approved by the
Board of Control, to reimburse the City for its administrative costs related to
the registration process as provided in Section
510.07.
   (d)   Registration of Service Providers with an Existing Franchise Ordinance
or Agreement. For purposes of this chapter, a Franchise Ordinance or Agreement
shall be deemed registration of the Franchisee’s Occupancy or Use of the Public
Right-of- Way to the extent described in the Franchise Ordinance or Agreement.
The Franchisee’s use of the Public Right-of-Way beyond that described in the
Franchise Ordinance or Agreement shall require additional registration for the
additional Occupancy or Use. Franchisees shall comply with the registration
provisions and the Public Right-of-Way Use Regulations to the extent that the
provisions of this chapter do not directly conflict with the Franchise
Ordinance or Agreement. If there is a direct conflict between the Franchise
Ordinance or Agreement and the provisions of this chapter, the Franchise
Ordinance or Agreement shall control.
   (e)   Service Provider Insurance. Service Providers must secure and
maintain, at a minimum, the following liability insurance policies insuring
both the Service Provider and the City, and its elected and appointed officers,
officials, agents, employees and representatives as additional insureds:
      (1)   Comprehensive general liability insurance with limits not less
than:
         A.   Five Million Dollars ($5,000,000) for bodily injury or death to
each Person;
         B.   Five Million Dollars ($5,000,000) for property damage resulting
from any one (1) accident; and
         C.   Five Million Dollars ($5,000,000) for all other types of
liability.
      (2)   Automobile liability for owned, non- owned and hired vehicles with
a limit of Three Million Dollars ($3,000,000) for each Person and Three Million
Dollars ($3,000,000) for each accident;
      (3)   Workers’ compensation within statutory limits and employer’s
liability insurance with limits of not less than One Million Dollars
($1,000,000);
      (4)   Comprehensive form premises- operations, explosions and collapse
hazard, underground hazard and products completed hazard with limits of not
less than Three Million Dollars ($3,000,000);
      (5)   The liability insurance policies required by this section shall be
maintained by the Service Provider at all times throughout the period of time
during which the Service Provider is Occupying or Using the Public Right-of-
Way, or is engaged in the removal of its Facilities;
      (6)   Not less than thirty (30) days prior to the effective cancellation
or termination date of a liability insurance policy required by this section,
when the Service Provider has at least thirty (30) days’ advance notice of
cancellation or termination, or immediately upon receipt of notice if it has
less than thirty (30) days’ advance notice, the Service Provider shall obtain
and furnish to the City replacement insurance policies meeting the requirements
of this section, without any lapse in coverage;
      (7)   Upon written application to, and written approval by, the Director,
a Service Provider with net capitalization of Ten Million Dollars ($10,000,000)
or more may be self-insured; except that all coverages for Workers’
Compensation shall be in compliance with State law. No approval for self-
insurance shall be given until the Director has made a complete review of the
Service Provider’s financial ability to provide the self- insurance. As part of
the review process, the Director may require, and the self-insurance applicant
shall provide financial documents necessary to make a valid determination of
the applicant’s ability to meet the needs of this chapter;
      (8)   Regulated Service Providers shall be exempt from the provisions of
division (e) of this section provided that they notify the Director of the name
and contact information of an officer or employee in the organization of the
Service Provider who is responsible for receiving claims filed against the
Service Provider for personal injury or property damage.
   (f)   General Indemnification. Each form for registering to Occupy or Use
the Public Right-of-Way, and each annual registration, shall include, to the
extent permitted by law, the Service Provider’s express undertaking to defend,
indemnify and hold the City and its elected and appointed officers, officials,
employees, agents, representatives and subcontractors harmless from and against
any and all damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney’s fees
and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to
arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts,
omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the Service Provider or its
Affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in the
Construction, Reconstruction, installation, operation, maintenance, repair or
removal of its System or Facilities, and in providing or offering Services over
the Facilities or System, whether the acts or omissions are authorized, allowed
or prohibited by this chapter.
(Ord. No. 599-11. Passed 6-6-11, eff. 6-13-11)
§ 510.03 Initial and Annual Registration of Existing Service Providers; Fee
   (a)   Initial Registration. Any Service Provider with initial presumed
registration to Occupy or Use the Public Rights-of-Way as provided in division
(b) of Section
510.02 shall file an initial registration with the City within ninety (90) days
of the effective date of this chapter, on a form provided by the Director,
which shall include the information in division (c)(2) of Section
510.02.
   (b)   Annual Registration Required. All Service Providers registered to
Occupy or Use the Public Right- of-Way shall register with the City each
calendar year between January 1 and January 31 on a form provided by the
Director. Service Providers who file an Initial Registration before January 1,
2008 need not file an Annual Registration for calendar year 2008.
   (c)   Purpose of Annual Registration. The purpose of the annual registration
under division (b) of this section is to:
      (1)   Compile, update and supplement the City’s database so that the City
has accurate and current information concerning the Service Providers that own
or operate Facilities, and/or provide Services, in the Public Right-of-Way;
      (2)   Assist the City in monitoring the usage of the Public Right-of-Way
in order to ensure that the public receives the maximum possible benefit from
that use and the use is consistent with the best management and care of the
Public Right-of-Way;
      (3)   Assist the City in the collection and enforcement of any municipal
taxes, franchise fees, compliance fees or charges that may be due the City; and
      (4)   Assist the City in monitoring compliance with local, State and
federal laws.
   (d)   Information Required for Annual Registration. Service Providers shall
provide the following information with the annual registration under division
(b) of this section:
      (1)   Any changes to the information the Service Provider provided the
City in the Service Provider’s previous registration under divisions (c)(2)A.
through (c)(2)D., division (c)(2)G., and division (c)(2)I. of Section
510.02;
      (2)   Evidence that the Service Provider is in compliance with the
insurance requirement under division (e) of Section
510.02;
      (3)   A preliminary Construction schedule and completion date for all
Capital Improvements planned, as of the date of registration, for the twelve
(12) months following the date of registration;
      (4)   If the Service Provider is Constructing a new System or
Reconstructing substantially all of its existing System, a general description
of the Services to be provided, transmission medium to be used, and the
Facilities to be utilized with the new or Reconstructed System in detail
acceptable to the Director after consultation with the Service Provider;
      (5)   Such other information as the Director may reasonably require
related to the City’s five (5) year capital plan.
   (e)   Facilities Maps. The City shall have the right to access and review
all the Service Provider’s maps and/or as-built plans showing the location of
its Facilities in the Public Right-of-Way, on ten (10) days notice to the
Service Provider.
   (f)   Registration Fee. Each Service Provider shall pay an annual
registration fee as determined by the Director, and approved by the Board of
Control, to reimburse the City for its administrative costs related to
maintaining annual registration and as provided in Section
510.07.
(Ord. No. 1242-A-07. Passed 10-8-07, eff. 10-11-07)
§ 510.04 General Public Right-of-Way Use Regulations
   (a)   Public Right-of-Way Route. A completed initial and annual registration
of a Service Provider to Occupy or Use the Public Right-of-Way under Sections
510.02 and
510.03 shall apply to only the types of Facilities and locations along the
Public Right-of-Way that were identified by the Service Provider in the
registration form.
   (b)   Nonexclusive Right to Occupy the Public Right-of-Way. Registration of
a Service Provider granted under Sections
510.02 and
510.03 shall not confer any exclusive right, privilege, license or franchise to
Occupy or Use the Public Right-of-Way of the City to operate a System for
delivery of Services or any other purposes.
   (c)   Rights Permitted. Registration of a Service Provider under Sections
510.02 and
510.03 shall not convey any right, title or interest in the Public Right-of-
Way.
   (d)   Maintenance of Facilities. Each Service Provider shall maintain its
System and Facilities in good and safe condition and in a manner that complies
with all applicable federal, State and local requirements.
   (e)   Safety Procedures. A Service Provider or other Person acting on its
behalf shall use suitable barricades, flags, flaggers, lights, flares and other
measures as necessary and under applicable State and local requirements for the
safety of all members of the general public and to prevent injury or damage to
any Person, vehicle or property by reason of the work in or affecting such
Public Right-of-Way or property.
   (f)   Interference with the Public Rights-of-Way. No Service Provider may
locate or maintain its Facilities so as to unreasonably interfere with the use
of the Public Right-of-Way by the City, by the general public or by other
Persons authorized to use or be present in or on the Public Right-of-Way. To
the extent permitted by law, all Facilities shall be moved by the Service
Provider, temporarily or permanently, as determined by the Director.
   (g)   Damage to Public and Private Property. No Service Provider nor any
Person acting on the Service Provider’s behalf shall take any action or permit
any action to be done which may impair or damage any City Property, including
trees, Public Right-of-Way, Other Ways or other public or private property
located in, on or adjacent thereto.
   (h)   Restoration of Public Right-of-Way, Other Ways and City Property.
      (1)   When a Service Provider, or any Person acting on its behalf, does
any work in or affecting any Public Right-of-Way, Other Ways or City Property,
it shall, after the work is completed and at its own expense, promptly remove
any obstructions and restore such ways or property, within ten (10) to sixty
(60) days, at the Director’s discretion, to as good a condition as existed
before the work was undertaken, unless otherwise directed by the City.
      (2)   If weather or other conditions do not permit the complete
restoration required by this section, the Service Provider shall temporarily
restore the affected ways or property as directed by the Director, to the
extent practical or feasible. Such temporary restoration shall be at the
Service Provider’s sole expense and the Service Provider shall promptly
undertake and complete the required permanent restoration when the weather or
other conditions no longer prevent permanent restoration.
   (i)   Duty to Provide Information.
      (1)   Within ten (10) days of a written request from the Director each
Service Provider shall furnish the City with documentation sufficient to show
that the Service Provider has complied with all requirements of this chapter.
      (2)   Within ten (10) days of a written request from the Director, each
Service Provider shall make available for inspection by the City at reasonable
times all books, records, maps and other documents, maintained by the Service
Provider with respect to its Facilities in the Public Right-of-Way.
      (3)   A Service Provider operating under a tariff issued by the PUCO
shall cooperate with the City upon request of the Director for assistance with
the “design ticket” process of the Ohio Utility Protection Service.
   (j)   Assignments or Transfers. Registration to Occupy or Use the Public
Right-of-Way may be, directly or indirectly, transferred, assigned or disposed
of by sale, lease, merger, consolidation or other act of the Service Provider,
by operation of law or otherwise, without consent of the City, so long as:
      (1)   The City is notified of the proposed transfer on or before the date
of transfer or upon approval of any jurisdictional agency, including the PUCO;
and
      (2)   The transferee shall fully comply with this chapter within sixty
(60) days of the transfer, including, but not limited to, providing:
         A.   All information required by the Registration to Occupy or Use the
Public Right-of-Way under Sections
510.02 and
510.03; and
         B.   Any other information reasonably required by the Director.
   (k)   Transactions Affecting Assignments or Transfers. Any transactions that
singularly or collectively result in a change of twenty-five percent (25%) or
more of the ownership or ultimate working control of a Service Provider, of the
ownership or working control of the Service Provider’s Facility, or of control
of the capacity or bandwidth of the Service Provider's System, Facilities or
substantial parts of the Facility shall be considered an assignment or transfer
under division (j) of this section. Transactions between Affiliated entities
are not exempt from division (j) of this section.
   (l)   Revocation of Registration. To the extent permitted by law, a Service
Provider’s registration to Occupy or Use the Public Right-of-Way of the City
may be revoked for any one (1) of the following reasons:
      (1)   Construction, Reconstruction, installation, location, operation or
Excavation at an unauthorized location;
      (2)   Construction, Reconstruction, installation, location, operation or
Excavation in violation of City safety and/or Construction requirements;
      (3)   Material misrepresentation or lack of candor by or on behalf of a
Service Provider in any permit application or registration required by the
City;
      (4)   Failure to relocate or remove Facilities, or failure to restore the
Public Right-of-Way, as required by this chapter;
      (5)   Failure to pay fees, costs, taxes or compensation when and as due
the City;
      (6)   Insolvency or bankruptcy of the Service Provider;
      (7)   Violation of material provisions of this chapter.
   (m)   Notice and Duty to Cure. In the event that the Director believes that
grounds exist for revocation of a Service Provider’s registration to Occupy or
Use the Public Right-of-Way, the Director shall give the Service Provider
written notice of the apparent violation or noncompliance, providing a short
and concise statement of the nature and general facts of the violation or
noncompliance, and providing the Service Provider a reasonable period of time
not exceeding thirty (30) days to furnish evidence:
      (1)   That corrective action has been, or is being actively and
expeditiously pursued, to remedy the violation or noncompliance;
      (2)   That rebuts the alleged violation or noncompliance; and/or
      (3)   That it would be in the public interest to impose some penalty or
sanction less than revocation.
   (n)   It is within the Director’s reasonable discretion to waive a portion
or portions of this chapter where the requirements, in the Director’s judgment,
are not necessary or appropriate to protect the City’s interests and the
purposes and intent of this chapter.
   (o)   Record Drawings. Within sixty (60) days after completion of
Construction, registered Service Providers shall furnish the City with the
following information for Facilities Constructed for the Service Provider in
detail acceptable to the Director based on consultation with the Service
Provider:
      (1)   The location, size, depth, grade, and route of any Underground
Facilities, including proximity to other existing Facilities within the area
excavated for the Construction;
      (2)   The location, height and route of any Overhead Facilities,
including pole attachments;
      (3)   The location and position of any Above Ground Facilities and
evidence of an AGF Installation Permit issued under Section
510.06 for the Facilities.
   Information supplied under division (o) of this section shall be submitted
in an electronic format which is available to the Service Provider and
acceptable to the Director, or, if an acceptable electronic format is not
available, on paper.
   (p)   Field Identification. Commencing on January 1, 2008, Service Providers
shall field identify in a readily available location by means of a mark or tag
in a manner, form and at such time as is acceptable to the Director in
accordance with national and state standards and regulations, all new or
replacement Facilities constructed or installed at the surface of the Public
Right-of-Way and, in conjunction with Public Right-of-Way improvements
constructed by the City, all existing Facilities owned by a Service Provider
and located on the surface of the portion of the Public Right-of-Way to be
improved by the City.
   (q)   Restoration of Improvements. On completion of any Construction work,
registered Service Providers shall promptly repair any and all Public Rights-
of-Way and provide property improvements, fixtures, structures and Facilities
which were damaged during the course of Construction, restoring the same as
nearly as practicable to its condition before the start of Construction.
   (r)   Trees in Public Right-of-Way; Cost of Replacement.
      (1)   In performing any Construction work that may impact trees with
roots, trunk or branches within the Public Right-of-Way, the Service Provider
shall follow Best Management Standards and ANSI Standards for Arboriculture, as
may be amended from time to time.
      (2)   When tree roots must be affected by any Construction work within
the Public Right-of-Way, the Service Provider shall submit specifications with
the permit or construction plans and shall follow guidelines in Best Management
Standards and ANSI Standards for Arboriculture, as may be amended from time to
time. The Commissioner of Urban Forestry (“Commissioner”) or a designee shall
review and approve the specifications prior to commencement of Construction
work.
      (3)   A Service Provider that damages a tree located in Public Right-of-
Way, due to the failure to properly protect or maintain the tree during
Construction as required under division (r)(1), whether by negligence or
otherwise, shall be charged one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per area of damage
to the roots or the above ground portion of the tree. If the damage can be
repaired or reduced following Best Management Standards and ANSI Standards for
Arboriculture, as may be amended from time to time, the Service Provider shall
hire an ISA- Certified Arborist to repair or reduce the damage at the Service
Provider’s cost. If the damage to the tree is adequately repaired by the ISA-
Certified Arborist, in the discretion of the Commissioner or designee, the
Commissioner may waive the civil fine. The civil fines shall be deposited into
the City’s Tree Preservation Fund.
      (4)   Trees within the Public Right-of-Way may not be removed without
prior consultation with the Commissioner or a designee. Best Management
Standards and ANSI Standards for Arboriculture, as may be amended from time to
time, shall be utilized when removing trees from the Public Right-of-Way.
Compensation for trees removed in connection with Construction work performed
by a Service Provider, based upon the replacement cost of the tree as
established using the Trunk Formula Method outlined in The Guide for Plant
Appraisal by the Council of Tree and Landscape Appraisers, as may be amended
from time to time, or other tree replacement analysis provided by similar
publication, shall be paid to the City’s Tree Preservation Fund prior to
completion of Construction work. A Service Provider shall not be required to
compensate the City for trees removed at the City’s request.
      (5)   The Commissioner or designee shall have the authority to charge the
civil fines and replacement costs as set forth in this division. Civil fines
under this section may be appealed to the Commissioner within ten (10) business
days of the date of the notice of the civil fine. The Commissioner shall have
jurisdiction to affirm, reverse or modify the decision and shall do so within
ten (10) days of the date of the appeal. A Service Provider aggrieved by a
final decision of the Commissioner may further appeal to the Board of Zoning
Appeals within thirty (30) days after the Commissioner’s decision.
   (s)   Landscape Restoration.
      (1)   All trees, landscaping and grounds removed, damaged or disturbed as
a result of the Construction, Reconstruction, installation, maintenance,
repair, replacement, or removal of Facilities must be replaced or restored as
nearly as may be practicable, to the condition existing prior to performance of
work as determined by the Commissioner or a designee, except to the extent that
tree trimming is necessary to prevent the interference of tree branches with
Overhead Facilities. Except in the case of emergency, trees within the Public
Right-of-Way shall not be pruned without prior notice to the Commissioner or a
designee. Best Management Standards and ANSI Standards for Arboriculture, as
may be amended from time to time, shall be utilized when pruning trees in the
Public Right-of-Way. Any Service Provider that fails to prune a tree using Best
Management Standards and ANSI Standards for Arboriculture, as may be amended
from time to time, such that the tree is damaged, as determined by the
Commissioner or designee, shall be fined the full replacement cost of the tree
as established using the Trunk Formula Method outlined in The Guide for Plant
Appraisal by the Council of Tree and Landscape Appraisers, as may be amended
from time to time, or other tree replacement analysis provided by similar
publication, which shall be paid to the City’s Tree Preservation Fund. If trees
are damaged during Construction, Reconstruction, installation, maintenance,
repair, replacement, or removal of Facilities, such that an ISA-Certified
Arborist determines that the tree will fall or decline and die as a result of
the damage, the Service Provider shall pay compensation to the City’s Tree
Preservation Fund based upon the replacement cost of the tree as established
using the Trunk Formula Method outlined in The Guide for Plant Appraisal by the
Council of Tree and Landscape Appraisers, as may be amended from time to time,
or other tree replacement analysis provided by similar publication. If, in the
opinion of the Commissioner or a designee, any trees cannot be replaced or
restored in the same location, then either: (A) an equal number of trees, the
type(s) of which shall be approved by the Commissioner or a designee, shall be
planted in the Public Right-of-Way at a location or locations determined by the
Commissioner or a designee; or (B) the Service Provider shall pay to the City’s
Tree Preservation Fund the replacement cost based on the Trunk Formula Method
outlined in The Guide for Plant Appraisal by the Council of Tree and Landscape
Appraisers, as may be amended from time to time, or other tree replacement
analysis provided by similar publication, for an equal number of trees. The
Commissioner or designee shall have the authority to charge the replacement
cost as set forth in this division.
      (2)   All restoration work within the Public Right-of-Way shall be done
under landscape plans approved by the Director.
   (t)   Responsibility of Owner. The owner of the Facilities to be
Constructed, Reconstructed, installed, located, operated, maintained or
repaired and, if different, the Service Provider, are responsible for
performance of and compliance with all provisions of this section.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 510.05 Location, Relocation and Removal of Facilities
   (a)   Location of Facilities. All Facilities shall be Constructed,
Reconstructed, installed and located under the following guidelines and
requirements:
      (1)   Facilities should be installed within an existing compatible
underground duct or conduit whenever Excess Capacity exists within the
Facility;
      (2)   A Service Provider registered to install Overhead Facilities should
install its Facilities on pole attachments to existing utility poles if Surplus
Overhead Space is available;
      (3)   A Service Provider registered to install Underground Facilities
should install its Facilities in space the Service Provider currently occupies
or in Surplus Underground Space if available;
      (4)   Except for Overhead Facilities as provided in this section, no AGF
or AGF Clusters shall be located above ground in a Public Right-of-Way without
a AGF Installation Permit issued under Section
510.06.
      (5)   No Facilities shall be located under ground in the Public Right-of-
Way without, as applicable, a Street Opening Permit issued under Section
503.01 or a Sidewalk Construction Permit issued under Sections
505.04 to
505.06, as deemed appropriate by the Director.
   (b)   Excess Capacity. To reduce Excavation in the Public Right-of-Way, it
is the City’s goal to encourage Service Providers to share occupancy of
underground conduit as well as to construct, whenever possible, excess conduit
capacity for occupancy of future Facilities in the Public Right-of-Way.
Therefore, if a Service Provider is constructing underground conduit in the
Public Right-of-Way for its own Facilities, and the City reasonably determines
the construction is in an area in which other Service Providers would likely
construct Facilities in the future, the City may require, to the extent
permitted by law, the Service Provider to construct the conduit in the Public
Right-of-Way with Excess Capacity in the Public Right-of-Way, provided the
Service Provider shall be reimbursed for the use of the Excess Capacity by
another Service Provider. The Service Provider may charge a reasonable market
lease rate for occupancy of the additional conduit space as reimbursement.
Division (b) of this section shall not apply where no practical operational,
engineering or safety standards will support the need for Excess Capacity.
   (c)   City Owned Conduit. If the City owns or leases conduit in the path of
a Service Provider’s proposed Facilities, the City determines that there is
Excess Capacity in the conduit, and provided it is technologically feasible for
the Service Provider’s Facilities to Occupy the conduit owned or leased by the
City, the Service Provider may be required, to the extent permitted by law to
Occupy the conduit owned or leased by the City in order to reduce the necessity
to Excavate the Public Right-of-Way. If required, the Service Provider shall
pay to the City a fee for Occupancy which shall be a reasonable market lease
rate for occupancy of the conduit. The City and the Service Provider may agree
to amortize the fee through annual payments to the City.
   (d)   Relocation or Removal of Facilities. Within thirty (30) days following
written notice from the City and in accordance with law, a Service Provider
shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change
or alter the position of any Facilities in the Public Right-of-Way whenever the
City shall have determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration
is reasonably necessary for:
      (1)   The Construction, Reconstruction, repair, maintenance or
installation of any City public improvement in or on the Public Right-of-Way;
or
      (2)   The operations of the City or other governmental entity in or on
the Public Right-of-Way.
   (e)   Removal of Unauthorized Facilities. Within thirty (30) days following
written notice from the City, and to the extent permitted by law any Service
Provider or other Person that owns, controls or maintains any unregistered
System, Facility or related appurtenances in the Public Right-of-Way shall, at
its own expense, remove those Facilities or appurtenances from the Public
Right-of-Way of the City or shall arrange to sell the System, Facilities or
appurtenances to the City. After the thirty (30) days have expired, the City
may remove the Facilities or appurtenances from the Public Right-of-Way at the
other party’s expense. A System or Facility is unauthorized and subject to
removal in any of the following circumstances:
      (1)   If the System or Facility was Constructed, Reconstructed,
installed, operated, located or maintained without registering, except as
otherwise provided by this chapter;
      (2)   On abandonment of a Facility in the Public Right-of-Way of the
City, with the exception of underground facilities abandoned in a manner
authorized and approved by the City;
      (3)   If the System or Facility was Constructed, Reconstructed,
installed, operated, located or maintained, or any Excavation of a Public
Right-of- Way was performed, without prior issuance of a required permit from
the City, except as otherwise provided by this chapter;
      (4)   If the System or Facility was Constructed, Reconstructed,
installed, operated, located or maintained, or any Excavation of a Public
Right-of- Way was performed, at a location not identified in the City’s
registration to Occupy or Use the Public Right- of-Way; or
      (5)   If the Service Provider fails to comply with the Registration
requirements of this chapter.
   Division (e) of this section does not apply to the extent that abandonment
of Facilities is governed by federal or State law.
   (f)   Emergency Removal or Relocation of Facilities. To the extent permitted
by law, the City retains the right and privilege to cut or move any Facilities,
or stop work on any Construction, Reconstruction, installation, operation or
Excavation, located in the Public Right-of-Way of the City, as the City may
determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any need to
protect the public health, safety or welfare; except to the extent that the
City’s actions would cause a dangerous or potentially dangerous situation.
(Ord. No. 1242-A-07. Passed 10-8-07, eff. 10-11-07)
§ 510.06 AGF Installation Permits; Fee
   (a)   Permit Required. No Service Provider shall install, place, replace or
alter the size of Above Ground Facilities in the Public Right-of-Way without
first obtaining an AGF Installation Permit issued by the Director under this
section or in violation of the regulations for AGF and AGF Clusters in this
section or Rules and Regulations promulgated by the Director under division (e)
(8) of this section.
   (b)   Application Process. Applications for AGF Installation Permits shall
be filed with the Commissioner of Engineering and Construction and shall
contain the following information:
      (1)   A detailed description of the AGF or AGF Cluster, including the
dimensions of each installation and the potential noise level resulting from
the operation of the installation;
      (2)   A site or landscape plan drawn to scale showing the proposed
installation with elevation drawings acceptable to the Director, and
photographs of the proposed location for the AGF before installation, including
the dimensions of the existing street improvements in the proximate vicinity of
the proposed AGF and the distance from the proposed AGF to existing buildings
on the adjoining and abutting lots;
      (3)   Mailing address labels of adjoining lots, abutting lots, and lots
across the Public Right-of-Way from the adjoining and abutting lots;
      (4)   The identity of any existing AGF in the City Block in which the AGF
is proposed to be installed;
      (5)   The identity, legal status, and federal tax identification number
of the Service Provider for the AGF;
      (6)   The name, address, telephone number, and e-mail address of the
local officer, agent or employee responsible for the accuracy of the
information contained in the application for the AGF application; and
      (7)   A copy of the Graffiti Mitigation Plan prepared by the Service
Provider under division (d) of this section.
   (c)   Permit Fee. Each Service Provider applying for an AGF Installation
Permit shall pay a fee as determined by the Director, and approved by the Board
of Control, to reimburse the City for its administrative costs related to
processing of reviewing the permit application and issuing the permit as
provided in Section
510.07.
   (d)   Graffiti Mitigation Plans. The exterior of each AGF and AGF Cluster
shall resist graffiti and be maintained in good condition and repair. Each
Service Provider shall submit a Graffiti Mitigation Plan detailing how each AGF
or AGF Cluster operated by the Service Provider shall be maintained free from
graffiti and other defacements (i.e. stickers, posters). The Graffiti
Mitigation Plan shall identify the resources dedicated to regularly inspecting
and maintaining the Facilities in good condition and repair. In addition, each
Graffiti Mitigation Plan shall provide the name, mailing address, phone number
and email address of a single point of contact responsible to resolve graffiti
issues should they occur. The Graffiti Mitigation Plan should clearly state
that AGF surfaces shall be maintained in good condition and repair following
installation.
   (e)   AGF Regulations.
      (1)   The placement of AGF and AGF Clusters shall be approved by the City
Planning Commission or its Secretary, as determined by the City Planning
Commission, in the following areas:
         A.   Residential zoning districts;
         B.   Open Space and Recreation Districts as described in Chapter
342;
         C.   Public Land Protective Districts as described in Chapter
341; and
         D.   Business Revitalization Districts as described in Chapter
303.
      (2)   The placement of AGF and AGF Clusters in Landmark Districts and on
Landmark properties, as described in Section
161.04, shall be approved by the Landmarks Commission or its Secretary, as
determined by the Landmarks Commission.
      (3)   AGF and AGF Clusters, including any doors, shall maintain an
unobstructed sidewalk width of six (6) feet to provide for unimpeded pedestrian
and wheelchair passage, except where the existing sidewalk width is less than
six (6) feet, and a minimum of two (2) feet unobstructed distance from the
perimeter of the AGF or AGF Cluster to the roadway curb face and to the closest
edge of the public sidewalk.
      (4)   AGF and AGF Clusters shall be placed in compliance with the
intersection sight distance requirements contained in the Location and Design
Manual without the necessity of installing additional safety measures as
provided in the L&D Manual. If the existing sight distance at an intersection
does not meet the current standards in the L&D Manual, the AGF and AGF Clusters
shall be placed at a location that will not reduce the existing sight distance
from the intersection. AGF and AGF clusters shall be placed at a distance from
drive-ways so as not to impair the sight distances for exiting vehicles as
determined by the Director using the intersection sight distance requirements
contained in the L&D Manual.
      (5)   No AGF or AGF Cluster shall be installed:
         A.   Within five (5) feet of any fire hydrant;
         B.   Within five (5) feet of any driveway;
         C.   Where there is no bus shelter at a bus stop, within forty (40)
feet back of a sign identifying a particular bus company or bus route and
marking a designated bus stop;
         D.   Where there is a bus shelter at a bus stop, within five (5) feet
forward and forty (40) feet back of the end of the shelter identified as
serving a particular bus company of bus route and marking a designated bus
stop;
         E.   Within three (3) feet of any traffic sign;
         F.   Within three (3) feet of any public utility pole, provided that
1) all or a portion of an AGF may be placed on a public utility pole as part of
an approved AGF Installation Permit and in accordance with other applicable
laws and regulations for the placement of Facilities on utility poles; and 2)
placement adjacent to a public utility pole shall be limited to one (1) side of
the pole;
         G.   Within an area designated for handicapped parking, a taxi stand
or a commercial loading or unloading zone; or
         H.   Immediately in front of buildings, houses, structures, or public
stairs such that it causes a violation of ADA guidelines for pedestrian passage
between private property and the Public Rights-of- Way.
      (6)   Advertising. Advertising is prohibited on AGF and AGF Clusters.
      (7)   Removal. Service Providers, at their cost and expense, shall remove
any AGF and AGF Clusters that are abandoned, become obsolete, are unused for
more than ninety (90) days or installed without an AGF Installation Permit
issued under this section.
      (8)   Additional Regulations. The Director is charged with the
enforcement of the provisions of this section and is hereby authorized to
adopt, promulgate and enforce additional Rules and Regulations relating to AGF
and AGF Clusters not in conflict with the provisions of this section, including
the maximum or minimum dimensions of AGF or AGF Clusters, the color and
finishes of any cabinets in which AGF or AGF Clusters are located, Service
Provider identification on all AGF and AGF Clusters, landscaping
considerations, permissible configuration of AGF Clusters, the maximum number
of installations of AGF or AGF Clusters in Public Right-of-Way per City Block
and the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this section. Rules
and Regulations promulgated by the Director shall become effective upon
publication in the City Record. Failure or refusal to comply with any Rules and
Regulations promulgated by the Director shall be deemed a violation of this
section.
   (f)   Performance Bond. To ensure the full and complete compliance with this
section, prior to the issuance of an AGF Installation Permit, a Service
Provider shall submit a performance bond in the amount of Fifty Thousand
Dollars ($50,000.00). In the alternative, a Service Provider may submit an
umbrella bond in the amount of Fifty Thousand Dollars ($50,000.00) which shall
be deemed to have met the performance bond requirement of this section for the
duration of the performance bond. Before any claims may be made against a
performance bond, the Director shall give written notice to the Service
Provider:
      (1)   Describing the act, default or failure to be remedied by reason of
the Service Provider’s act or default;
      (2)   Providing a reasonable opportunity for the Service Provider to
first remedy the existing or ongoing default or failure;
      (3)   Providing a reasonable opportunity for the Service Provider to pay
any monies due the City before the City makes a claim against the performance
bond; and
      (4)   Stating that the Service Provider will be given an opportunity to
review the act, default or failure described in the notice with the Director.
   (g)   Other Permits. A Service Provider that is issued an AGF Installation
Permit issued under this section is not required to obtain a Street Obstruction
Permit issued under Section
411.011 or a Sidewalk Obstruction Permit issued under Section
507.06 for Construction or reconstruction of an AGF. A Service Provider may be
required to obtain a Street Obstruction Permit issued under Section
411.011 or a Sidewalk Obstruction Permit issued under Section
507.06, as applicable, when performing Ordinary Maintenance on an AGF. If the
installation of AGF and AGF Clusters requires installation of Underground
Facilities, a Service Provider must also obtain a Street Opening Permit issued
under Section
503.01 or a Sidewalk Construction Permit issued under Sections
505.04 to
505.06 as deemed appropriate by the Director.
   (h)   Additional Penalty. In addition to any penalty imposed for a violation
of this chapter under Section
510.99, the Director, following notice in writing to a Service Provider of the
Service Provider’s failure to comply with this section, shall not issue any new
AGF Installation Permits to the Service Provider until such time as the
violations of this section as detailed in the notice are corrected.
(Ord. No. 1242-A-07. Passed 10-8-07, eff. 10-11-07)
§ 510.07 Recovery of City Costs
   (a)   Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to provide for the recovery
of all direct and indirect costs and expenses actually incurred by the City and
associated with the registration of a Service Provider’s Occupancy or Use of
the Public Right-of-Way, the reviewing of applications for and issuing AGF
Installation Permits, and related to the enforcement and administration of this
chapter. All registration and permit fees shall be assessed in a manner to be
determined by the Director and approved by the Board of Control. To the extent
that a fee fixed by this chapter is a public way fee under RC 4939.06, a
Service Provider may appeal the public way fee to the PUCO within thirty (30)
days after the fee is assessed by the City.
   (b)   Regulatory Fees and Compensation Not a Tax. The fees and costs
provided for in this chapter are separate from, and additional to, any and all
federal, State, local and City taxes as may be levied, imposed or due from a
Service Provider, its customers or subscribers, or on account of the lease,
sale, delivery or transmission of Services.
(Ord. No. 1242-A-07. Passed 10-8-07, eff. 10-11-07)
§ 510.08 Miscellaneous Provisions
   (a)   Preemption by State and Federal Law. Except as may be preempted by
applicable State or Federal laws, rates, regulations, and orders, this chapter
shall apply and be controlling over each Service Provider engaged in the
business of transmitting, supplying or furnishing of Services originating,
passing through, or terminating in the City.
   (b)   Compliance with Other Applicable City Code Provisions. Except as
expressly provided in this chapter, a Service Provider registered to Occupy and
Use the Public Right-of-Way under this chapter is not relieved of any
obligation to obtain a franchise, license, encroachment permit, street opening
permit or other permit which may be additionally required by the City under
law, including any required by the following sections and chapters of the
Codified Ordinances:
      (1)   Section
411.011 relating to street obstruction permits;
      (2)   Chapter
503 relating to street openings and maintenance;
      (3)   Sections
505.04 to
505.06 relating to sidewalk construction Permits;
      (4)   Section
507.06 relating to sidewalk obstruction permits;
      (5)   Chapter
523 relating to electrical poles;
      (6)   Chapter
670B relating to pay telephones;
      (7)   Chapter
3105 relating to building permits;
      (8)   Chapter
3109 relating to encroachments.
   (c)   Compliance with Other Laws. Nothing in this chapter shall relieve a
Service Provider from its obligation to comply with all applicable federal,
State and City laws, including the obligation to obtain any and all applicable
licenses, permits or other authorizations necessary to the operation and
conduct of its business or the occupation or use of the Public Right-of-Way. In
the event that a Service Provider believes that a conflict exists between the
provisions of this chapter and other provisions contained in the Codified
Ordinances, the Service Provider should request a clarification of the
applicable provision from the City’s Director of Law. Should there be a direct
conflict between the provisions in this chapter and the provisions contained in
a Franchise Ordinance or Agreement, the provisions of the Franchise Ordinance
or Agreement shall prevail; provided, however, that additional obligations
shall not be construed as a conflict.
   (d)   Director’s Rules and Regulations. The Director is charged with the
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and is hereby authorized to
adopt, promulgate and enforce Rules and Regulations relating to any matter or
thing pertaining to the registration of Service Providers and the
administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. Rules and
Regulations promulgated by the Director shall become effective upon publication
in the City Record. Failure or refusal to comply with any Rules and Regulations
promulgated by the Director shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.
   (e)   Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or
other portion of this chapter, or its application to any Person or Service
Provider, is, for any reason, declared invalid, in whole or in part by any
court or agency of competent jurisdiction, said decision shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 1242-A-07. Passed 10-8-07, eff. 10-11-07)
§ 510.99 Penalties and Other Remedies
   (a)   Criminal Penalty. Any Person found guilty of violating, disobeying,
omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. A separate and
distinct offense shall be deemed committed each day on which a violation occurs
or continues.
   (b)   Other Remedies. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting
any judicial remedies that the City may have, at law or in equity, for
enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 1242-A-07. Passed 10-8-07, eff. 10-11-07)
CHAPTER 511 – HOSPITAL TRAILBLAZER SIGNS
511.01   Purpose
511.02   Definitions
511.03   Qualifying Hospital Facilities
511.04   Design of Signs
511.05   General Locational Standards
511.06   Specific Placement Standards
511.07   Installation, Ownership and Maintenance
511.08   Encroachment Application Permit Required
511.09   Pre-existing Signs
511.10   Variations and Appeals
511.11   Insurance and Liability
511.12   Illustrations
§ 511.01 Purpose
   The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that signs placed in the public
right-of-way to direct motorists to emergency medical facilities are located
and designed in a manner which provides information clearly and efficiently,
with a minimum of confusion and clutter. Generally, these guidelines are
consistent with standards established by the Ohio Department of Transportation.
(Ord. No. 374-96. Passed 6-10-96, eff. 7-20-96)
§ 511.02 Definitions
   (a)   A “hospital trailblazer sign” is a sign located within the public
right-of-way, directing the public to a qualifying hospital facility.
   (b)   A “standard” hospital trailblazer sign displays only the “H” symbol
and a white directional arrow, as depicted in Section
511.12.
   (c)   A hospital trailblazer “identification” sign displays the name of each
hospital to which the public is directed, as depicted in Section
511.12.
(Ord. No. 374-96. Passed 6-10-96, eff. 7-20-96)
§ 511.03 Qualifying Hospital Facilities
   Qualifying hospital facilities are hospitals that provide emergency medical
services to the general public on a seven (7) day-a-week, twenty-four (24)
hours-a-day basis, with a physician on duty in the emergency department at all
times or with a registered nurse on duty in the emergency department and with a
physician in the hospital on call. Qualifying hospital facilities are permitted
to use hospital trailblazer signs pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. No. 374-96. Passed 6-10-96, eff. 7-20-96)
§ 511.04 Design of Signs
   (a)   All Signs. Each hospital trailblazer sign shall consist of a
rectangular metal panel twenty-four (24) inches in width, displaying a white
“H” on a blue background in a twenty-four (24) inches square copy area, placed
at the top of the sign. The sign shall also display a directional arrow or
arrows. All elements of the sign shall be displayed on a single panel, bordered
in a white frame. Each sign shall be designed in accordance with the applicable
illustration in Section
511.12. Each hospital may be identified with either a Standard sign or an
Identification Sign, as described in divisions (b) and (c) of this section.
   (b)   Standard Signs. The Standard Sign shall be designed according to
division (b) of Section
511.02. The sign panel shall be twenty-four (24) inches in width and a total of
thirty-three (33) inches in height, including a nine (9) inch high band for
display of the directional arrow.
   (c)   Identification Signs. The Identification Sign shall display the name
or names of each qualifying hospital permitted to be displayed at the subject
location, in accordance with the General Location Standards set forth in
Section
511.05. Each hospital name shall be displayed in white letters at least three
(3) inches in height, in a copy area which is a maximum of fifteen (15) inches
in height. A white directional arrow shall be placed under each hospital name.
For signs displaying the names of two (2) or more hospitals, the hospitals
shall be listed in descending order with respect to the distance of each
hospital, with the closest hospital listed first. The distance of each
hospital’s emergency entrance shall be displayed in fractions of a mile, in
white numerals and letters placed to the left of the directional arrow. No more
than three (3) hospital names shall be displayed on a single sign unless a
special design accommodating more than three names has been approved by the
City Planning Director for a location at which the standards of this chapter
permit identification of more than three (3) hospitals.
(Ord. No. 374-96. Passed 6-10-96, eff. 7-20-96)
§ 511.05 General Locational Standards
   (a)   Local Area Signs. The area within one (1) mile of the boundaries of a
qualifying hospital facility shall be considered the “local area” for purposes
of hospital trailblazer sign placement. Within the “local area,” trailblazer
signs directing motorists to the subject hospital or hospitals may be placed on
arterial roads or collector roads (as classified by the Ohio Department of
Transportation) at “decision-making points” where a right or left turn is
required, and at the intersection of two (2) or more arterial roads. Separate
signs for two (2) or more hospitals shall not be permitted where a single,
multiple-hospital sign could be placed.
   (b)   Signs of Freeway Routes. Outside of the one (1) mile “local area,”
hospital trailblazer signs shall be permitted only on roads which provide the
most direct route from freeway interchanges most directly serving a qualifying
hospital. Such signs may be placed at “decisions-making points,” where a right
or left turn is required for one (1) or more of the listed hospitals, and at
the intersection of two (2) or more arterial roads (as classified by Ohio
Department of Transportation). Separate signs for two (2) or more hospitals
shall not be permitted where a single, multiple-hospital sign could be placed.
   (c)   Signs on Freeways. Hospital trailblazer signs shall be placed on
inter-state highways and other freeways, as well as in immediate proximity to
freeway exits ramps, as permitted by the Ohio Department of Transportation.
(Ord. No. 374-96. Passed 6-10-96, eff. 7-20-96)
§ 511.06 Specific Placement Standards
   (a)   Distance from Intersection. A permitted hospital trailblazer sign
shall be placed approximately one hundred fifty (150) - two hundred (200) feet
in advance of an intersection where a left turn is indicated, approximately one
hundred (100) feet in advance of an intersection where only a right turn is
indicated, and less than one hundred (100) feet in advance of an intersection
where no turn is indicated. Precise locations for particular signs shall be
determined by the Commissioner of Traffic Engineering and Parking.
   (b)   Attachment. Hospital trailblazer signs shall be attached to utility
poles, where such poles are appropriately located. Only where utility poles or
other sign posts are not available shall hospital trailblazer signs be attached
to posts installed exclusively for display of the trailblazer sign. Specific
placement shall be approved by the Commissioner of Traffic Engineering and
Parking and, for signs placed on utility poles, the Commissioner of Cleveland
Public Power.
   (c)   Vertical and Lateral Clearance. Each hospital trailblazer sign shall
be set back at least two (2) feet from the curb face or as permitted by the
Commissioner of Traffic Engineering and Parking. The bottom of each sign shall
be approximately seven (7) to ten (10) feet above the level of the adjoining
street surface, as approved by the Commissioner of Traffic Engineering and
Parking.
(Ord. No. 374-96. Passed 6-10-96, eff. 7-20-96)
§ 511.07 Installation, Ownership and Maintenance
   (a)   Manufacture, installation, maintenance, and replacement of hospital
trailblazer signs shall be at the sole cost and responsibility of the subject
hospital or hospitals or its designated agent or agents. The signs shall remain
property of the hospital or hospitals or its agent or agents.
   (b)   All signs shall be maintained in good condition. Signs in deteriorated
or damaged condition, or signs that contain obsolete information shall be
repaired, replaced or removed upon the order of the Commissioner of Traffic
Engineering and Parking.
(Ord. No. 374-96. Passed 6-10-96, eff. 7-20-96)
§ 511.08 Encroachment Application Permit Required
   Encroachment Permits are required for placement of all hospital trailblazer
signs. Applications shall be as follows:
   (a)   Comprehensive Sign Location Plan. Not later than six (6) months after
the effective date of this chapter, all hospitals shall submit to the City
Planning Commission a comprehensive citywide plan for the placement of such
signs. The plan shall indicate the general location of each proposed sign and
each existing sign to be retained, and the name or names of each hospital
listed on each sign. The plan shall demonstrate how the number of signs will be
minimized by coordinating the signage needs of hospitals that share access
routes. The City Planning Commission shall review the plan with respect to the
General Locational Standards set forth in Section
511.05 and shall either approve or disapprove the plan within forty-five (45)
days of receipt of a complete plan, unless the applicant hospitals request an
extension in this time period to permit preparation of recommended revisions.
The Commission shall consult with the Commissioner of Traffic Engineering and
Parking prior to approving the plan.
   (b)   Encroachment Permit Application. Subsequent to approval of a
comprehensive sign location plan by the City Planning Commission, any hospital
or hospitals seeking to install hospital trailblazer signs shall apply for an
Encroachment Permit from the Director of Public Service. The application shall
include the following information:
      (1)   A written description of the proposed encroachment or
encroachments, including the dimensions, height, color and construction
materials of each sign, as well as the name or names of each hospital listed on
each sign;
      (2)   A sketch of each proposed sign, drawn to scale and marked with
dimensions and colors;
      (3)   A description and scaled site plan of the encroachment area,
prepared, if required by the Director of Public Service, by a licensed
surveyor;
      (4)   A detailed description of the method of attachment to a permanent
structure or to the ground;
      (5)   Written consent of the Councilmember in whose ward the encroachment
is to be located; and
      (6)   Evidence of consent of the pole owner to affixing the sign to its
pole if the pole is not owned by the applicant for the Encroachment Permit; and
      (7)   Any other information that the Director of Public Service deems
necessary.
   (c)   Review and Approval of Encroachment Permit Application. The Director
of Public Service shall promptly refer the Encroachment Permit application to
the Commissioner of Traffic Engineering and Parking, the Director of the City
Planning Commission and, if applicable, the Commissioner of Cleveland Public
Power, each of whom shall review the application for consistency with the
standards established in this chapter, the approved comprehensive sign location
plan, and other applicable City standards. Each such official shall transmit a
recommendation to the Director of Public Service, who shall then initiate the
final Encroachment Permit process. The Director shall issue the Encroachment
Permit if he or she determines that all requirements of this chapter have been
met, including consent of the City Council member in whose ward the
encroachment is to be located.
   (d)   Revocation of Encroachment Permits. The Director of Public Service
shall revoke the Encroachment Permit for any sign that is not maintained in
accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. No. 374-96. Passed 6-10-96, eff. 7-20-96)
§ 511.09 Pre-existing Signs
   (a)   Submission of Information. As part of the comprehensive sign location
plan to be submitted to the City Planning Commission pursuant to division (a)
of Section
511.08, each hospital shall submit a complete listing of all existing hospital
trailblazer signs it installed prior to the effective date of this chapter. The
listing shall include the location of each sign, a notation indicating whether
the hospital proposes to retain, remove or replace each sign, the ordinance
number of the applicable Encroachment Permit for each sign, and a photograph of
each sign, or sign type, marked with the dimensions of the sign panel.
   (b)   Conforming Signs. Any sign determined by the Director of the City
Planning Commission to be substantially conforming to these guidelines shall be
permitted to remain in place. However, if there is no record of an Encroachment
Permit for any such sign, the subject hospital shall apply for an Encroachment
Permit within thirty (30) days of receipt of written notification from said
Director.
   (c)   Nonconforming Signs. Any sign determined by the Director of the City
Planning Commission to be substantially nonconforming to the standards of this
chapter shall be removed by the subject hospital within thirty (30) days after
receipt of written notice from said Director, except in the case of a sign
which the hospital proposes to replace. For such signs, the hospital shall
submit an Encroachment Permit application for the replacement sign to the
Director of Public Service within thirty (30) days of approval of the
Comprehensive Sign Location Plan. The nonconforming sign shall be removed and
replaced within thirty (30) days of the issuance of an Encroachment Permit.
(Ord. No. 374-96. Passed 6-10-96, eff. 7-20-96)
§ 511.10 Variations and Appeals
   The Commissioner of Traffic Engineering and Parking may vary the standards
established in this chapter to the extent necessary, in the determination of
the Commission, to ensure traffic safety and to better direct the motorist in
particular instances. Decisions of any City official with respect to hospital
trailblazer signs may be appealed to the Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance
with applicable regulations and procedures.
(Ord. No. 374-96. Passed 6-10-96, eff. 7-20-96)
§ 511.11 Insurance and Liability
   The recipient of an Encroachment Permit for a hospital trailblazer sign
shall hold the City harmless from any and all liability, for any reason
whatsoever, occasioned upon the installation and use of each such device, other
than liability arising from any negligent act or omission which is solely
attributable to the City, and shall furnish, at sign owner’s expense, such
commercial general liability insurance as shall protect the owner and the City
from all claims for damage to property or bodily injury, including death, which
may arise from operation under the permit or in connection therewith.
   Such policy shall include the City as an additional insured, and shall be in
an amount of not less than One Hundred Thousand Dollars ($100,000.00) combined
single limit for any injury to persons and/or damage to property.
   A certificate of insurance shall be provided to the City with the required
application for the Encroachment Permit and the required insurance coverage
shall be maintained before and during installation of such device and
throughout the period that the permit for the encroachment is effect.
(Ord. No. 599-11. Passed 6-6-11, eff. 6-13-11)
§ 511.12 Illustrations
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4cc937dcc99cd9ae45e5f9bfbf6bc5ab64112b8f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11412.jpg]
 
(Ord. No. 374-96. Passed 6-10-96, eff. 7-20-96)
CHAPTER 512 – ISSUANCE OF TEMPORARY PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY OCCUPANCY PERMITS FOR
BUSINESS SIGNS
512.01   Definitions
512.02   Temporary Public Right-of-Way Occupancy Permits
512.03   Application for Permits
512.04   Permit Fee, Issuance and Duration
512.05   Permitted Locations
512.06   Permits
512.07   Requirements and Conditions of Permit
512.08   Permit Suspension and Revocation
512.09   Removal of Business Signs
512.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Retail business signs in public right-of-way, CO
Ch. 512A
   Temporary public right-of-way occupancy permits for outdoor patios and
parklets, CO
Ch. 513
§ 512.01 Definitions
   When used in this chapter, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
   (a)   “Director” means the Director of Public Service or his or her
designee.
   (b)   “Business Signs” means a commercial sign identifying a retail business
fronting a public right-of- way or adjacent to a public right-of-way.
   (c)   “Permit” means a temporary public right-of- way occupancy permit
authorized by Section
512.02 of the Codified Ordinances.
   (d)   “Permittee” means the person who owns the business sign permitted to
occupy an area of the public right-of-way.
   (e)   “Retail Business” means a business conducting the majority of its
business with customers on the business premises. “Retail business” does not
include residential buildings or parking lots.
   (f)   “Right-of-way” means any sidewalk, court, alley, street or other area
dedicated or otherwise designated for public use and held by the City.
   (g)   “Unobstructed Walk” means a clear, continuous surface free of tree
grates, elevator grates and all vertical obstructions.
(Ord. No. 392-03. Passed 9-22-03, eff. 10-1-03)
§ 512.02 Temporary Public Right-of-Way Occupancy Permits
   Notwithstanding any codified ordinance to the contrary, the Director is
hereby authorized to issue temporary public right-of-way occupancy permits
revocable at the will of Council authorizing the placement of business signs at
permitted locations on sidewalks, courts, alleys, streets, or other public
rights- of-way in the City, subject to the provisions of this chapter. A
separate encroachment permit for such business sign shall not be required.
(Ord. No. 392-03. Passed 9-22-03, eff. 10-1-03)
§ 512.03 Application for Permits
   Application for a permit shall be made to the Director in a form established
by the Director. Such application shall include, but not be limited to, the
following information:
   (a)   Name, phone number and address of applicant;
   (b)   Name and address of the business establishment seeking the temporary
public right-of- way occupancy permit;
   (c)   A description of the proposed area, with photographs, to be occupied
by the business sign;
   (d)   An example of the proposed business sign or a detailed drawing of the
business sign complete with dimensions, design details, and plans necessary to
determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter; and
   (e)   A signed statement that the permittee shall hold harmless the City of
Cleveland, its officers and employees and shall indemnify the City of
Cleveland, its officers and employees for any claims or damage to property or
injury to persons which may be occasioned by the business sign. Permittee shall
furnish and maintain such public liability and property damage insurance as
will protect permittee and the City from all claims for damage to property or
bodily injury, including death, which may arise from operations under the
permit or in connection with it. The insurance shall provide coverage in an
amount deemed acceptable by the Director of Law and the Director of Capital
Projects. The insurance also shall include the City of Cleveland, its officers
and employees, as additional insured.
(Ord. No. 599-11. Passed 6-6-11, eff. 6-13-11)
§ 512.04 Permit Fee, Issuance and Duration
   An application for a permit shall be accompanied by a fee established by the
Board of Control for each business sign.
   On the approval of an application by the Director of Public Service, the
Director of Public Safety, the City Planning Commission, and the Landmarks
Commission, if applicable, and upon compliance with the Council notification
provision described below, the Director of Public Service shall issue a permit
in accordance with this chapter.
   The City Planning Commission and the Landmarks Commission, if applicable,
shall consider in their review of the permit application, the size and design
of the proposed sign.
   No permit shall be issued until the members of Council of the wards affected
have been provided with written notice by the Director of Public Service and
until the expiration of thirty (30) days from the date of such notice, unless
such period of thirty (30) days is expressly waived by such Council Members in
writing. The processing of a complete application shall not take more than
ninety (90) days and in the event such application is not processed within
ninety (90) days, the applicant shall be entitled to a refund of the permit
fee.
   Permits shall be valid for a twelve (12) month period or any portion
thereof. Permits shall expire on May 31 of each year. Permits may be renewed,
on a form provided by the Director, for the following year provided all the
requirements of this chapter are met and no changes have been made from the
previous approved application. The permit renewal fee shall be established by
the Board of Control. If there are changes to the information provided in the
application, a new application must be made in accordance with this chapter and
the appropriate fee shall accompany such application.
(Ord. No. 392-03. Passed 9-22-03, eff. 10-1-03)
§ 512.05 Permitted Locations
   The issuance of a permit and the maintenance of the business sign shall be
subject to the provisions of this chapter, the zoning code, and the following
conditions and restrictions:
   (a)   Temporary public right-of-way occupancy permits shall be issued for
placement of business signs only in areas of the Central Business District
designated for such signs by the Cleveland City Council and in Pedestrian
Retail Overlay Districts specifically designated for placement of such signs
under the provisions of Section
343.22 of the Codified Ordinances;
   (b)   A business sign shall be placed only in front of or adjacent to the
location of the business establishment obtaining the permit;
   (c)   A business sign shall be placed only in a manner that allows for an
unobstructed walk for pedestrians;
   (d)   A business sign shall not obstruct emergency exits or fire standpipes;
   (e)   A business sign shall not occupy any portion of the roadway or be
within two (2) feet of the curb;
   (f)   A business sign shall not be permitted within six (6) feet of any fire
hydrant, within five (5) feet of any driveway or bus shelter, within three (3)
feet of any sidewalk handicap ramp, or within that portion of the sidewalk
parallel to an area designated for parking, handicapped parking or commercial
loading and unloading or within three (3) feet of a utility pole or traffic
sign; and
   (g)   A business sign shall not be located where the clear, continuous,
unobstructed sidewalk for the passageway of pedestrians would be reduced to
less than six (6) feet if the business sign were located there.
(Ord. No. 392-03. Passed 9-22-03, eff. 10-1-03)
§ 512.06 Permits
   The permit issued shall be posted on the business sign and may be posted on
the back of the sign provided that the permit is clearly visible from the
public sidewalk or street. The permit shall be protected from the weather as
necessary. Each permit shall contain the following information:
   (a)   The name and address of the Permittee;
   (b)   A description of the permitted location;
   (c)   A description of the business sign; and
   (d)   The expiration date of the permit.
(Ord. No. 392-03. Passed 9-22-03, eff. 10-1-03)
§ 512.07 Requirements and Conditions of Permit
   (a)   Permittees and their agents shall comply with all the requirements of
this chapter.
   (b)   The business sign shall be placed only in the location set forth in
the permit.
   (c)   The business sign shall be displayed in the public right-of-way only
during the operating hours of the business and shall be removed from the right-
of- way at the end of each business day.
   (d)   Permittees and their agents shall obey any order of a police officer
or other emergency personnel to remove the business sign from the public right-
of- way if necessary in an emergency.
   (e)   Permittees and their agents shall be responsible for maintaining all
business signs in good repair, free of corrosion and in a safe condition.
   (f)   The business sign shall not contain flashing lights or any other
lighting.
   (g)   The business sign shall include an anchoring system that withstands
normal weather conditions which anchoring system shall be approved by the
Director of Public Service.
   (h)   Permittees and their agents shall be responsible for the cost to
repair any damage to the sidewalk caused by the installation, placement, or
removal of a business sign.
   (i)   The business sign shall be no more than forty- eight (48) inches tall
and thirty (30) inches wide and shall be designed to withstand normal winds
loads. The size of a business sign shall be no bigger than that which is
necessary to identify the retail business to pedestrians.
   (j)   No permit shall be transferable in any manner.
   (k)   No permit shall be issued for a sidewalk not in compliance with code
requirements.
(Ord. No. 392-03. Passed 9-22-03, eff. 10-1-03)
§ 512.08 Permit Suspension and Revocation
   (a)   The Director may suspend or revoke the permit of any Permittee if the
Permittee or his or her agent fails to abide by the provisions of these
Codified Ordinances.
   (b)   The Director shall give written notice of the suspension or revocation
of the permit to the Permittee or his or her agent stating the reason or
reasons for the suspension or revocation. If the reason for the suspension or
revocation is that the Permittee does not currently have an effective insurance
policy as required by Section
512.03, suspension or revocation shall be effective upon receipt of the notice
of suspension or revocation by the Permittee or his or her agent. Otherwise,
the notice shall contain the further provision that the action shall become
final and effective ten (10) days thereafter unless, within five (5) days of
receipt of notice, the Permittee requests a hearing before the Director. The
Director shall forthwith hold the requested hearing, at which time the
Permittee shall be given the opportunity to contest the action and present
evidence. After the hearing, the director shall determine whether to suspend or
revoke the permit.
   (c)   The action of the Director may be appealed to the Board of Zoning
Appeals.
(Ord. No. 392-03. Passed 9-22-03, eff. 10-1-03)
§ 512.09 Removal of Business Signs
   Any business sign placed in the public right-of- way without a permit issued
pursuant to this section or not in compliance with a permit issued may be
seized and removed.
(Ord. No. 392-03. Passed 9-22-03, eff. 10-1-03)
§ 512.99 Penalty
   No person shall violate the provisions of this chapter and whoever violates
any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor. Each day
during which a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 392-03. Passed 9-22-03, eff. 10-1-03)
CHAPTER 512A – RETAIL BUSINESS SIGNS IN PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
512A.01   Definitions
512A.02
   Retail Business Signs in Public Right-of- Way Permits
512A.03
   Application for Permits
512A.04
   Permit Fee, Issuance and Duration
512A.05
   Permit Review and Locations
512A.06
   Permits
512A.07
   Requirements and Conditions of Permit
512A.08
   Permit Suspension and Revocation
512A.09
   Removal of Retail Business Signs
512A.99
   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Temporary public right-of-way occupancy permits for business signs, CO
Ch. 512
   Temporary public right-of-way occupancy permits for outdoor patios and
parklets, CO
Ch. 513
§ 512A.01 Definitions
   When used in this chapter, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
   (a)   “Director” means the Director of Public Service or his or her
designee.
   (b)   “Business Signs” means a commercial sign identifying a retail business
fronting a public right-of- way or adjacent to a public right-of-way.
   (c)   “Permit” means a public right-of-way occupancy permit authorized by
Section
512A.02 of the Codified Ordinances.
   (d)   “Permittee” means the person who owns the business sign permitted to
occupy an area of the public right-of-way.
   (e)   “Retail Business” means a business conducting the majority of its
business on the business premises.
   (f)   “Right-of-way” means any sidewalk, court, alley, street or other area
dedicated or otherwise designated for public use and held by the City.
   (g)   “Unobstructed Walk” means a clear, continuous surface free of tree
grates, elevator grates and all vertical obstructions.
(Ord. No. 1521-03. Passed 9-22-03, eff. 10-1-03)
§ 512A.02 Retail Business Signs in Public Right- of-Way Permits
   Notwithstanding any codified ordinance to the contrary, the Director is
hereby authorized to issue public right-of-way occupancy permits revocable at
the will of Council authorizing the placement of retail business signs if the
following requirements are met:
   (a)   There are five (5) or more businesses in a single building lacking
ground floor frontage;
   (b)   The sign is approved by the City Planning Commission or the Landmarks
Commission, if applicable;
   (c)   The Director of Public Service determines that the placement of the
retail business signs leaves sufficient unobstructed walk for pedestrians; and
   (d)   The applicant has obtained all necessary building permits.
   A separate encroachment permit for such retail business sign shall not be
required.
(Ord. No. 1521-03. Passed 9-22-03, eff. 10-1-03)
§ 512A.03 Application for Permits
   Application for a permit shall be made to the Director in a form established
by the Director. Such application shall include, but not be limited to, the
following information:
   (a)   Name, phone number and address of applicant;
   (b)   Name and address of the business establishment seeking the permit;
   (c)   A description of the proposed area, with photographs, to be occupied
by the business sign;
   (d)   A detailed drawing of the retail business sign complete with
dimensions, design details, and plans necessary to determine compliance with
the provisions of this chapter; and
   (e)   A signed statement that the permittee shall hold harmless the City of
Cleveland, its officers and employees and shall indemnify the City of
Cleveland, its officers and employees for any claims or damage to property or
injury to persons which may be occasioned by the business sign. Permittee shall
furnish and maintain such public liability and property damage insurance as
will protect permittee aid the City from all claims for damage to property or
bodily injury, including death, which may arise from operations under the
permit or in connection with it. The insurance shall provide coverage in an
amount deemed acceptable by the Director of Law and the Director of Capital
Projects. The insurance also shall include the City of Cleveland, its officers
and employees, as additional insured.
(Ord. No. 599-11. Passed 6-6-11, eff. 6-13-11)
§ 512A.04 Permit Fee, Issuance and Duration
   An application for a permit shall be accompanied by a fee determined by the
Board of Control for each business sign.
   On the approval of an application by the Director of Public Service, the
Director of Public Safety, the City Planning Commission, and the Landmarks
Commission, if applicable, and upon compliance with the Council notification
provision described below, the Director of Public Service shall issue a permit
in accordance with this chapter.
   No permit shall be issued until the members of Council of the wards affected
have been provided with written notice by the Director of Public Service and
until the expiration of thirty (30) days from the date of such notice, unless
such period of thirty (30) days is expressly waived by such Council Members in
writing.
   Permits shall be valid for a twelve (12) month period or any portion
thereof. Permits shall expire on May 31 of each year. Permits may be renewed,
on a form provided by the Director, for the following year provided all the
requirements of this chapter are met and no changes have been made from the
previous approved application. The permit renewal fee shall be established by
the Board of Control. If there are changes to the information provided in the
application, a new application must be made in accordance with this chapter and
the appropriate fee shall accompany such application.
(Ord. No. 1521-03. Passed 9-22-03, eff. 10-1-03)
§ 512A.05 Permit Review and Locations
   The issuance of a permit and the maintenance of the business sign shall be
subject to the provisions of this chapter, the zoning code, and the following
conditions and restrictions:
   (a)   A retail business sign in the public right-of- way shall be placed
only in that portion of the public right-of-way directly adjoining the building
lacking ground floor footage on a public street;
   (b)   The City Planning Commission or Landmarks Commission, if applicable,
reviewed the design of the retail business sign and the sign is no greater in
size than necessary to identify the retail business to pedestrians.
   (c)   The City Planning Commission or Landmarks Commission, if applicable,
determines that there is no appropriate location for such retail business sign
on the private property occupied by the Retail Business;
   (d)   The Director of Public Service determined that the placement of the
retail business sign leaves sufficient unobstructed walk area to permit safe
passage by pedestrians;
   (e)   The retail business sign shall not obstruct crosswalks, bus stops,
building entrances, access to handicap parking spaces, or other areas necessary
for pedestrian movement, as determined by the Director of Public Service;
   (f)   The retail business sign shall not be located closer than five (5)
feet to a crosswalk, bus shelter, or fire hydrant and shall not be located
closer than three (3) feet to a utility pole or traffic sign; and
   (g)   A retail business sign shall not occupy any portion of the roadway or
be within two (2) feet of the curb.
(Ord. No. 1521-03. Passed 9-22-03, eff. 10-1-03)
§ 512A.06 Permits
   The permit issued shall be posted on the retail business sign and may be
posted on the back of the sign provided that the permit is clearly visible from
the public sidewalk or street. The permit shall be protected from the weather
as necessary. Each permit shall contain the following information:
   (a)   The name and address of the Permittee;
   (b)   A description of the permitted location;
   (c)   A description of the retail business sign; and
   (d)   The expiration date of the permit.
(Ord. No. 1521-03. Passed 9-22-03, eff. 10-1-03)
§ 512A.07 Requirements and Conditions of Permit
   (a)   Permittees and their agents shall comply with all the requirements of
this chapter.
   (b)   The retail business sign shall be placed only in the location set
forth in the permit.
   (c)   Permittees and their agents shall be responsible for maintaining all
retail business signs in good repair, free of corrosion and in a safe
condition.
   (d)   No permit shall be transferable in any manner.
(Ord. No. 1521-03. Passed 9-22-03, eff. 10-1-03)
§ 512A.08 Permit Suspension and Revocation
   (a)   The Director may suspend or revoke the permit of any Permittee if the
Permittee or his or her agent fails to abide by the provisions of these
Codified Ordinances.
   (b)   The Director shall give written notice of the suspension or revocation
of the permit to the Permittee or his or her agent stating the reason or
reasons for the suspension or revocation. If the reason for the suspension or
revocation is that the Permittee does not currently have an effective insurance
policy as required by Section
512A.03, the suspension or revocation shall be effective upon receipt of the
notice of suspension or revocation by the Permittee or his or her agent.
Otherwise, the notice shall contain the further provision that the action shall
become final and effective ten (10) days thereafter unless, within five (5)
days of receipt of notice, the Permittee requests a hearing before the
Director. The Director shall forthwith hold the requested hearing, at which
time the Permittee shall be given the opportunity to contest the action and
present evidence. After the hearing, the Director shall determine whether to
suspend or revoke the permit.
   (c)   The action of the Director may be appealed to the Board of Zoning
Appeals.
(Ord. No. 1521-03. Passed 9-22-03, eff. 10-1-03)
§ 512A.09 Removal of Retail Business Signs
   Any retail business sign placed in the public right- of-way without a permit
issued pursuant to this section or not in compliance with a permit issued may
be seized and removed.
(Ord. No. 1521-03. Passed 9-22-03, eff. 10-1-03)
§ 512A.99 Penalty
   No person shall violate the provisions of this chapter and whoever violates
any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor. Each day
during which a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 1521-03. Passed 9-22-03, eff. 10-1-03)
CHAPTER 513 – ISSUANCE OF TEMPORARY PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY OCCUPANCY PERMITS FOR
PATIOS AND PARKLETS
513.01   Definitions
513.02   Temporary Public Right-of-Way Occupancy Permits for Outdoor Patios and
Parklets
513.03   Application for Permits
513.04   Permit Fee, Issuance and Duration
513.05   Permitted Locations
513.06   Permits
513.07   Requirements and Conditions of Permit
513.08   Permit Suspension and Revocation
513.09   Removal of Structures, Tables, Chairs and Other Associated Equipment
513.10   Taxes
513.11   Regulations
513.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Retail business signs in public right-of-way, CO
Ch. 512A
   Temporary public right-of-way occupancy permits for business signs, CO
Ch. 512
§ 513.01 Definitions
   When used in this chapter, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
   (a)   "Community Development Corporation" or "CDC" means a non-profit,
community-focused entity whose mission is to support its affiliated City
neighborhood with a range of programs, services, and activities.
   (b)   "Director" means the Director of Capital Project or his or her
designee.
   (c)   "Outdoor Patio" means a portion of a public sidewalk that is used by a
business establishment for its current business operations.
   (d)   "Parklet" means an area within an existing curb lane on a street where
parking is permitted that may be used by a business establishment for its
current business operations, bicycle parking, or any other purpose deemed
appropriate by the Director or by a CDC for food and/or beverage consumption,
bicycle parking, or any other purpose deemed appropriate by the Director.
   (e)   "Permit" means a temporary public right-of-way occupancy permit
authorized by Section
513.02 of the Codified Ordinances.
   (f)   "Permittee" means the person or entity who owns the outdoor patio and/
or parklet, or the CDC who owns the parklet, permitted to occupy an area of the
public right-of-way.
   (g)   "Right-of-way" means any sidewalk, street or other area dedicated or
otherwise designated for public use and held by the City.
   (h)   "Unobstructed Walk" means a clear, continuous paved surface free of
tree grates, elevator grates and all vertical obstructions.
(Ord. No. 704-2023. Passed 7-12-23, eff. 7-17-23)
§ 513.02 Temporary Public Right-of-Way Occupancy Permits for Outdoor Patios and
Parklets
   Notwithstanding any codified ordinance to the contrary, the Director of
Capital Projects is hereby authorized to issue temporary public right-of-way
occupancy permits revocable at the will of the Council authorizing the
placement of outdoor patios at permitted locations on sidewalks, and parklets
at permitted locations on streets in the City, subject to the provisions of
this chapter. A separate encroachment permit for such outdoor patios or
parklets shall not be required.
   No owner or operator of a business establishment shall occupy any portion of
a public sidewalk or street with an outdoor patio or parklet, respectively, and
no CDC shall occupy any portion of a street with a parklet, without first
obtaining a permit in accordance with this chapter. Any business owner or
operator occupying any portion of a public sidewalk or street, or any CDC
occupying any portion of a street, without a permit as required by this chapter
shall be subject to the fines and penalties set forth in Sections
513.09 and
513.99 of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 704-2023. Passed 7-12-23, eff. 7-17-23)
§ 513.03 Application for Permits
   Application for a permit shall be made to the Director in a form deemed
appropriate by him or her. Such application shall include, but not be limited
to, the following information:
   (a)   Name, phone number and address of the applicant;
   (b)   Name and address of the business establishment or CDC, as appropriate,
seeking the temporary occupancy permit;
   (c)   A description of the proposed area, with photographs, to be occupied
by the outdoor patio or parklet and the hours and days of operation;
   (d)   Detailed plans drawn to scale showing the locations, number and
arrangement of tables, chairs, and other structures, the location of the
pedestrian diverters planned to demarcate the occupied area, the location of
the entrance to the establishment, the locations of fire exits or fire escapes,
and the nature and location of any existing sidewalk obstructions. If the
application is for a parklet, drawings and any other information that the
Director deems necessary for the protective barrier required under division (e)
of Section
513.05 of these Codified Ordinances;
   (e)   A description of the tables, chairs, pedestrian diverters, and other
structures, including information about the composition;
   (f)   If applicable, a description of the type of food, beverage or
merchandise for sale;
   (g)   If applicable, a copy of the applicant's liquor permit, expansion
permit, and a complete copy of the expansion permit application submitted to
the Division of Liquor Control;
   (h)   If applicable, evidence that all required health licenses, including,
but not limited to, the license required by Section
241.21 of the Codified Ordinances, have been obtained or have been applied for;
and
   (i)   A signed statement that the permittee shall hold harmless the City of
Cleveland, its officers and employees and shall indemnify the City of
Cleveland, its officers and employees for any claims or damage to property or
injury to persons which may be occasioned by any activity carried on under the
terms of the permit. Permittee shall furnish and maintain such public
liability, food products liability, if applicable, and property damage
insurance as will protect permittee and the City from all claims for damage to
property or bodily injury, including death, which may arise from operations
under the permit or in connection therewith. Such insurance shall provide
coverage in an amount of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) on
account of an accident involving injuries, including death, to one (1) or more
persons and property damage insurance in an amount of not less than one million
dollars ($1,000,000.00), or a combined single limit of one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) provided however, that this insurance requirement shall not be
construed to limit permittee's indemnification obligations to the above-
required limits of insurance. Such insurance shall also include the City of
Cleveland, its officers and employees, as additional insured.
   (j)   Prior to issuing a permit for a patio or parklet, the applicant shall
deposit with the Director a survey bond or equivalent financial instrument in
the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) to guarantee full and faithful
performance of the requirements of this chapter. Such bond shall be
satisfactory to the Director of Capital Projects and the Director of Law. The
requirements in this division shall not apply to a CDC that is seeking a permit
for a public purpose.
(Ord. No. 704-2023. Passed 7-12-23, eff. 7-17-23)
§ 513.04 Permit Fee, Issuance and Duration
   (a)   An application for a permit shall be accompanied by the fee
established by time to time by the Board of Control for each proposed area for
an outdoor patio and/or parklet.
   (b)   On approval of the application by the Director of Public Health, the
Director of Public Safety, the Director of Capital Projects, the Director of
the City Planning Commission, and, as applicable, the Director of Building and
Housing, the Director of Public Works, and the Secretary of the Landmarks
Commission, the legislative approval required under division (c) below, and the
bond described in division (j) of Section
513.03 above, the Director of Capital Projects shall issue a permit under this
chapter. Denial of a permit may be appealed to the Board of Sidewalk Appeals.
   (c)   No permit shall be issued without the prior approval of Council.
   (d)   Permits shall be valid for a twelve (12) month period. Permits may be
renewed, on a form provided by the Director, for the following year provided
all the requirements of this chapter are met, and no changes have been made
from the previous approved application. The non-refundable permit renewal fee
shall be established by time to time by the Board of Control. If there are
changes to the application, a new application must be made under this
application and the appropriate permit fee shall accompany the application.
   (e)   If a permittee sells or leases its business establishment, the new
business owner or operator may submit, within sixty (60) days of obtaining or
leasing such business establishment and at no cost, an amended application for
the location(s) with the information required under Section
513.03, except for divisions (c) and (d) thereof, if no changes will be made to
the use or detailed plans for which the permit was previously issued.
Otherwise, a new application for the location(s) must be made under Section
513.03 and the appropriate permit fee shall accompany the application.
(Ord. No. 704-2023. Passed 7-12-23, eff. 7-17-23)
§ 513.05 Permitted Locations
   The Director, consistent with the provisions of this chapter and the zoning
code, shall establish rules and regulations as the Director deems proper with
respect to permitted locations for the operation of outdoor patios and
parklets. The Director shall consider, as appropriate, the operation and
location of the outdoor patio and/or parklet, the maintenance of the business
establishment requesting a permit, the proximity and location of emergency
exits, fire standpipes, fire hydrants, driveways, handicap ramps, handicapped
parking zones, commercial loading and unloading zones, the condition of the
sidewalk, and other factors he or she deems relevant. The Director may modify
the rules and regulations as he or she deems necessary.
   The issuance of permits and the maintenance of structures, tables, chairs,
and other associated equipment shall be subject to the rules and regulations
established by the Director, the zoning code and the following conditions and
restrictions:
   (a)   Outdoor patios shall not obstruct emergency exits or fire standpipes;
   (b)   Outdoor patios and parklets shall comply with the handicap
accessibility requirements established in the Director's rules and regulations;
   (c)   Outdoor patios and parklets shall not be permitted within six (6) feet
of any fire hydrant, within five (5) feet of any driveway, within three (3)
feet of any sidewalk handicap ramp, within two (2) feet of the curb designated
for parking, unless the use is for a parklet, or within an area designated for
handicapped parking or commercial loading and unloading or any other area where
parking is prohibited. Parklets also shall not be permitted within fifty (50)
feet of an intersection; and
   (d)   Outdoor patios shall not be permitted at any location where the clear,
continuous, unobstructed sidewalk for the passageway of pedestrians is reduced
to less than six (6) feet with the exception of the following areas which shall
have clear, continuous unobstructed sidewalk at width of no less than ten (10)
feet:
      (1)   Public Square;
      (2)   East 9th Street between Carnegie and the East 9th Street Pier,
Lakeside Avenue, St. Clair Avenue and Superior Avenue between Ontario Street
and East 13th Street; and
      (3)   Ontario Street between Carnegie Avenue and Lakeside Avenue, East
6th Street between Superior Avenue and Lakeside Avenue.
   (e)   Parklets shall not be used without a protective barrier that meets the
plans and specifications approved by the Director.
(Ord. No. 704-2023. Passed 7-12-23, eff. 7-17-23)
§ 513.06 Permits
   Permits for outdoor patios shall be issued in such a manner that they are
distinguishable from liquor permits issued by the State of Ohio and shall be
posted in a conspicuous location in a window or other readily visible location
of the frontage of the applicant's business establishment. The permit shall be
protected from the weather as necessary and shall be clearly visible from the
public sidewalk, court, alley or street and not obstructed by awnings,
landscaping or other impediments.
   Each permit for an outdoor patio and a parklet shall contain the following
information:
   (a)   The name and address of the permittee;
   (b)   A description of the permitted location;
   (c)   A description of any structures, tables, chairs and other associated
equipment;
   (d)   A statement indicating whether the permittee is authorized by the
State of Ohio to serve alcohol in the outdoor patio and/or parklet;
   (e)   The expiration date of the permit; and
   (f)   Any other information the Director deems desirable.
(Ord. No. 704-2023. Passed 7-12-23, eff. 7-17-23)
§ 513.07 Requirements and Conditions of Permit
   (a)   Permittees and their agents shall comply with all of the requirements
of this chapter and any applicable state law, while engaged in business at
permitted locations.
   (b)   The outdoor patio and/or parklet shall be placed only on the location
set forth in the permit.
   (c)   An outdoor patio or a parklet located in the Central Business District
shall not operate earlier than 6:00 a.m. nor later than 12:00 midnight. An
outdoor patio or a parklet located in any district other than the Central
Business District shall not operate earlier than 6:00 a.m. nor later than 11:00
p.m.
   (d)   Permittees and their agents shall obey any order of a police officer
or other emergency personnel to remove their structures, tables, chairs and
other associated equipment from the public right-of-way if necessary to avoid
congestion or obstruction in an emergency.
   (e)   Permittees shall maintain all required health licenses, including, but
not limited to, the license required by Section
241.22 of the Codified Ordinances.
   (f)   Permittees and their agents shall be responsible for maintaining all
outdoor patio and parklet structures and associated equipment in good repair,
free of corrosion and in a safe, sound and nonhazardous condition. Permittees
and their agents shall remedy any maintenance violations within the time frame
stated in a written notice by the Director.
   (g)   Permittees and their agents shall be responsible for keeping the
general area around the permitted location free of litter and shall provide a
suitable container for the placement of paper, wrappers, and other similar
items used by customers and others within the permitted area. Permittees and
their agents shall maintain at least six (6) feet of unobstructed walk as
required by the Director of Capital Projects, which shall be free of snow at
all times, as required by Section
507.13.
   (h)   Permittees shall not cook food in the outdoor patio or parklet.
   (i)   Except for outdoor patios located on a sidewalk that is adjacent to a
permittee's business establishment, permittees shall install, after obtaining a
permit from the City and at their expense, a sign in each permitted location
which conforms with the City's design format and states the hours of
operations, whether it is for public or customer use, and the permittee's
business name. Such sign shall not include any other commercial messages,
slogans, telephone numbers, or other forms of advertising. Permittees shall not
place any other signs in the permitted location, except under a permit issued
by the City of Cleveland.
   (j)   A business establishment that has been issued a permit for a parklet
shall provide prior written notice to its respective CDC that the permittee
will be installing, or will cause to be installed, a parklet at the permitted
location.
   (k)   Permittees shall include the additional seating in outdoor patios and/
or parklets in its capacity in determining restroom requirements under state
and local law.
   (l)   No permit shall be transferable in any manner.
   (m)   A permit is valid only when used at the location designated in the
permit.
(Ord. No. 704-2023. Passed 7-12-23, eff. 7-17-23)
§ 513.08 Permit Suspension and Revocation
   (a)   The Director may suspend or revoke the permit of any permittee if the
permittee or his or her agent fails to abide by the provisions of these
Codified Ordinances or state law, or if any required health license has been
suspended or revoked.
   (b)   The Director may revoke the permit of any permittee if the permittee
suspends operations permanently in the location designated in the permit.
   (c)   The Director shall give written notice of suspension or revocation of
the permit to the permittee or his or her agent stating the reasons therefor.
If the reason for the suspension or revocation is that a required health
license has been suspended or revoked or that the permittee does not currently
have an effective insurance policy as required by division (i) of Section
513.03, the action shall be effective upon giving such notice to the permittee
or to his or her agent. Otherwise, such notice shall contain the further
provision that the action shall become final and effective ten (10) days
thereafter unless, within five (5) days of receipt of notice, the permittee
requests a hearing before the Director. The Director shall forthwith hold the
requested hearing, at which time the permittee shall be afforded the
opportunity to give his or her version of the facts which gave rise to the
Director's action. After the hearing the Director shall determine whether to
proceed with the action or to rescind it.
   (d)   The action of the Director may be appealed to the Board of Sidewalk
Appeals.
(Ord. No. 704-2023. Passed 7-12-23, eff. 7-17-23)
§ 513.09 Removal of Structures, Tables, Chairs and Other Associated Equipment
   (a)   Failure to Obtain Required Permit. Any structures, tables, chairs and
other associated equipment placed in a public sidewalk, street or other public
right-of-way without a permit issued pursuant to this section may be seized and
removed. Prior to such seizure and removal, the property owner or operator of
the business establishment fronting on the public right-of-way from which the
structure, tables, chairs and other associated equipment are to be removed
shall be notified and given two (2) days in which to remedy the violation. If
the property owner or operator of the business establishment fails to remedy
the violation, the City may seize and remove the structures, tables, chairs and
other associated equipment.
   (b)   Immediate and Serious Danger to Person or Property. Notwithstanding
any other provisions of this chapter, the City may seize any structures,
tables, chairs and other associated equipment, whether placed with or without a
permit, without prior notice if the structures, tables, chairs and other
associated equipment are placed in the public right-of-way in such a place or
manner as to pose an immediate and serious danger to persons or property or if
the condition of the structures, tables, chairs, and associated equipment
renders them unsafe, unsound or hazardous so as to pose an immediate and
serious danger to persons or property. After seizure, the City shall promptly
notify the owner or operator of the business establishment and such individual
shall have the right to request an informal hearing before the Director within
ten (10) days after such notification to determine whether the seizure was
proper.
   (c)   Emergency Situations. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
chapter, the City may seize and remove any structures, tables, chairs and other
associated equipment, whether placed with or without a permit, without prior
notice in the case of an emergency. The City shall promptly notify the owner or
operator of the business establishment or CDC, as appropriate, of such removal.
   (d)   Temporary Removal for Utility Work. If a public or private entity
needs to make repairs to any utilities located in, over, or across, or through
the permitted location for a parklet, the permittee shall remove, or cause to
be removed, any structures, tables, chairs and other associated equipment
within the later of thirty (30) days or the time frame stated in the written
notification to the permittee by such public or private entity. If the
permittee fails to remove any structures, tables, chairs, and other associate
equipment, the City may remove and seize, or cause to be removed and seized,
the structures, tables, chairs, and other associated equipment. Upon completion
of any such utility repairs, the permittee may reinstall such items.
   (e)   Restoration; Failure to Restore. Upon the termination or revocation of
a permit, the permittee shall immediately remove any structures, tables, chairs
and other associated equipment in the public right-of-way and shall restore the
public right-of-way to a similar or like condition which existed at the time
permittee began to use the location designated in the permit or to the
standards and specifications required by the Director. Notwithstanding the
above, such removal and restoration shall not be required when the permittee
sells or leases its business establishment to a third party who files, within
sixty (60) days of obtaining or leasing such business, an amended or new
application, as appropriate, pursuant to division (e) of Section
513.04 of these Codified Ordinance.
   (f)   As a condition of recovering any structures, tables, chairs and other
associated equipment properly seized pursuant to this section, except for
division (c), the owner of such structure, tables, chairs and other associated
equipment shall pay an impound fee covering the actual cost to the City of
transporting and storing such structure, tables, chairs and other associated
equipment.
(Ord. No. 704-2023. Passed 7-12-23, eff. 7-17-23)
§ 513.10 Taxes
   The permittee shall be responsible for all charges and all federal, state or
local taxes, including property taxes, which may now or hereafter be imposed or
levied upon the outdoor patio and/or parklet and the services provided in
connection therewith.
(Ord. No. 704-2023. Passed 7-12-23, eff. 7-17-23)
§ 513.11 Regulations
   The Director may promulgate such regulations, not inconsistent with the
provisions of this chapter, establishing procedures for the issuance, requiring
uniformity and landscaping provisions, and any additional requirements and
conditions of permits. The Director shall submit to the Council for its
approval, any change or addition to the regulations referred to in this
section.
(Ord. No. 704-2023. Passed 7-12-23, eff. 7-17-23)
§ 513.99 Penalty
   (a)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. Each day during which noncompliance or a
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
   (b)   The Administration Manager for the Office of Capital Projects, or his
or her designee, is authorized to assess a civil penalty of one hundred dollars
($100.00) for each day during which noncompliance or a violation continues. A
civil penalty imposed under this division may be appealed to the Board of
Right-of-Way Appeals. Notice of appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed
with the Board within ten (10) business days from the date of the notice of the
civil penalty.
   (c)   The authority to assess civil penalties under division (b) of this
section does not limit or affect any criminal offense, or the authority of the
Director to suspend or revoke a license under Section
513.08, or any other means of enforcement of this chapter provided for in these
Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 1141-2023. Passed 2-3-25, eff. 2-4-25)
CHAPTER 514 – ISSUANCE OF TEMPORARY PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY OCCUPANCY PERMITS FOR
STREETSCAPE AMENITIES
514.01   Definitions
514.02   Temporary Public Right-of-Way Occupancy Permits
514.03   Application for Permits
514.04   Permit Fee, Issuance and Duration
514.05   Permitted Locations
514.06   Permits
514.07   Requirements and Conditions of Permit
514.08   Permit Suspension and Revocation
514.09   Removal of Streetscape Amenities
514.091   Temporary Removal of Streetscape Amenities
514.10   Taxes
514.11   Regulations
514.99   Penalty
§ 514.01 Definitions
   When used in this chapter, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
   (a)   “Director” means the Director of Capital Projects, or the Director’s
designee.
   (b)   “Permit” means a temporary public right-of- way occupancy permit
authorized under this chapter.
   (c)   “Permittee” means the person authorized to occupy an area of the
public right-of-way.
   (d)   “Right-of-way” means any sidewalk, court, alley, street or other area
dedicated or otherwise designated for public use and held by the City.
   (e)   “Streetscape amenities” means any item placed within the public right-
of-way, including but not limited to: banners, benches, planters, public art,
directional signs, bicycle racks, trash containers, railings, decorative
fencing, curbing, pavers, planting beds, planting bed irrigation, hanging
baskets, special district signage, and seasonal decorations.
   (f)   “Unobstructed walk” means a clear, continuous paved surface free of
tree grates, elevator grates and all vertical obstructions.
(Ord. No. 1141-2023. Passed 2-3-25, eff. 2-4-25)
§ 514.02 Temporary Public Right-of-Way Occupancy Permits
   Notwithstanding any codified ordinance to the contrary, the Director is
authorized to issue temporary public right-of-way occupancy permits revocable
at the will of Council authorizing the placement of various streetscape
amenities at permitted locations on sidewalks, courts, alleys, streets or other
public rights-of-way in the City, subject to the provisions of this chapter. A
separate street opening permit may also be required as determined by the
Manager of Engineering and Construction, or the Manager’s designee. A separate
encroachment permit for such items shall not be required.
   No owner or operator of a business establishment shall occupy any portion of
a public sidewalk, court, alley, street or other public right-of-way with
streetscape amenities without first obtaining a permit under this chapter. Any
business owner or operator occupying any portion of a public sidewalk, court,
alley, street or other public right-of-way without a permit as required by this
chapter shall be subject to the fines and penalties set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. No. 1141-2023. Passed 2-3-25, eff. 2-4-25)
§ 514.03 Application for Permits
   Application for a permit shall be made to the Director in a form deemed
appropriate by the Director. The application shall include, but not be limited
to, the following information:
   (a)   Name, phone number, and address of applicant;
   (b)   Street address of the proposed amenity;
   (c)   A description of the proposed area, with photographs;
   (d)   A description of the proposed amenity, including information about the
composition;
   (e)   A signed statement that the applicant is the owner of the property
immediately adjacent to the proposed amenity. If the applicant is not the owner
of the subject property, a notarized statement from the owner indicating their
knowledge and consent to the proposed amenities; and
   (f)   A signed statement that the Permittee shall hold harmless the City of
Cleveland, its officers and employees and shall indemnify the City of
Cleveland, its officers and employees for any claims or damage to property or
injury to persons. Permittee shall furnish and maintain the public liability
and property damage insurance as will protect Permittee and the City from all
claims for damage to property or bodily injury, including death, which may
arise from operations under the permit or in connection therewith. The
insurance shall provide coverage in an amount of not less than One Million
Dollars ($1,000,000.00) on account of an accident involving injuries, including
death, to one (1) or more persons and property damage insurance in an amount of
not less than One Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00), or a combined single limit
of One Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00) provided however, that this insurance
requirement shall not be construed to limit Permittee’s indemnification
obligations to the above-required limits of insurance. Such insurance shall
also name the City of Cleveland as an additional insured, its officers and
employees, and shall further provide that the policy shall not terminate or be
canceled prior to the expiration date of the permit without thirty (30) days
written notice to the Director.
(Ord. No. 884-10. Passed 8-18-10, eff. 8-20-10)
§ 514.04 Permit Fee, Issuance and Duration
   (a)   Upon approval of an application for a permit, the applicant shall pay
a non-refundable fee in accordance with a fee schedule fixed from time to time
by the Board of Control for each individual amenity for which a permit is
desired.
   (b)   On approval of the application by the Director of Capital Projects,
the Director of the City Planning Commission, the Secretary of the Landmarks
Commission, and any other Director that the Director of Capital Projects deems
applicable, the payment of the fee described in division (a) above, and in
compliance with the Council notification provision described below, the
Director of Capital Projects shall issue a permit under this chapter.
   (c)   No permit shall be issued until the members of Council of the wards
affected have been provided with written notice by the Director of Capital
Projects and until the expiration of thirty (30) days from the date of this
notice, unless the period of thirty (30) days is expressly waived by the
Council members in writing.
   (d)   Permits for banners and seasonal decorations shall be valid for not
more than a twelve (12) month period; permits for all other streetscape
amenities shall be valid for no more than a sixty (60) month period. Permits
may be renewed, on a form provided by the Director, provided all the
requirements of this chapter are met, and no changes have been made from the
previous approved application. The permit renewal fee shall be in accordance
with a fee schedule fixed from time to time by the Board of Control for each
individual amenity. If there are changes to the application, a new application
must be made under this application.
   (e)   No permit application fee or renewal fee shall be required under the
provisions of this Section for placement of only bicycle racks.
(Ord. No. 1141-2023. Passed 2-3-25, eff. 2-4-25)
§ 514.05 Permitted Locations
   The Director, consistent with the provisions of this chapter and the zoning
code, shall establish rules and regulations as the Director deems proper with
respect to permitted locations for streetscape amenities.
   The issuance of permits shall be subject to the rules and regulations
established by the Director.
(Ord. No. 884-10. Passed 8-18-10, eff. 8-20-10)
§ 514.06 Permits
   Permits shall be issued in such a manner that they are readily accessible on
request from a City official. Each permit shall contain the following
information:
   (a)   The name and address of the Permittee;
   (b)   A description of the permitted location;
   (c)   A description of the permitted amenities;
   (d)   The expiration date of the permit; and
   (e)   Any other information the Director deems appropriate.
(Ord. No. 884-10. Passed 8-18-10, eff. 8-20-10)
§ 514.07 Requirements and Conditions of Permit
   (a)   Permittees and their agents shall comply with all of the requirements
of this chapter and any applicable state law, while engaged in business at
permitted locations.
   (b)   Permittees and their agents shall be responsible for maintaining all
amenities and associated equipment in good repair, free of corrosion and in a
safe, sound, and nonhazardous condition.
   (c)   Permittees and their agents shall be responsible for keeping the
general area around the permitted location free of litter. Permittees and their
agents shall maintain at least four (4) feet of unobstructed walk as required
by the Director, which shall be free of snow at all times, as required by
Section
507.13.
   (d)   No permit shall be transferable in any manner.
   (e)   A permit is valid only when used at the location designated in the
permit.
(Ord. No. 1141-2023. Passed 2-3-25, eff. 2-4-25)
§ 514.08 Permit Suspension and Revocation
   (a)   The Director may suspend or revoke the permit of any Permittee if the
Permittee or his or her agent fails to abide by the provisions of these
Codified Ordinances or state law.
   (b)   The Director shall give written notice of suspension or revocation of
the permit to the Permittee or his or her agent stating the reasons therefore.
If the reason for the suspension or revocation is that the Permittee does not
currently have an effective insurance policy as required by this chapter, the
action shall be effective on giving notice to the Permittee or to his or her
agent. Otherwise notice shall contain the further provision that the action
shall become final and effective ten (10) days thereafter unless, within five
(5) days of receipt of notice, the Permittee requests a hearing before the
Director. The Director shall hold the requested hearing, at which time the
Permittee shall be afforded the opportunity to give his or her version of the
facts which gave rise to the Director’s action. After the hearing, the Director
shall determine whether to proceed with the action or to rescind it.
   (c)   The action of the Director may be appealed to the Board of Zoning
Appeals.
(Ord. No. 884-10. Passed 8-18-10, eff. 8-20-10)
§ 514.09 Removal of Streetscape Amenities
   Any streetscape amenity placed in a public sidewalk, court, alley, street,
or other public right-of-way without a permit issued or with a permit that has
expired under this section may be seized and removed. Before the seizure and
removal, the property owner or operator of the business establishment fronting
on the public right-of-way shall be notified and given two (2) days in which to
remedy the violation. If the property owner or operator of the business
establishment fails to remedy the violation, the City may seize and remove the
associated amenity.
   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the City may seize any
amenity items and associated equipment, whether placed with or without a
permit, without prior notice if such items and associated equipment are placed
in the public right-of- way in such a place or manner as to pose an immediate
and serious danger to persons or property or if the condition of the items and
associated equipment renders them unsafe, unsound, or hazardous so as to pose
an immediate and serious danger to persons or property. After seizure, the City
shall promptly notify the owner or operator of the business establishment and
such individual shall have the right to request an informal hearing before the
Director within ten (10) days after notification to determine whether the
seizure was proper.
   As a condition of recovering any items and other associated equipment
properly seized under this section, the owner of the items and other associated
equipment shall pay an impound fee covering the actual cost to the City of
transporting and storing the items and other associated equipment.
(Ord. No. 1141-2023. Passed 2-3-25, eff. 2-4-25)
§ 514.091 Temporary Removal of Streetscape Amenities
   (a)   Emergency Situations. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
chapter, the City may seize and remove a streetscape amenity, whether placed
with or without a permit, without prior notice in the case of an emergency and
shall not be responsible for any damages resulting therefrom. The City shall
promptly notify the owner or operator of the business establishment of such
removal.
   (b)   Temporary Removal for Utility Work. Whenever a public or private
entity needs to make repairs to any utilities located in, over, or across, or
through the permitted location for a streetscape amenity, the permittee shall
remove, or cause to be removed, the streetscape amenity within the later of
thirty (30) days or the time frame stated in the notice to the permittee by
such public or private entity. If the permittee fails to remove the streetscape
amenity, the City may remove and seize, or cause to be removed and seized, the
streetscape amenity. Upon completion of any such utility repairs, the permittee
may reinstall the streetscape amenity.
(Ord. No. 1141-2023. Passed 2-3-25, eff. 2-4-25)
§ 514.10 Taxes
   The Permittee shall be responsible for all charges and all federal, State or
local taxes, including property taxes, which may now or hereafter be imposed or
levied on the subject site.
(Ord. No. 884-10. Passed 8-18-10, eff. 8-20-10)
§ 514.11 Regulations
   The Director may promulgate regulations, not inconsistent with the
provisions of this chapter, establishing procedures for the issuance of
permits.
(Ord. No. 884-10. Passed 8-18-10, eff. 8-20-10)
§ 514.99 Penalty
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. Each day during which noncompliance or a
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 884-10. Passed 8-18-10, eff. 8-20-10)
CHAPTER 515 – ISSUANCE OF TEMPORARY PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY OCCUPANCY PERMITS FOR
SIDEWALK SALES
515.01   Definitions
515.02   Temporary Public Right-of-Way Occupancy Permits
515.03   Application for Permits
515.04   Permit Fee, Issuance and Duration
515.05   Permitted Locations
515.06   Permits
515.07   Requirements and Conditions of Permit
515.08   Permit Suspension and Revocation
515.09   Removal of Merchandise and Other Associated Equipment
515.10   Taxes
515.11   Regulations
515.99   Penalty
§ 515.01 Definitions
   When used in this chapter, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
   (a)   “Director” means the Director of Public Service or his or her
designee.
   (b)   “Sidewalk Sale” means a commercial sale or display of goods, products,
wares, merchandise, services or material related to services, any one (1) or
all of which is sold or displayed on a sidewalk immediately contiguous to the
building/commercial premises within which the vendor has for permitted
commercial sale of products, or services.
   (c)   “Permit” means a temporary public right-of- way occupancy permit
authorized by Section
515.02 of the Codified Ordinances.
   (d)   “Permittee” means the person who owns the business immediately
contiguous to the sidewalk sale and is permitted to occupy an area of the
public right- of-way for the purpose of a sidewalk sale.
   (e)   “Right-of-way” means any sidewalk, court, alley, street or other area
dedicated or otherwise designated for public use and held by the City.
   (f)   “Unobstructed Walk” means a clear, continuous paved surface free of
tree grates, elevator grates and all vertical obstructions.
(Ord. No. 928-04. Passed 7-14-04, eff. 7-23-04)
§ 515.02 Temporary Public Right-of-Way Occupancy Permits
   Notwithstanding any codified ordinance to the contrary, the Director of
Public Service is authorized to issue temporary public right-of-way occupancy
permits revocable at the will of the Council authorizing a Sidewalk Sale at
locations approved by resolution of Council on sidewalks, courts, alleys,
streets or other public rights-of-way in the City, subject to the provisions of
this chapter. A separate encroachment permit will not be required for a
Sidewalk Sale. An owner or operator of a business establishment who obtains a
permit under this chapter is exempt from the license and permit requirements of
Chapter
675, “Peddlers and Produce Dealers”, if the Sidewalk Sale is limited to the
sale or display of the same goods, products, wares, merchandise, services or
material related to services as those that the owner or operator sells or
displays inside the immediately contingent building or commercial premises.
   No owner or operator of a business establishment shall occupy any portion of
a public sidewalk, court, alley, street or other public right-of-way with a
Sidewalk Sale without first obtaining a permit in accordance with this chapter.
Any business owner or operator occupying any portion of a public sidewalk,
court, alley, street or other public right-of-way without a permit as required
by this chapter shall be subject to the fines and penalties set forth in
Sections
515.09 and
515.99 of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 928-04. Passed 7-14-04, eff. 7-23-04)
§ 515.03 Application for Permits
   Application for a permit shall be made to the Director in a form deemed
appropriate by him or her.
(Ord. No. 928-04. Passed 7-14-04, eff. 7-23-04)
§ 515.04 Permit Fee, Issuance and Duration
   (a)   An application for a permit shall be accompanied by a fee of fifty
dollars ($50.00) for each sidewalk sale location for which a permit is desired.
The Director shall notify the Council Member in whose ward the location is
situated that an application for a permit has been received. If the applicant
is not issued a permit the fee shall be refunded.
   On approval of the application by Director of Public Safety, the Director of
Public Service, the Director of the City Planning Commission, the Director of
Public Service shall issue a permit in accordance with this chapter. Denial of
a permit may be appealed to the Board of Zoning Appeals.
   The processing of a complete application shall not take more than thirty
(30) days and in the event the application is not processed within thirty (30)
days, the applicant shall be entitled to a refund of the permit fee.
   (b)   A permittee located in the Central Business District may receive a
permit valid for six (6) months, during which the Permittee may conduct a
Sidewalk Sale only one (1) day a week, on the same day every week. A Permittee
seeking this Permit must state in the Permit Application what day of the week
Permittee will conduct the Sidewalk Sale.
   A location in the Central Business District may not receive more than one
(1) permit per year.
   (c)   Permits for all locations not in the Central Business District shall
be valid for three (3) days. A location outside of the Central Business
District may not receive more than two (2) permits per year.
(Ord. No. 928-04. Passed 7-14-04, eff. 7-23-04)
§ 515.05 Permitted Locations
   The Director, consistent with the provisions of this chapter and the zoning
code, shall establish rules and regulations as the Director deems proper with
respect to permitted locations for the operation of Sidewalk Sales. The
Director shall consider the operation and location of the Sidewalk Sale, the
maintenance of the business establishment requesting a permit, the proximity
and location of emergency exits, fire standpipes, fire hydrants, driveways,
handicap ramps, handicapped parking zones, commercial loading and unloading
zones, the condition of the sidewalk, and other factors he or she deems
relevant. The Director may modify the rules and regulations as he or she deems
necessary.
   The issuance of permits and the maintenance of merchandise, and other
structures shall be subject to the rules and regulations established by the
Director, the zoning code, and the following conditions and restrictions:
   (a)   Sidewalk Sales shall not obstruct emergency exits or fire standpipes;
   (b)   Sidewalk Sales shall not occupy any portion of the roadway or within
two (2) feet of the curb;
   (c)   Sidewalk Sales shall not be permitted within six (6) feet of any fire
hydrant, within five (5) feet of any driveway, within three (3) feet of any
sidewalk handicap ramp.
(Ord. No. 928-04. Passed 7-14-04, eff. 7-23-04)
§ 515.06 Permits
   At any time during the Sidewalk Sale that it is requested, Permittee shall
immediately produce the Permit.
   Each permit shall contain the following information:
   (a)   The name and address of the permittee;
   (b)   A description of the permitted location;
   (c)   A description of the merchandise and other structures;
   (d)   The expiration date of the permit; and
   (e)   Any other information the Director deems necessary.
(Ord. No. 928-04. Passed 7-14-04, eff. 7-23-04)
§ 515.07 Requirements and Conditions of Permit
   (a)   Permittees and their agents shall comply with all of the requirements
of this chapter and any applicable state law, while engaged in business at
permitted locations.
   (b)   The Sidewalk Sale shall be placed only on the location set forth in
the permit.
   (c)   No Sidewalk Sale shall operate earlier than 8:00 a.m. nor later than
9:00 p.m. All merchandise, and other structures shall be removed from the
sidewalk at the end of the permitted hours of operation.
   (d)   Permittees and their agents shall obey any order of a police officer
or other emergency personnel to remove their merchandise and other structures
from the public right-of-way if necessary to avoid congestion or obstruction in
an emergency.
   (e)   Permittees and their agents shall be responsible for maintaining all
Sidewalk Sale structures and associated equipment in good repair, and in a
safe, sound and non-hazardous condition.
   (f)   Permittees and their agents shall be responsible for keeping the
general area around the permitted location free of litter.
   (g)   No banner, pennant, or sign shall be displayed as a part of any
outdoor display except under a permit issued by the City of Cleveland.
   (h)   No permit shall be transferable in any manner.
   (i)   All merchandise sold at a Sidewalk Sale shall be of the type and
nature sold by the business immediately adjacent to the Sidewalk Sale.
   (j)   A permit is valid only when used at the location designated in the
permit.
(Ord. No. 928-04. Passed 7-14-04, eff. 7-23-04)
§ 515.08 Permit Suspension and Revocation
   (a)   The Director may suspend or revoke the permit of any permittee if the
permittee or his or her agent fails to abide by the provisions of these
Codified Ordinances or state law.
   (b)   The Director shall give written notice of suspension or revocation of
the permit to the permittee or his or her agent stating the reasons for the
suspension or revocation. If the reason for the suspension or revocation is
that the permittee does not currently have an effective insurance policy as
required by division (h) of Section
515.03, the action shall be effective upon giving such notice to the permittee
or to his or her agent. Otherwise, such notice shall contain the further
provision that the action shall become final and effective ten (10) days,
afterwards unless, within five (5) days of receipt of notice, the permittee
requests a hearing before the Director. The Director shall hold the requested
hearing, at which time the permittee shall be afforded the opportunity to give
the permittee’s version of the facts which gave-rise to the Director’s action.
After the hearing the Director shall determine whether to proceed with the
action or to rescind it.
   (c)   The action of the Director may be appealed to the Board of Zoning
Appeals.
(Ord. No. 928-04. Passed 7-14-04, eff. 7-23-04)
§ 515.09 Removal of Merchandise and Other Associated Equipment
   Any merchandise and other associated equipment placed in a public sidewalk,
court, alley, street or other public right-of-way without a permit issued under
this section may be seized and removed. Prior to such seizure and removal, the
property owner or operator of the business establishment fronting on the public
right- of-way from which the merchandise, and other associated equipment are to
be removed shall be notified and asked to immediately begin to remove the
merchandise and other associated equipment and to complete the removal within a
reasonable amount of time. If the property owner or operator of the business
establishment fails to remedy the violation, the City may seize and remove the
merchandise, and other associated equipment.
   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the City may seize any
merchandise, and other associated equipment, whether placed with or without a
permit, without prior notice if the merchandise, and other associated equipment
are placed in the public right-of-way in such a place or manner as to pose an
immediate and serious danger to persons or property or if the condition of the
merchandise, and associated equipment renders them unsafe, unsound or hazardous
so as to pose an immediate and serious danger to persons or property. After
seizure, the City shall promptly notify the owner or operator of the business
establishment and such individual shall have the right to request an informal
hearing before the Director within ten (10) days after such notification to
determine whether the seizure was proper.
   As a condition of recovering any merchandise, and other associated equipment
properly seized pursuant to this section, the owner of such merchandise, and
other associated equipment shall pay an impound fee covering the actual cost to
the City of transporting and storing such merchandise, and other associated
equipment.
(Ord. No. 928-04. Passed 7-14-04, eff. 7-23-04)
§ 515.10 Taxes
   The Permittee shall be responsible for all charges and all federal, state or
local taxes, including property taxes, which may now or hereafter be imposed or
levied upon the Sidewalk Sale and the services provided in connection
therewith.
(Ord. No. 928-04. Passed 7-14-04, eff. 7-23-04)
§ 515.11 Regulations
   The Director may promulgate such regulations, not inconsistent with the
provisions of this chapter, establishing procedures for the issuance of
permits.
(Ord. No. 928-04. Passed 7-14-04, eff. 7-23-04)
§ 515.99 Penalty
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor on the first offense and may be enforced by the issuance of a
citation in accordance with Criminal Rule 4.1 by any police officer or any
other City employee whose duties include the issuance of minor misdemeanor
citations under the authority of a special police commission granted under
Charter Section
117. On the second and any subsequent offense, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(Ord. No. 928-04. Passed 7-14-04, eff. 7-23-04)
CHAPTER 516 – DECORATIVE STREET PAINTING PROGRAM
516.01   Purpose
516.02   Decorative Street Painting Program
516.03   License Application
516.04   License Fee; Issuance
516.05   Rules and Regulations
516.06   License Conditions
§ 516.01 Purpose
   The City of Cleveland establishes a Decorative Street Painting Program for
the purpose of promoting the following:
   (a)   To make City streets attractive environments;
   (b)   To encourage and support communities to work cooperatively to beautify
neighborhoods;
   (c)   To encourage civic engagement on the part of residents and
stakeholders of local neighborhoods;
   (d)   To encourage well-designed, creative and aesthetically pleasing
decorative street paintings that relate to the history and culture of the
neighborhood.
(Ord. No. 1397-14. Passed 10-19-15, eff. 1-19-16)
§ 516.02 Decorative Street Painting Program
   Persons interested in painting decorative designs on City streets may submit
an application to the Director of Capital Projects ("Director"), which
application shall be reviewed in accordance with the provisions of this
Chapter. If approved, the Director may accept the painting of designs on the
pavement of City streets as a donation.
   Decorative street painting shall be considered "speech" of the City; the
display of street designs shall not cause the City's public street pavements to
be considered "public forums" on which street paintings are authorized without
acceptance of the donated painting by the City.
(Ord. No. 1397-14. Passed 10-19-15, eff. 1-19-16)
§ 516.03 License Application
   An application for a license to perform decorative street painting shall be
made to the Director of Capital Projects upon a form provided by the Director
for that purpose. The application form shall include the following:
   (a)   The name, address, telephone number, and e-mail address of the
applicant and a contact person primarily responsible for the decorative street
painting;
   (b)   A detailed description of the design proposed to be painted, including
a scale, color diagram or drawing;
   (c)   A detailed description of the proposed location of the design, meeting
the requirements of Section
516.06;
   (d)   A petition of support with signatures from not less than fifty-one
percent (51%) of the owners of property within a two hundred (200) foot radius
from the design location, indicating approval of the project and location. The
Director may modify the petition boundaries when deemed appropriate and shall
also certify the accuracy of the petition;
   (e)   Any additional information deemed necessary by the Director.
(Ord. No. 1397-14. Passed 10-19-15, eff. 1-19-16)
§ 516.04 License Fee; Issuance
   (a)   An application for a license shall be accompanied by a fee in an
amount not to exceed the cost of administering the application as established
by the Board of Control.
   (b)   On the approval of an application by the Director, the Commissioner of
Traffic Engineering, the City Planning Commission as to the proposed design,
and upon compliance with the Council notification provision described below,
the Director shall issue a license in accordance with this Chapter.
   (c)   Upon receipt of an application in compliance with this Chapter, the
Director shall notify the City Councilmember(s) in whose ward(s) the street
painting design is proposed. The Director shall issue a license for decorative
street painting in the ward(s) of the City Councilmember(s) so notified, unless
within fifteen (15) days of receipt of notification an objection or comment is
received by the Director. If the notification to the Director is in the nature
of a comment rather than an objection, then the Councilmember(s) shall have an
additional fifteen (15) days in which to submit an objection.
(Ord. No. 1397-14. Passed 10-19-15, eff. 1-19-16)
§ 516.05 Rules and Regulations
   The Director, consistent with the provisions of this Chapter, shall
establish rules and regulations as the Director deems proper with respect to
decorative street painting conditions, including acceptable paint materials to
be used. The issuance of licenses shall be subject to the rules and regulations
established by the Director.
(Ord. No. 1397-14. Passed 10-19-15, eff. 1-19-16)
§ 516.06 License Conditions
   A license to paint decorative designs on certain City streets shall be
subject to the following conditions:
   (a)   Eligible Locations. A design may be located on an alley, way, or
court, at the intersection of two residential streets or a mid-block location
of a residential street, a crosswalk marked with two white horizontal lines,
and/or a designated bicycle lane.
   (b)   Paint and Design Elements. The proposed design shall include
decorative designs and patterns only, and shall contain no numerals, text, or
commercial messages.
   (c)   Prohibited Paint or Design Features.
      (1)   The paint and resulting design shall not include any relief or
texture (except anti-skid texturizing material), or retroreflectivity;
      (2)   The design shall not create a three (3) dimensional or multi-
dimensional effect or other optical illusion; and
      (3)   The design shall not mimic or imitate an official traffic control
device or street signage.
   (d)   The licensee shall notify all households and businesses within a two
hundred (200) foot radius from the design location at least fourteen (14) days
prior to any painting of the street.
   (e)   The licensee shall be responsible for all costs associated with the
painting of the street including, but not limited to, costs of labor, paint,
other materials, and cleanup of the street area upon completion of the
painting.
   (f)   Project Installation Procedure. Once the license has been granted
under this Chapter, the licensee must apply for and obtain any permits
necessary for the use of the public right-of-way.
      (1)   The licensee shall maintain, at no cost to the City, all aspects of
the project and shall apply for and obtain any permits necessary for the use of
the public right-of-way during maintenance.
      (2)   The licensee assumes all risk in placing the painted design on the
City street including any damages, vandalism, and/or destruction of the painted
design.
   (g)   Indemnification. If a license is approved, the licensee shall agree to
indemnify the City of Cleveland.
   (h)   The City shall not be responsible for damage to the design regardless
of cause, including but not limited to damage caused by any utility or
contractor performing work in the right-of-way, or resulting from street
surface maintenance. Additionally, if any portion of the design creates a
hazard, the Director may require the removal of the painted design, and demand
that the use of the City street for decorative street painting be discontinued
without recourse against the City for any loss or damage occasioned by any such
requirement.
   (i)   No license shall be transferable in any manner.
   (j)    Licensees and their agents shall comply with all the requirements of
this Chapter.
   (k)   Duration. A license issued under this Chapter authorizes the design as
approved for as long as the design exists, as long as the design does not
change and it is repaired and maintained as required under the provisions of
this Chapter. A request to change the originally-approved design will require
an application for a new license, a new license application fee, processing as
a new application, and acceptance by the City of the new donation.
   (l)   License Revocation. A license under this Chapter may be revoked by the
Director at any time if the licensee violates the conditions of the approved
license. Upon revocation of a license, the licensee shall, at no cost to the
City, remove all aspects and/or features of a project. Prior to revocation of a
license under this division, the City shall send written notice to the
licensee.
(Ord. No. 1325-17. Passed 8-15-18, eff. 8-17-18)
CHAPTER 517 – SHARED MOBILITY DEVICE AND BICYCLE VENDORS
517.01   Shared Mobility Device and Bicycle Vendor
517.02   Shared Mobility Device and Bicycle Vendor Permit Application
517.03   Permit Fee; Issuance
517.04   Rules and Regulations
517.05   Permit Conditions
517.06   Permit Suspension or Revocation; Appeal
517.07   Shared Mobility Fund
517.071   Shared Mobility Grants and Contributions
517.072   Fines for Violating Rules and Regulations
517.08   Contracts
§ 517.01 Shared Mobility Device and Bicycle Vendor
   "Shared mobility device and bicycle vendor" means an entity approved by the
Director of Capital Projects, or designee, to use/occupy the public right-of-
way for offering shared mobility device such as a scooter, e-scooter, e-bike,
or any other mobility device as determined by the Director of Capital Projects,
and bicycles that do not require a fixed docking apparatus to return
("devices"), to subscribers on a fee basis subscription for short-term rental
in point-to-point trips.
(Ord. No. 464-2019. Passed 6-3-19, eff. 7-5-19; Am. Ord. No. 396-2020. Passed
6-3-20, eff. 6-9-20)
§ 517.02 Shared Mobility Device and Bicycle Vendor Permit Application
   (a)   An application for a permit to operate as a shared mobility device and
bicycle vendor shall be made to the Director of Capital Projects upon a form
provided by the Director for that purpose. The application form shall include
the following:
      (1)   The name, address, telephone number, e-mail address of the
applicant and a contact person primarily responsible for the vendor's shared
mobility device and bicycle operations;
      (2)   Images and descriptions of the devices and mobile application;
      (3)   Size of initial fleet at launch, including any planned fleet
expansions;
      (4)   Detailed plan for educating users on proper shared mobility device
operation and parking;
      (5)   Detailed plan for providing an equitable shared mobility device and
bicycle service;
      (6)   Detailed plan for complying with all applicable codified ordinance
requirements and rules and regulations;
      (7)   Any additional information deemed necessary by the Director.
   (b)   Following successful evaluation of an initial application, as
determined by the Director of Capital Projects based on performance criteria
established by the Director in the Rules and Regulations, a permit shall be
valid up for up to three (3) years. Permits may be renewed, on a form provided
by the Director, provided all the requirements of this chapter are met, and no
changes have been made from the previous approved application. If there are
changes to the application, a new application must be made and the appropriate
permit fee shall accompany the application.
   (c)   Beginning in 2021, the applications for and issuance of permits shall
be in accordance with the schedules established by the Director in the rules
and regulations.
   (d)   Permittees must remove all devices and associated equipment within
thirty (30) days after the expiration of the term.
(Ord. No. 892-2023. Passed 10-2-23, eff. 10-3-23)
§ 517.03 Permit Fee; Issuance
   (a)   The Director is authorized to charge and collect an application fee
and a per trip fee from the permittee in an amount established by the Board of
Control.
   (b)   All devices must comply with local and state safety standards, as well
as those established by the Consumer Product Safety Commission.
   (c)   Each device must have a unique permanent identification number that is
provided to the City and aligns with data reporting, as well as be labeled
clearly with the permittee's logo and twenty-four (24) hour customer service
phone number.
   (d)   All devices shall have GPS equipment affixed to the device that is
calibrated to ping a minimum of every ninety (90) seconds while in use.
   (e)   Permittees must be able to remotely lock a device to prevent use.
   (f)   Every device shall be equipped with an adequate brake when used on a
street or highway.
   (g)   On the approval of an application by the Director, the Commissioner of
Traffic Engineering, the Director of City Planning and the Director of Public
Safety, the Director shall issue a permit in accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. No. 464-2019. Passed 6-3-19, eff. 7-5-19; Am. Ord. No. 396-2020. Passed
6-3-20, eff. 6-9-20)
§ 517.04 Rules and Regulations
   Within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this ordinance, the
Director shall establish rules and regulations governing the operation of
shared mobility device and bicycle vendors. Rules and regulations will include,
but are not limited to, schedules for permit applications and issuances,
applicable procedures, fee schedule, indemnification agreement, operating
regulations, insurance requirements, maximum number of vendor permits, maximum
number of devices, fleet maintenance requirements, data sharing plan,
communications plan, and fines for violations. Such rules and regulations shall
become effective seven (7) days after publication in the City Record. The
issuance of permits and all permittees shall be subject to the rules and
regulations established by the Director.
(Ord. No. 396-2020. Passed 6-3-20, eff. 6-9-20)
§ 517.05 Permit Conditions
   (a)   Permittees and their agents shall comply with all of the requirements
of this chapter and any applicable state law, and shall conduct business in
compliance with all applicable provisions of the Codified Ordinances.
   (b)   Permittees and their agents shall be responsible for maintaining all
devices and associated equipment in good repair, and in a safe, sound, and non-
hazardous condition.
   (c)   Permittees and their agents shall obey any lawful order of a police
officer to remove their shared mobility devices from the public right-of-way if
necessary to avoid congestion or obstruction in an emergency.
   (d)   Permits shall be maintained by the permittee in such a manner that
they are readily accessible on request from a City official. Each permit shall
contain the following information:
      (1)   The name and address of the Permittee;
      (2)   A description of the permitted mobility device type and minimum and
maximum permitted fleet size;
      (3)   The expiration date of the permit; and
      (4)   Any other information the Director deems appropriate.
   (e)   Any device and other associated equipment placed in a public sidewalk,
court, alley, street, or other public right-of-way without a permit issued
under this section may be seized and removed. Prior to such seizure and
removal, the permittee shall be notified and asked to immediately begin to
remove the devices and associated equipment, and to complete the removal within
a reasonable amount of time. If the permittee fails to remedy the violation,
the city may seize and remove the equipment.
   (f)   The permittee shall maintain insurance and limits of liability, the
amounts to be specified in the Director's rules and regulations, at no cost to
the City of Cleveland.
   (g)   If a permit is granted, permittee shall agree to indemnify the City of
Cleveland against liability, loss, or damage.
   (h)   Any damage to City of Cleveland property from shared mobility devices
shall be paid by the permittee.
   (i)   No permit shall be transferable in any manner.
   (j)   No permittee has the exclusive right to operate within the City of
Cleveland.
   (k)   When any device or other associated equipment placed on a public
sidewalk, court, alley, street, or other public right-of-way poses a risk or
inhibits access to the right of way by other users, the permittee shall be
notified and asked to immediately begin to remove the devices and associated
equipment, and to complete the removal within a reasonable amount of time. If
the permittee fails to remedy the violation, the City may seize and remove the
equipment.
   (l)   Any device that is parked in one location for more than seven (7)
consecutive days without moving may be seized and removed by the City.
   (m)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the City may
seize any device and other associated equipment, whether placed with or without
a permit, without prior notice if the equipment is placed in such a place or
manner as to pose an immediate and serious danger to persons or property, or if
the condition of the equipment renders it unsafe, unsound, or hazardous so as
to pose an immediate and serious danger to persons or property. After seizure,
the City shall promptly notify the permittee, and such individual shall have
the right to request an informal hearing before the Director within ten (10)
days after such notification to determine whether the seizure was proper.
   (n)   Notwithstanding any codified ordinance to the contrary, police
officers are authorized to provide for the removal of a mobility device located
in the public right-of-way in violation of the provisions of this chapter.
   (o)   As a condition of recovering any equipment seized pursuant to this
section, the permittee shall pay an impound fee covering the actual cost to the
City of transporting and storing such device and other associated equipment.
(Ord. No. 464-2019. Passed 6-3-19, eff. 7-5-19; Am. Ord. No. 396-2020. Passed
6-3-20, eff. 6-9-20)
§ 517.06 Permit Suspension or Revocation; Appeal
   (a)   A permit granted under this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the
Director at any time if the permittee violates the conditions or rules and
regulations of the permit. Additionally, if the operation of shared mobility
device and bicycle rentals on City streets and rights-of-way become a hazard or
risk to the health, safety, and welfare of the public, the Director may revoke
existing permits and discontinue the issuance of permits under this chapter.
Upon suspension or revocation of a permit, the permittee shall, at no cost to
the City, remove all devices from the right-of-way.
   (b)   The Director shall give written notice of suspension or revocation of
the permit to the permittee or his or her agent stating the reasons therefor.
The action shall be effective upon giving such notice to the permittee or to
his or her agent, and the permittee shall have five (5) business days to remove
all devices from the public right-of-way. If the business owner or operator of
the equipment fails to comply, the City may seize and remove the devices.
   (c)   Within five (5) days of receipt of the notice, the permittee may
request a hearing before the Director. The Director shall forthwith hold the
requested hearing, at which time the permittee shall be afforded the
opportunity to give his or her version of the facts which gave rise to the
Director's action. After the hearing the Director shall determine whether to
reinstate the permit or to permanently rescind it. The action of the Director
may be appealed in accordance with the provisions of the Charter.
(Ord. No. 464-2019. Passed 6-3-19, eff. 7-5-19; Am. Ord. No. 396-2020. Passed
6-3-20, eff. 6-9-20)
§ 517.07 Shared Mobility Fund
   The Director of Finance shall establish a Shared Mobility Fund for the
purpose of supporting the expansion of multi-modal infrastructure and
programming. All permit and per-trip fees collected or received under this
chapter shall be earmarked to the Shared Mobility Fund to support multi-modal
infrastructure and programming, including bicycle and mobility device racks and
shared bicycle and mobility device infrastructure. The Director of Capital
Projects shall provide an annual report to the members of Council concerning
the amount of revenue collected and deposited into the Shared Mobility Fund and
how the funds were spent during that reporting year.
(Ord. No. 464-2019. Passed 6-3-19, eff. 7-5-19; Am. Ord. No. 396-2020. Passed
6-3-20, eff. 6-9-20
§ 517.071 Shared Mobility Grants and Contributions
   The Director of Capital Projects is authorized to apply for and accept from
various entities, both public and private, such grants and contributions as
they become available; provided that such contributions may be in the form of
money, material or services. The Director is further authorized to file all
papers and execute all documents necessary to receive the funds under any grant
or contribution, and upon acceptance of any grant or contribution by the
Director, the funds shall be appropriated in the case of grants, for the
purposes set forth in the grant agreement, and in the case of contributions,
for the purposes designated by the donors. The Director shall report the
acceptance of any grant or contribution to the Clerk of Council. Funds accepted
under this section shall be deposited in the Shared Mobility Fund.
(Ord. No. 396-2020. Passed 6-3-20, eff. 6-9-20)
§ 517.072 Fines for Violating Rules and Regulations
   (a)   The Director of Capital Projects shall have the authority to set and
assess fines against permittees for violations of the rules and regulations as
published in the City Record.
   (b)   The authority to assess fines under this section does not limit or
affect any criminal offense, or the authority of the Director to suspend or
revoke a license under Section
517.06, or any other means of enforcement of this chapter provided for in these
Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 396-2020. Passed 6-3-20, eff. 6-9-20)
§ 517.08 Contracts
   (a)   The Director is authorized to enter one or more cooperative agreements
with, and to cause payment to, Cuyahoga County (“County”) related to the
operation of devices and any cost-sharing contributions for operational
expenses of the shared mobility program and, if necessary, to receive payment
of the City’s share of the per-trip fees charged or collected by the County
under its Bicycle and Scooter Share Licensing authority.
   (b)   The Director of Capital Projects is authorized to employ by contract
or contracts one or more professional consultants or firms of professional
consultants for the purpose of supplementing the regularly employed staff of
the departments of the City of Cleveland to provide professional services
necessary to develop, review and manage the shared mobility program. The
selection of the professional consultants or firms of professional consultants
shall be made by the Board of Control on the nomination of the Director of
Capital Projects. The compensation to be paid for the services shall be fixed
by the Board of Control.
   (c)   The Director of Capital Projects is authorized to enter into one or
more written requirement or standard purchase contracts under the Charter and
the Codified Ordinances of Cleveland, Ohio, 1976, as may be necessary, from
time to time, for items, materials, equipment, supplies, and services necessary
to manage the shared mobility program, including but not limited to,
informational signage and parking racks, and maintenance and licenses related
thereto, including labor and materials if necessary.
   (d)   That under Section
108(b) of the Charter, the services and goods authorized by this section may be
made through cooperative arrangements with other governmental agencies. The
Director of Capital Projects may sign all documents that are necessary to make
the purchases, and may enter into one (1) or more contracts with the vendors
selected through that cooperative process.
   (e)   That the cost of the contract or contracts authorized herein shall not
exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) and shall be paid from the Shared
Mobility Fund and any funds approved by the Director of Finance.
(Ord. No. 892-2023. Passed 10-2-23, eff. 10-3-23)
TITLE III: ELECTRICITY
   Chapter
521   Wires and Cables
   Chapter
523   Rules and Rates
CHAPTER 521 – WIRES AND CABLES
521.01   Prohibited Area for Placing Wires or Cables
521.02   Provisions for Removal of Wires
521.03   Submission of Plans for Removal of Wires
521.04   Director of Public Service May Change Plans
521.05   Final Plans Returned by Director
521.06   Alternate Placement of Wires and Cables
521.07   Excess Removal of Wires May Apply on Next Year’s Quota
521.08   Credit for Joint Removal of Wires
521.09   Procedure when Streets of Schedule B Become Part of Schedule A
521.10   Underground Wiring Required in New Subdivisions
521.99   Penalty
   Note: The legislative history of this chapter, except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 63410-A, passed
September 22, 1924.
Cross-reference:
   Electrical wires injuring or killing trees, CO
509.09,
509.10
   Erection of electrical fixtures on streets; permit, CO
503.05
   Municipal use of pole line, CO
503.06
   Provisions and rates for sale of electricity, CO
Ch. 523
Statutory reference:
   Power to erect electric works, RC 743.34
   Power to furnish light, power and heat, RC 715.06, 717.01
§ 521.01 Prohibited Area for Placing Wires or Cables
   No person, firm or corporation shall place, erect, maintain or permit to
remain any wires, cables or poles for supporting the same, on or above the
surface of any of the streets, alleys or public grounds hereafter enumerated as
Schedule A. This shall not be held to apply, however, to arc lights for street
lighting or to the poles and wires for the same, or to trolley and feed wires
or to the poles supporting the same. By special permission from the Director of
Public Service, revocable at the pleasure of the Director, distributing poles
may be set on any of the streets, alleys or public grounds that are now, or may
hereafter become, a part of
Schedule A, if in his or her opinion, it is impracticable to distribute the
wires in any other manner.
Schedule A
Schedule A
St. Clair Ave. from W. 9th to E. 9th St.
Frankfort Ave., N.W.
Superior Ave. from W. 9th to E. 9th St.
   Long Ave. N.W., from Columbus Rd., N.W. to W.3rd St.
   Champlain Ave. N.W., from Canal Rd. N.W., to Ontario St.
Euclid Ave. from Public Square to E. 22nd St.
Prospect Ave., from Ontario St. to E. 14th St.
   W. 9th St., from Front Ave. N.W. to Superior Ave. N.W.
   Columbus Rd. S.W. from Superior Ave. N.W. to Canal Rd. N.W.
   W. 6th St., from Front Ave. N.W. to Superior Ave. N.W.
   W. 3rd St. from Lakeside Ave. N.W. to Canal Rd. N.W.
Ontario St., from Lakeside Ave. to Eagle Ave. S.E.
   E. 3rd St. from St. Clair Ave. N.E. to Superior Ave. N.E.
   E. 6th St., from Lakeside Ave. N.E. to Euclid Ave. N.E.
E. 4th St., from Euclid Ave. to Woodland Ave. S.E.
The Public Square
   E. 9th St., from Summit Ave. S.E. to Woodland Ave. S.E.
   Rockwell Ave., N.E. from Public Square to E. 9th St.
Hamilton Ave. N.E. from Ontario St. to E. 9th St.
Vincent Ave. S.E. from E. 6th St. to E. 9th St.
Huron Rd. S.E. from Ontario St. to Euclid Ave.
E. 2nd St.
High Ave.
   Bolivar Rd. S.E. from Ontario St. to Prospect Ave. S.E.
   W. 25th St. from Washington Ave. S.W. to Lorain Ave.
Lorain Ave. from W. 25th St. to W. 59th St.
Detroit Ave. from W. 25th St. to W. 28th St.
Johnson Ave. N.W., from W. 9th St. to W. 6th St.
Woodland Ave. S.E., from E. 9th St. to E. 55th St.
   Michigan Ave. N.W., from Canal Rd. N.W. to Ontario St.
Howe Ave. N.W., from W. 3rd St. to Ontario St.
   W. 4th St., from St. Clair Ave. N.W. to Lakeside Ave. N.W.
Fountain Ct. N.W., from W. 3rd St. to Ontario St.
Noble Ct. N.W., from W. 3rd St. to Ontario St.
   W. 2nd St., from St. Clair Ave. N.W. to Lakeside Ave. N.W.
   Superior Ave. N.W., from W. 9th St. to Cuyahoga River
E. 8th Pl., from Euclid Ave. to Prospect Ave. S.E.
E. 3rd Pl., from Euclid Ave. to Prospect Ave. S.E.
Theresa Ct. N.E., from E. 3rd St. to E. 9th St.
   W. 2nd St., from Public Square to St. Clair Ave. N.E.
   E. 4th St. from St. Clair Ave. N.E. to Lakeside Ave. N.E.
 
§ 521.02 Provisions for Removal of Wires
   Every person, firm or corporation now or hereafter owning or operating any
wires, cables or poles used for supporting the same, located on or above the
surface of any streets, alleys or public grounds in the City hereafter
enumerated as Schedule B, shall remove or cause to be removed, from above the
surface of any of the streets, alleys or public grounds, or parts thereof, all
such cables, wires and poles used for supporting the same, to the extent of at
least ten (10) miles, street measurement, for each such person, firm or
corporation, during the remainder of the year 1914, and to the extent of at
least fourteen (14) miles, street measurement, for each such person, firm or
corporation, during each and every calendar year thereafter, beginning with
January 1, 1915. This shall not be held to apply, however, to arc lights used
for street lighting, or to the poles and wires for the same, or to trolley and
feed wires used for street cars, or to the poles supporting the same.
§ 521.03 Submission of Plans for Removal of Wires
   Every such person, firm or corporation shall, during the month of October of
each year, submit a plan and schedule to the Director of Public Service,
showing the particular territory within which the person, firm or corporation
proposes to remove or place underground during the following calendar year its
wires, cables and poles for supporting the same, to the extent of fourteen (14)
miles, street measurement.
   Every such person, firm or corporation shall also, during the first thirty
(30) days after this chapter becomes effective, submit a plan and schedule to
the Director showing the particular territory within which the person, firm or
corporation proposes to remove or place underground during the remainder of the
year 1914, its wires, cables and poles for supporting the same, to the extent
of ten (10) miles, street measurement.
§ 521.04 Director of Public Service May Change Plans
   The Director of Public Service shall have the right to change the schedules
and plans submitted, or to substitute therefor other schedules and plans,
designating the territory for each person, firm or corporation within which its
wires, cables and poles for supporting the same shall be removed or placed
underground. No such plan or schedule shall be changed, however, to include any
street, alley or public ground not enumerated herein as a part of
Schedule B.
§ 521.05 Final Plans Returned by Director
   The Director of Public Service shall, during the month of November of each
year, return to the several persons, firms or corporations the plans and
schedules submitted, with such changes or substitutions as he or she has seen
fit to make, and with his or her approval, and such plans and schedules as
approved and returned, shall be binding upon the several persons, firms or
corporations. Each such person, firm or corporation shall during the following
calendar year remove its wires, cables and poles for supporting the same in
accordance with the schedule and plan approved and returned by the Director.
The schedules and plans for the remainder of the year 1914, however, shall be
returned by the Director within forty (40) days after this chapter takes
effect, and these schedules and plans as approved and returned by the Director,
shall be binding upon the several aforesaid persons, firms or corporations, who
shall during the remainder of the year 1914 proceed to remove or place
underground their wires, cables and poles in accordance therewith, to the
extent of ten (10) miles, street measurement.
Schedule B
Schedule B
St. Clair Ave., from E. 9th St. to E. 125th St.
Superior Ave., from E. 9th St. to E. 125th St.
Wade Park Ave., from E. 66th St. to E. 118th St.
Payne Ave., from Superior Ave. to E. 55th St.
Lexington Ave., from E. 55th St. to E. 79th St.
Hough Ave., from E. 55th St. to Ansel Rd., N.E.
Euclid Ave., from E. 22nd St. to easterly City limits
Prospect Ave., from E. 14th St. to E. 55th St.
Carnegie Ave., from E. 22nd St. to E. 89th St.
Cedar Ave., from E. 22nd St. to E. 107th St.
Central Ave., from Central Viaduct to E. 85th St.
Quincy Ave., from E. 55th St. to Woodhill Rd., S.E.
Scovill Ave., from E. 9th St. to E. 55th St.
   Woodland Ave., from E. 55th St. to Woodhill Rd., S.E.
   Buckeye Rd., from Woodland Ave. to Woodhill Rd., S.E.
Kinsman Rd., from E. 55th St. to Woodhill Rd., S.E.
Broadway, from E. 34th St. to Miles Ave., S.E.
Miles Ave., from Broadway to E. 110th St.
Broadway, from Bolivar Rd. to Pittsburgh Ave., S.E.
Pittsburgh Ave. S.E., from Broadway to E. 34th St.
E. 34th St. from Orange Ave. to Broadway, S.E.
Orange Ave., from Broadway to E. 34th St.
E. 49th St., from Broadway to Fleet Ave., S.E.
Fleet Ave., from E. 49th St. to E. 71st St.
E. 71st St., from Fleet Ave. to Harvard Ave.
E. 22nd St., from Euclid Ave. to Broadway, S.E.
E. 55th St., from Lake Erie to Broadway, S.E.
E. 79th St., from Lexington Ave. to Hough Ave.
   E. 105th St., from Lake Shore & Michigan Southern R.R. to Quincy Ave.
Woodhill Rd., from Quincy Ave. to E. 93rd St.
E. 93rd St., from Woodhill Rd. to Miles Ave.
Harvard Ave., from Broadway to E. 71st St.
Detroit Ave., from W. 28th St. to W. 117th St.
Franklin Ave., from W. 25th St. to W. 65th St.
Bridge Ave., from W. 25th St. to W. 65th St.
Madison Ave., from W. 65th St. to W. 117th St.
Lorain Ave., from W. 59th St. to W. 110th St.
Clark Ave., from W. 14th St. to Lorain Ave.
W. 65th St., from Clark Ave. to Detroit Ave.
Fulton Rd., from Franklin Ave. to Denison Ave.
W. 25th St., from Lorain Ave. to Pearl Rd.
Pearl Rd., from W. 25th St. to City limits
Abbey Ave., from W. 25th St. to W. 14th St.
Scranton Rd., from Abbey Ave. to Clark Ave.
W. 14th St., from Central Viaduct to Clark Ave.
 
§ 521.06 Alternate Placement of Wires and Cables
   Whenever the placing of the wires and cables underground as referred to in
Sections
521.02 to
521.05 would necessitate the tearing up of the pavement in any street then in
good condition and where there is not sufficient room between the curb and the
sidewalk for the laying of the necessary conduits underground, then if such
wires and cables are suspended from poles following the rear lot lines of the
lots bounding and abutting upon the street from which such wires are so
removed, when such work has been done and the wires, cables and poles removed
from the street, then the same shall be deemed a satisfactory substitute for
the literal compliance with the requirement of Sections
521.02 to
521.05. The parties so complying with the provisions of this section shall
thereby be relieved from further obligation to comply with the abovementioned
sections in so far as the same relate to that portion of the street from which
the wires, cables and poles have been removed.
(Ord. No. 75427. Passed 8-16-26)
§ 521.07 Excess Removal of Wires May Apply on Next Year’s Quota
   Whenever in any one (1) calendar year any person, firm or corporation shall
remove or place underground wires, cables and poles in excess of the fourteen
(14) miles, street measurement, required by this chapter, the amount in excess,
or any part thereof, if removed or placed underground with the approval of the
Director of Public Service, shall in any subsequent calendar year that the
person, firm or corporation may elect, be counted a part of the fourteen (14)
miles, street measurement, of wires, cables and poles required by this chapter
to be placed underground or removed in that year.
§ 521.08 Credit for Joint Removal of Wires
   When two (2) or more persons, firms or corporations own jointly any wires,
cables or poles, and place underground or remove the same in accordance with a
plan and schedule approved by the Director of Public Service, each person, firm
or corporation shall be credited with the amount so removed.
§ 521.09 Procedure when Streets of Schedule B Become Part of Schedule A
   When all the wires, cables and poles, except trolley and feed wires used for
street cars, and the poles supporting the same, and arc lights used for street
lighting and the poles and wires for the same, and such distributing poles as
the Director of Public Service has approved, have been removed from above the
surface of any of the streets, alleys or public grounds of the City, enumerated
in Schedule B, in accordance with plans and schedules approved by the Director,
all such streets, alleys or public grounds, or parts thereof, shall thereupon
automatically become a part of Schedule A, and shall be subject to the
provisions of this chapter governing the same.
§ 521.10 Underground Wiring Required in New Subdivisions
   In new subdivisions of ten (10) or more lots, all telephone, electric power
and street lighting wires, conduits or cables to serve lots in such subdivision
shall be constructed underground upon easements provided for the utilities,
except that those wires, conduits or cables owned by or serving individual
customers and located wholly on the customer’s property, need not be located
upon easements. All underground wiring shall be constructed in accordance with
standards and regulations promulgated by the Public Utilities Commission of
Ohio.
   No such subdivision shall be approved by the Platting Commissioner nor shall
any permit be issued by the Commissioner of Building for the construction of
any building within a subdivision unless proper provision has been made to
comply with the requirements of this section.
(Ord. No. 1287-66. Passed 6-27-66, eff. 6-30-66)
§ 521.99 Penalty
   Any person, firm or corporation which violates or fails to comply with any
of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and the costs of
the prosecution. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during
or on which an offense occurs or continues.
CHAPTER 523 – RULES AND RATES
523.01   Provisions for Sale of Electricity
523.02   Residential Rate Schedule
523.021   Residential Incentive Rate Schedule – Repealed
523.03   Small Commercial Rate Schedule
523.04   Large Commercial Rate Schedules
523.043   Small Industrial Rate Schedules
523.047   Large Industrial Rate Schedules
523.048   Optional Large Industrial Rate Schedule
523.049   Capacity Enhancement Incentive Rate Schedules
523.0491   Commercially Contracted Alternative Rate Schedules
523.05   Street Lighting Schedules
523.06   Protective Lighting Schedules
523.061   Charge for Outdoor Residential Lighting
523.062   Homestead Discount for Outdoor Residential Lighting
523.065   Traffic Signal Service Rate Schedules
523.066   Security Equipment Rate Schedule
523.067   Small Wireless Facility Rate Schedule
523.07   Regulations for Applicants for Electrical Service
523.08   Provisions Governing Advance Deposits
523.09   Accounting System
523.10   Statements for Service Supplied
523.11   Delinquent Accounts
523.115   Cleveland Public Power Arbitration Panel
523.12   Special Charges
523.13   Access to Consumer’s Property
523.14   Changes of Electrical Service
523.15   Provisions Governing Electrical Construction and Apparatus
523.16   Faulty Meters
523.17   Environmental and Ecological Adjustment
523.18   Liability for Damages
523.19   Electric Service Agreement
523.195   Electrical Service Agreements with Government and Charitable Entities
523.196   Electric Service Agreements with Commercial Customers
523.20   Refusal of Electrical Service
523.21   Power Supply Recovery
523.215   Customer Information
523.22   Further Rules and Regulations
523.23   Pole and Anchor Attachments; Fee
523.24   Electric Service Policy
523.25   Interconnection Service for Distributed Generation
523.251   CEI Lawsuit Surcharge; Amount – Repealed
523.26   Net Metering Service
523.27   Effect of Rates Assessed by the Division of Public Power
523.28   Charges for Work Provided
523.29   Extension of Time for Payment
Cross-reference:
   Restrictions on electrical wire and cable placement, CO
Ch. 521
Statutory reference:
   Power to establish light and power rates, RC 715.03, 715.06
§ 523.01 Provisions for Sale of Electricity
   The rates, rules and regulations governing the sale of the product of
electric current furnished by the Department of Public Utilities, Division of
Cleveland Public Power, are hereby established as set forth in the following
Sections.
(Ord. No. 472-2022. Passed 5-23-22, eff. 5-25-22)
§ 523.02 Residential Rate Schedule
   Effective January 1 of each applicable year, the following schedule is
applicable to private single residences or to any individually metered family
accommodation when service is used primarily for domestic and household
purposes, as distinguished from commercial, professional or industrial
purposes. Usage charges are not prorated. The charge used will correspond with
the bill period end date.
   (a)   Kilowatt Hour Charge.
 
               Summer                  Winter
KWH Per Month  2024    2025    2026    2024    2025    2026
First 1,000    $0.0774 $0.0888 $0.0970 $0.0655 $0.0752 $0.0821
All over 1,000 $0.0752 $0.0863 $0.0943 $0.0353 $0.0405 $0.0443
 
   (b)   Definition of Seasonal Rate. For the purpose of this rate schedule,
the summer rate shall be in effect during the months of June, July, August,
September and October. The winter rate shall be in effect during the months of
November, December, January, February, March, April and May.
   (c)   Power Supply Recovery. In accordance with Section
523.21, the Power Supply Recovery shall be determined and applied on a monthly
basis by the Division of Cleveland Public Power.
   (d)   Environmental and Ecological Adjustment. An adjustment to the Power
Supply Recovery shall be applied to this rate as set forth and described in
Section
523.17.
(Ord. No. 957-2024. Passed 11-4-24, eff. 11-6-24) (BOC Res. No. 639-24. Adopted
12-18-24)
§ 523.021 Residential Incentive Rate Schedule – Repealed
(Ord. No. 957-2024. Passed 11-4-24, eff. 11-6-24) (BOC Res. No. 639-24. Adopted
12-18-24)
§ 523.03 Small Commercial Rate Schedule
   Effective January 1 of each applicable year, the following schedule is
applicable to all commercial installations during any month in which such
installation has a demand of less than thirty (30) kilowatts (KWD). Usage
charges are not prorated. The charge used will correspond with the bill period
end date.
   (a)   Kilowatt Hour Charge.
 
               Summer                  Winter
KWH Per Month  2024    2025    2026    2024    2025    2026
First 7,500    $0.0679 $0.0779 $0.0851 $0.0588 $0.0675 $0.0737
All over 7,500 $0.0398 $0.0457 $0.0499 $0.0309 $0.0355 $0.0387
 
   (b)   Definition of Seasonal Rate. For the purpose of this rate schedule,
the summer rate shall be in effect during the months of June, July, August,
September and October. The winter rate shall be in effect during the months of
November, December, January, February, March, April and May.
   (c)   Special Service. Standby, temporary, special, welding, intermittent or
extremely low load factor service is not included in this schedule and shall be
subject to special rates based upon cost as computed by the Division of
Cleveland Public Power.
   Applicants for these services may be charged with the cost of installing and
furnishing such services as well as the cost of removal of such services at the
discretion of the Division.
   (d)   Combined Billing. At the option of the Division, commercial
installations on the same premises may be combined on one (1) meter and billed
under this schedule with the number of kilowatt hours in each block of the rate
and the minimum charge multiplied by the number of commercial installations.
   (e)   Plural Service Connections. Where plural service connections supply a
customer on the same premises, meter readings on one (1) commercial light
service connection and on one (1) commercial power service connection may, at
the option of the Division, be added for billing purposes, and meter readings
on two (2) or more commercial connections supplying a customer on the same
premises may be added for billing purposes at the option of the Division.
   (f)   Environmental and Ecological Adjustment. An adjustment to the Power
Supply Recovery shall be applied to this rate as set forth and described in
Section
523.17.
   (g)   Power Supply Recovery. In accordance with Section
523.21, the Power Supply Recovery shall be determined and applied on a monthly
basis by the Division.
   (h)   Flat Rate Billing. This rate schedule may be used for billing
installations where the consumption is constant, and the installation of a
meter is not economic or practical, as determined by the Commissioner of the
Division of Cleveland Public Power, or designee. The kilowatt hours used for
billing shall be calculated based on the consumption characteristic of the
device being billed. At the option of the Commissioner of the Division of
Cleveland Public Power, the summer and winter kilowatt hour rates may be
combined on a weighted basis to provide one rate.
   (i)   Determination of Applicable Schedule. In any month that the kilowatt
demand (KWD) equals or exceeds thirty (30), the billing for that month shall be
calculated using the Large Commercial Rate Schedules set forth in Section
523.04.
(Ord. No. 957-2024. Passed 11-4-24, eff. 11-6-24) (BOC Res. No. 639-24. Adopted
12-18-24)
§ 523.04 Large Commercial Rate Schedules
   Effective January 1 of each applicable year, the following are applicable to
all commercial installations during any month in which such installation has a
demand equal to or greater than thirty (30) kilowatts (KWD) and less than ten
thousand (10,000) kilowatts (KWD) and a kilowatt hour consumption of less than
or equal to five hundred thousand (500,000). Usage charges are not prorated.
The charge used will correspond with the bill period end date.
   (a)   Demand Charge.
 
                   Summer             Winter
Kilowatt Per Month 2024  2025  2026   2024  2025  2026
First 50           $7.99 $9.17 $10.02 $7.28 $8.35 $9.13
All over 50        $6.92 $7.94 $8.68  $6.33 $7.26 $7.94
 
   (b)   Reactive Charge.
 
                  Summer            Winter
Kilovar Per Month 2024  2025  2026  2024  2025  2026
In excess of 30   $0.20 $0.23 $0.25 $0.20 $0.23 $0.25
 
   (c)   Kilowatt Hour Charge.
 
                   Summer                  Winter
Kilowatt Per Month 2024    2025    2026    2024    2025    2026
First 40,000       $0.0331 $0.0380 $0.0415 $0.0288 $0.0330 $0.0361
Next 60,000        $0.0207 $0.0238 $0.0260 $0.0173 $0.0199 $0.0217
All over 100,000   $0.0166 $0.0190 $0.0208 $0.0140 $0.0161 $0.0176
 
   (d)   Minimum Charge. The monthly minimum charge shall be fifteen dollars
and thirty-five cents ($15.35), plus the Power Supply Recovery.
   (e)   Maximum Charge. The monthly maximum charge shall be twenty and one-
half cents ($0.205)/KWH, plus the Power Supply Recovery.
   (f)   Definition of Seasonal Rate. For the purpose of this rate schedule,
the summer rate shall be in effect during the months of June, July, August,
September and October. The winter rate shall be in effect during the months of
November, December, January, February, March, April and May.
   (g)   Determination of Demand. The kilowatt demand shall be determined
monthly by demand measurements and shall be the maximum thirty (30) minute
kilowatt demand during the month.
   (h)   Determination of Reactive Demand. For all three (3) phase
installations where the kilowatt demand is sixty-five (65) or greater, and all
single-phase installations where the kilowatt demand is seventy-five (75) or
greater, the reactive billing demand shall be determined by multiplying the
monthly kilowatt demand by the ratio of the monthly lagging reactive kilovolt
ampere hours to the monthly kilowatt hours.
   For all three (3) phase installations where the kilowatt demand is less than
sixty-five (65), and all single-phase installations where the kilowatt demand
is less than seventy-five (75), the reactive billing demand shall be zero.
   (i)   Discount for Primary Metering. Where the electric energy is metered on
the primary (2,300 volts or higher) side of the service transformers, a
discount of two percent (2%) of the gross primary metered kilowatt hours may be
allowed.
   (j)   Voltage Supply Discount. Where the electric energy is provided
entirely from an eleven thousand (11,000) volt circuit, a discount of five
cents ($0.05) per kilowatt of demand billed may be allowed.
   (k)   Substation Ownership Discount. A discount of thirty cents ($0.30) per
kilowatt of demand billed may be allowed when a customer owns, installs and
maintains transformation and substation apparatus, thereby relieving the
Division of Cleveland Public Power of these costs.
   (l)   Off-Peak Demand Allowance. At the option of the Division, the billing
demand may be the greater of the regularly incurred demand or eighty-five
percent (85%) of the maximum demand incurred during off- peak periods.
   The cost of special metering to determine such demand shall be charged to
the customer.
   Off-peak periods shall be from 12:00 a.m. until 8:00 a.m., Tuesday through
Saturday, and from 4:00 p.m. Saturday through 8:00 a.m. Monday.
   (m)   Special Service. Direct current, standby, temporary, special, welding,
intermittent or extremely low load and extremely low load factor service is not
included in this schedule and shall be subject to special rates based upon cost
as computed by the Division of Cleveland Public Power.
   Applicants for these services may be charged with the cost of installing and
furnishing such services as well as the cost of removal of such services at the
discretion of the Division.
   The monthly minimum charge shall be applied in the case of all special
services.
   (n)   Combined Billing. Where plural service connections supply a customer
on the same premises, meter readings may, at the option of the Division, be
added for billing purposes. The combined demand shall be the sum of the
undiversified demands computed as for separate billing.
   (o)   Environmental and Ecological Adjustment. An adjustment to the Power
Supply Recovery shall be applied to this rate as set forth and described in
Section
523.17.
   (p)   Power Supply Recovery. In accordance with Section
523.21, the Power Supply Recovery shall be determined and applied on a monthly
basis by the Division.
   (q)   Determination of Applicable Schedule. In any month that the kilowatt
demand (KWD) is less than ten thousand (10,000) and the kilowatt hour
consumption exceeds five hundred thousand (500,000), the billing for that month
shall be calculated using the Small Industrial Rate Schedules set forth in
Section
523.043.
   In any month that the kilowatt demand (KWD) is less than thirty (30), the
billing for that month shall be calculated using the Small Commercial Rate
Schedule set forth in Section
523.03
(Ord. No. 957-2024. Passed 11-4-24, eff. 11-6-24) (BOC Res. No. 639-24. Adopted
12-18-24)
§ 523.043 Small Industrial Rate Schedules
   Effective January 1 of each applicable year, the following schedule is
schedules are applicable to all commercial installations during any month in
which such installation uses more than five hundred thousand (500,000) kilowatt
hours during the current month and has a demand of less than ten thousand
(10,000) kilowatts. Usage charges are not prorated. The charge used will
correspond with the bill period end date.
   (a)   Demand Charge.
 
                   Summer             Winter
Kilowatt Per Month 2024  2025  2026   2024  2025  2026
First 50           $7.99 $9.17 $10.02 $7.28 $8.35 $9.13
All over 50        $6.92 $7.94 $8.68  $6.33 $7.26 $7.94
 
   (b)   Reactive Charge.
 
                  Summer            Winter
Kilovar Per Month 2024  2025  2026  2024  2025  2026
In excess of 30   $0.20 $0.23 $0.25 $0.20 $0.23 $0.25
 
   (c)   Kilowatt Hour Charge.
 
                   Summer                  Winter
Kilowatt Per Month 2024    2025    2026    2024    2025    2026
First 40,000       $0.0331 $0.0380 $0.0415 $0.0288 $0.0330 $0.0361
Next 60,000        $0.0207 $0.0238 $0.0260 $0.0173 $0.0199 $0.0217
Next 200 KWH/KWD
but not less than  $0.0166 $0.0190 $0.0208 $0.0140 $0.0161 $0.0176
400,000 KWH
Next 200 KWH/KWD   $0.0105 $0.0120 $0.0132 $0.0084 $0.0096 $0.0105
All excess KWH     $0.0056 $0.0064 $0.0070 $0.0056 $0.0064 $0.0070
 
   (d)   Determination of Demand. The kilowatt demand shall be determined
monthly by demand measurements and shall be the maximum thirty (30) minute
kilowatt demand during the month.
   (e)   Definition of Seasonal Rate. For the purpose of this rate schedule,
the summer rate shall be in effect during the months of June, July, August,
September and October. The winter rate shall be in effect during the months of
November, December, January, February, March, April and May.
   (f)   Determination of Reactive Demand. The reactive billing demand shall be
determined by multiplying the monthly kilowatt demand by the ratio of the
monthly lagging reactive kilovolt ampere hours to the monthly kilowatt hours.
   (g)   Discount for Primary Metering. Where the electric energy is metered on
the primary (two thousand three hundred (2,300) volts or higher) side of the
service transformers, a discount of two percent (2%) of the gross primary
metered kilowatt hours may be allowed.
   (h)   Voltage Supply Discount. Where the electric energy is provided
entirely from an eleven thousand (11,000) volt circuit, a discount of five
cents ($0.05) per kilowatt of demand billed may be allowed.
   (i)   Substation Ownership Discount. A discount of thirty cents ($0.30) per
kilowatt of demand billed may be allowed when a customer owns, installs and
maintains transformation and substation apparatus, thereby relieving the
Division of these costs.
   (j)   Off-Peak Demand Allowance. At the option of the Division, the billing
demand may be the greater of the regularly incurred demand or eighty-five
percent (85%) of the maximum demand incurred during off- peak periods.
   The cost of special metering to determine such demand shall be charged to
the customer.
   Off-peak periods shall be from 12:00 a.m. until 8:00 a.m., Tuesday through
Saturday, and from 4:00 p.m. Saturday through 8:00 a.m. Monday.
   (k)   Special Service. Direct current, standby, temporary, special, welding,
intermittent or extremely low load and extremely low load factor service is not
included in this schedule and shall be subject to special rates based upon cost
as computed by the Division of Cleveland Public Power.
   Applicants for these services may be charged with the cost of installing and
furnishing such services as well as the cost of removal of such services at the
discretion of the Division.
   The monthly minimum charge shall be applied in the case of all special
services.
   (l)   Combined Billings. Where plural service connections supply a customer
on the same premises, meter readings may, at the option of the Division, be
added for billing purposes. The combined demand shall be the sum of the
undiversified demands computed as for separate billing.
   (m)   Environmental and Ecological Adjustment. An adjustment to the Power
Supply Recovery shall be applied to this rate as set forth and described in
Section
523.17.
   (n)   Power Supply Recovery. In accordance with Section
523.21, the Power Supply Recovery shall be determined and applied on a monthly
basis by the Division.
   (o)   Determination of Applicable Schedule. In any month that the kilowatt
demand (KWD) equals or exceeds ten thousand (10,000), the billing for that
month shall be calculated using the Large Industrial Rate Schedules set forth
in Section
523.047.
   In any month that the kilowatt hour consumption is less than or equal to
five hundred thousand (500,000), and the kilowatt demand (KWD) is less than ten
thousand (10,000), the billing for that month shall be calculated using the
Large Commercial Rate Schedules set forth in Section
523.04.
(Ord. No. 957-2024. Passed 11-4-24, eff. 11-6-24) (BOC Res. No. 639-24. Adopted
12-18-24)
§ 523.047 Large Industrial Rate Schedules
   Effective January 1 of each applicable year, the following schedule is
schedules are applicable to all commercial installations during any month in
which such installation has a demand of greater than ten thousand (10,000)
kilowatts. Usage charges are not prorated. The charge used will correspond with
the bill period end date.
   (a)   Demand Charge.
 
                   Summer             Winter
Kilowatt Per Month 2024  2025  2026   2024  2025  2026
First 5,000        $8.43 $9.67 $10.57 $7.68 $8.81 $9.63
All over 5,000     $7.85 $9.01 $9.84  $7.09 $8.14 $8.89
 
   (b)   Reactive Charge.
 
                                      Summer            Winter
Kilovar Per Month                     2024  2025  2026  2024  2025  2026
For KVAR in excess of 10% of kilowatt $0.20 $0.23 $0.25 $0.20 $0.23 $0.25
demand
 
   (c)   Kilowatt Hour Charge.
 
                   Summer                  Winter
Kilowatt Per Month 2024    2025    2026    2024    2025    2026
First 115 KWH/KWD  Charges are included in the demand charge
Next 305 KWH/KWD   $0.0115 $0.0132 $0.0144 $0.0092 $0.0106 $0.0115
All excess KWH     $0.0050 $0.0057 $0.0063 $0.0053 $0.0061 $0.0066
 
   (d)   Determination of Demand. The kilowatt demand shall be determined
monthly by demand measurements and shall be the maximum thirty (30) minute
kilowatt demand during the month.
   (e)   Determination of Reactive Demand. The reactive billing demand shall be
determined by multiplying the monthly kilowatt demand by the ratio of the
monthly lagging reactive kilovolt ampere hours to the monthly kilowatt hours.
   (f)   Definition of Seasonal Rate. For the purpose of this rate schedule,
the summer rate shall be in effect during the months of June, July, August,
September and October. The winter rate shall be in effect during the months of
November, December, January, February, March, April and May.
   (g)   Discount for Primary Metering. Where the electric energy is metered on
the primary (two thousand three hundred (2,300) volts or higher) side of the
service transformers, a discount of two percent (2%) of the gross primary
metered kilowatt hours may be allowed.
   (h)   Voltage Supply Discount. Where the electric energy is provided
entirely from an eleven thousand (11,000) volt circuit, a discount of five
cents ($0.05) per kilowatt of demand billed may be allowed.
   (i)   Substation Ownership Discount. A discount of thirty cents ($0.30) per
kilowatt of demand billed may be allowed when a customer owns, installs and
maintains transformation and substation apparatus, thereby relieving the
Division of these costs.
   (j)   Off-Peak Demand Allowance. At the option of the Division, the billing
demand may be the greater of the regularly incurred demand or eighty-five
percent (85%) of the maximum demand incurred during off- peak periods.
   The cost of special metering to determine such demand shall be charged to
the customer.
   Off-peak periods shall be from 12:00 a.m. until 8:00 a.m., Tuesday through
Saturday, and from 4:00 p.m. Saturday through 8:00 a.m. Monday.
   (k)   Special Service. Direct current, standby, temporary, special, welding,
intermittent or extremely low load and extremely low load factor service is not
included in this schedule and shall be subject to special rates based upon cost
as computed by the Division of Cleveland Public Power.
   Applicants for these services may be charged with the cost of installing and
furnishing such services as well as the cost of removal of such services at the
discretion of the Division.
   The monthly minimum charge shall be applied in the case of all special
services.
   (l)   Combined Billings. Where plural service connections supply a customer
on the same premises, meter readings may, at the option of the Division, be
added for billing purposes. The combined demand shall be the sum of the
undiversified demands computed as for separate billing.
   (m)   Environmental and Ecological Adjustment. An adjustment to the Power
Supply Recovery shall be applied to this rate as set forth and described in
Section
523.17.
   (n)   Power Supply Recovery. In accordance with Section
523.21, the Power Supply Recovery shall be determined and applied on a monthly
basis by the Division.
   (o)   Determination of Applicable Schedule. In any month that the demand is
less than ten thousand (10,000) kilowatts, the billing for that month shall be
calculated using the Small Industrial Rate Schedules set forth in Section
523.043.
(Ord. No. 957-2024. Passed 11-4-24, eff. 11-6-24) (BOC Res. No. 639-24. Adopted
12-18-24)
§ 523.048 Optional Large Industrial Rate Schedule
   The following schedule is applicable to all commercial customers who
contract for a demand equal to or in excess of ten thousand (10,000) kilowatts
for a period of not less than five (5) years and who are served at a primary
voltage of 138,000 volts.
   (a)   Demand Charge.
 
Kilowatt Per Month       Summer    Winter
For the first 10,000 KWD $8.15/KWD $7.35/KWD
For all over 10,000 KWD  $7.85/KWD $7.09/KWD
 
   (b)   Reactive Charge.
 
Kilovar Per Month                                Summer      Winter
For all KVAR in excess of 10% of kilowatt demand $0.20/KVARD $0.20/KVARD
 
   (c)   Kilowatt Hour Charge.
 
Kilowatt Per Month        Summer      Winter
For the first 115 KWH/KWD Charges are included in the demand charge
For the next 305 KWH/KWD  $0.0115/KWH $0.0092/KWH
For all excess KWH        $0.0050/KWH $0.0053/KWH
 
   (d)   Determination of Demand. The kilowatt demand shall be determined
monthly by demand measurements, and shall be the maximum thirty (30) minute
kilowatt demand during the month.
   (e)   Determination of Reactive Demand. The reactive billing demand shall be
determined by multiplying the monthly kilowatt demand by the ratio of the
monthly lagging reactive kilovolt ampere hours to the monthly kilowatt hours.
   (f)   Definition of Seasonal Rate. For the purpose of this rate schedule,
the summer rate shall be in effect during the months of June, July, August,
September and October. The winter rate shall be in effect during the months of
November, December, January, February, March, April and May.
   (g)   Metering. Electric energy shall be metered on the secondary side of
the service transformers.
   (h)   Facilities Ownership Discount. When a customer owns or constructs
transmission, transformation, substation apparatus or other facilities,
relieving the Division of these costs, a discount of rates and charges may be
allowed based on the cost of service to such customer as determined by the
Division.
   (i)   Combined Billing. At the option of the Division, where plural
connections supply the same customer, meter readings may be added for billing
purposes and the combined demand shall be the coincident demand or the sum of
the undiversified demands.
   (j)   Environmental and Ecological Adjustment. An adjustment to the Energy
Adjustment Charge shall be applied to this rate as set forth and described in
Section
523.17.
   (k)   Energy Adjustment Charge. An incremental charge for excess energy
costs shall be determined and applied on a monthly basis by the Division and
applied in addition to the rates established in this section. The energy
adjustment charge shall be determined by dividing the sum of the costs of coal,
oil, gas and all costs of purchase power from a specific source or sources
purchased by the Division for distribution to the Consumer by the total
kilowatt hours distributed to Consumer. From the resulting figure shall be
subtracted fifteen (15) mils per kilowatt hour, which constitutes the cost of
coal, oil, gas and purchase power which is imbedded in the Optional Large
Industrial Rate Schedule. In the event that no specific energy source is
identified for Consumer, the energy adjustment charge shall be determined
pursuant to Section
523.21(c)(2).
(Ord. No. 472-2022. Passed 5-23-22, eff. 5-25-22)
§ 523.049 Capacity Enhancement Incentive Rate Schedules
   The following schedules are applicable to all new commercial customers who
have not received Cleveland Public Power service at their present location in
the preceding two (2) years, who enter into a written ten (10) year contract
for service anticipated to commence in 2010, who will be served by distribution
capacity created as part of Cleveland Public Power’s “Capacity Enhancement
Program,” and whose peak demand is equal to or in excess of one hundred fifty
(150) kilowatts. The availability of this rate schedule shall be limited to the
first one hundred thousand (100,000) kilowatts of peak demand contracted under
this rate schedule, or such lower total as may be determined by the Division.
   The rates and charges contained in paragraphs (a) through (h) of this
schedule shall be fixed for the duration of the initial contract term. For all
commercial installations during any month in which such installation has a
demand of less than one hundred fifty (150) kilowatts, the appropriate standard
rate schedule shall apply.
   For all commercial installations during any month in which such installation
has a demand of at least one hundred fifty (150) kilowatts and less than six
hundred fifty (650) kilowatts:
   (a)   Customer Charge per Month: Ninety dollars and fifty-eight cents
($90.58).
   (b)   Demand Charge.
 
Kilowatt Per Month    Summer      Winter
For the first 200 KWD $14.269/KWD $13.326/KWD
For all excess KWD    $12.631/KWD $11.750/KWD
 
   (c)   Reactive Charge.
 
Kilovar Demand  Summer       Winter
Per Month
For all KVARD   $0.456/KVARD $0.456/KVARD
in excess of 30
 
   (d)   Kilowatt Hour Charge.
 
Kilowatt Per Month        Summer       Winter
For the first 200 KWH/KWD $0.06709/KWH $0.06365/KWH
For the next 200 KWH/KWD  $0.05115/KWH $0.04790/KWH
For all excess KWH        $0.04197/KWH $0.04017/KWH
 
   For all commercial installations during any month in which such installation
has a demand equal to or greater than six hundred fifty (650) kilowatts:
   (e)   Customer Charge Per Month: Two hundred twenty-six dollars and thirty-
two cents ($226.32)
   (f)   Demand Charge.
 
Kilowatt Per Month    Summer      Winter
For the first 500 KWD $14.994/KWD $14.994/KWD
For the next 500 KWD  $13.905/KWD $13.905/KWD
For all excess KWD    $11.723/KWD $11.723/KWD
 
   (g)   Reactive Charge.
 
Kilovar Demand  Summer       Winter
Per Month
For all KVARD   $0.456/KVARD $0.456/KVARD
in excess of 30
 
   (h)   Kilowatt Hour Charge.
 
Kilowatt Per Month        Summer       Winter
For the first 150 KWH/KWD $0.06480/KWH $0.06480/KWH
For the next 150 KWH/KWD  $0.05100/KWH $0.05100/KWH
For the next 150 KWH/KWD  $0.03552/KWH $0.03552/KWH
For all excess KWH        $0.01362/KWH $0.01362/KWH
 
   (i)   Applicability. This rate schedule shall be in effect for capacity
enhancement contracts entered into with new commercial customers before
December 31, 2024 and will remain in effect for the duration of the contract.
Usage charges are not prorated. The charge used will correspond with the bill
period end date. This rate schedule will no longer be available for new
commercial customers who enter into new service contracts on or after January
1, 2025. After January 1, 2025, the commercial contract rates for new
commercial customers shall be determined under Sections
523.03,
523.04,
523.043 or
523.0491.
   (j)   Determination of Demand. The kilowatt demand shall be determined
monthly by demand measurements, and shall be the maximum thirty (30) minute
kilowatt demand during the month.
   (k)   Determination of Reactive Demand. The reactive billing demand shall be
determined by multiplying the monthly kilowatt demand by the ratio of the
monthly lagging reactive kilovolt ampere hours to the monthly kilowatt hours.
At the Division’s option, the reactive billing demand may be the metered
reactive demand.
   (l)   Definition of Seasonal Rate. For the purpose of this rate schedule,
the summer rate shall be in effect for bills rendered during the months of
June, July, August, and September. The winter rate shall be in effect for bills
rendered during the months of October, November, December, January, February,
March, April, and May.
   (m)   Discount for Primary Metering. Where the electric energy is metered on
the primary (two thousand three hundred (2,300) volts or higher) side of the
service transformers, a discount of two percent (2%) of the gross primary
metered kilowatt hours may be allowed.
   (n)   Substation Ownership Discount. A discount of thirty cents ($0.30) per
kilowatt of demand billed may be allowed when a customer owns, installs and
maintains transformation and substation apparatus, thereby relieving the
Division of these costs.
   (o)   Combined Billing. At the option of the Division, where plural
connections supply the same customer in the same general location, meter
readings may be added for billing purposes and the combined demand shall be the
coincident demand or the sum of the undiversified demands.
   (p)   Transmission, Taxes, and Other Charges. Customers under this schedule
shall be charged for increases incurred after the adoption of this schedule for
transmission service, costs or charges imposed by federal or state law,
regulatory authorities, regional transmission operators, or reliability
authorities/organizations, and taxes of any kind, however measured, paid
directly or indirectly by the City. The kWh tax prescribed by RC Chapter 5727,
or any successor tax, shall be charged to the same extent as such tax is
applied to customers under the standard CPP rate schedules.
(Ord. No. 957-2024. Passed 11-4-24, eff. 11-6-24) (BOC Res. No. 639-24. Adopted
12-18-24)
§ 523.0491 Commercially Contracted Alternative Rate Schedules
   Effective January 1 of each applicable year, the following schedules are
applicable to all new commercial customers who have not received Cleveland
Public Power service at their present location in the preceding two (2) years,
and enter into, at minimum, a written ten (10) year contract for service
anticipated to commence on or after January 1, 2025. This rate shall also apply
to existing Cleveland Public Power customers who enter into, at minimum, a new
written five (5) year contract for service commencing on or after January 1,
2025. Commercially Contracted Alternative Rate – Small Capacity rates shall
apply to commercial contract customers with a peak demand between 150 KWD and
650 KWD. Commercially Contracted Alternative Rate – Large Capacity rates shall
apply to commercial contract customers with a peak demand greater than 650 KWD.
   The rates and charges contained in this section shall be fixed for four (4)
years starting January 1, 2025 and shall be adjusted effective January 1, 2029
for five (5) additional years. For all commercial installations during any
month in which such installation has a demand of less than one hundred fifty
(150) kilowatts, the appropriate standard rate schedule shall apply. Usage
charges are not prorated. The charge used will correspond with the bill period
end date.
   For all commercial installations during any month in which such installation
has a demand of at least one hundred fifty (150) kilowatts and less than six
hundred fifty (650) kilowatts, the schedules in divisions (a) to (d) of this
section shall apply:
   (a)   Customer Charge per Month – Small Capacity.
 
Commercially Contracted Alternative Rate – Small Capacity
             Winter                  Summer
Fixed Fee    2025 - 2028 2029 - 2034 2025 - 2028 2029 - 2034
Each Account $112.32     $129.17     $112.32     $129.17
 
   (b)   Demand Charge – Small Capacity.
 
Commercially Contracted Alternative Rate – Small Capacity
                 Winter                  Summer
Demand Charges   2025 - 2028 2029 - 2034 2025 - 2028 2029 - 2034
Tier 1           $16.524     $19.003     $17.694     $20.348
(up to 200 KWD)
Tier 2           $14.570     $16.756     $15.662     $18.012
(all excess KWD)
 
   (c)   Reactive Charge – Small Capacity.
 
Commercially Contracted Alternative Rate – Small Capacity
                          Winter                  Summer
Reactive Charges ($/KVAR) 2025 - 2028 2029 - 2034 2025 - 2028 2029 - 2034
All KVAR over 30          $0.57       $0.65       $0.57       $0.65
 
   (d)   Kilowatt Hour Charge – Small Capacity.
 
Commercially Contracted Alternative Rate – Small Capacity
                   Winter                  Summer
KWH Charge         2025 - 2028 2029 - 2034 2025 - 2028 2029 - 2034
First 200          $0.07893    $0.09076    $0.08319    $0.09567
KWH/KWD
Second 200 KWH/KWD $0.05940    $0.06831    $0.06343    $0.07294
All excess KWH     $0.04981    $0.05728    $0.05204    $0.05985
 
   For all commercial installations during any month in which such installation
has a demand equal to or greater than six hundred fifty (650) kilowatts rate
the schedules in divisions (e) to (h) of this section shall apply:
   (e)   Customer Charge per Month – Large Capacity.
 
Commercially Contracted Alternative Rate – Large Capacity
             Winter                  Summer
Fixed Fee    2025 - 2028 2029 - 2034 2025 - 2028 2029 - 2034
Each Account $271.58     $312.32     $271.58     $312.32
 
   (f)   Demand Charge – Large Capacity.
 
Commercially Contracted Alternative Rate – Large Capacity
                  Winter                  Summer
Demand Charges    2025 - 2028 2029 - 2034 2025 - 2028 2029 - 2034
Tier 1            $17.993     $20.692     $17.993     $20.692
(up to 500 KWD)
Tier 2            $16.686     $19.189     $16.686     $19.189
(501 - 1,000 KWD)
Tier 3            $14.068     $16.178     $14.068     $16.178
(all excess KWD)
 
   (g)   Reactive Charge – Large Capacity.
 
Commercially Contracted Alternative Rate – Large Capacity
                          Winter                  Summer
Reactive Charges ($/KVAR) 2025 - 2028 2029 - 2034 2025 - 2028 2029 - 2034
All KVAR over 30          $0.55       $0.63       $0.55       $0.63
 
   (h)   Kilowatt Hour Charge – Large Capacity.
 
Commercially Contracted Alternative Rate – Large Capacity
               Winter                  Summer
KWH Charge     2025 - 2028 2029 - 2034 2025 - 2028 2029 - 2034
First 150      $0.07776    $0.08942    $0.07776    $0.08942
KWH/KWD
Second 150     $0.06120    $0.07038    $0.06120    $0.07038
KWH/KWD
Third 150      $0.04262    $0.04902    $0.04262    $0.04902
KWH/KWD
All excess KWH $0.01634    $0.01880    $0.01634    $0.01880
 
   (i)   Determination of Demand. The kilowatt demand shall be determined
monthly by demand measurements, and shall be the maximum thirty (30) minute
kilowatt demand during the month.
   (j)   Determination of Reactive Demand. The reactive billing demand shall be
determined by multiplying the monthly kilowatt demand by the ratio of the
monthly lagging reactive kilovolt ampere hours to the monthly kilowatt hours.
At the option of the Commissioner of the Division of Cleveland Public Power,
the reactive billing demand may be the metered reactive demand.
   (k)   Definition of Seasonal Rate. For the purpose of this rate schedule,
the summer rate shall be in effect for bills rendered during the months of
June, July, August, and September. The winter rate shall be in effect for bills
rendered during the months of October, November, December, January, February,
March, April, and May.
   (l)   Discount for Primary Metering. Where the electric energy is metered on
the primary (two thousand three hundred (2,300) volts or higher) side of the
service transformers, a discount of two percent (2%) of the gross primary
metered kilowatt hours may be allowed.
   (m)   Substation Ownership Discount. A discount of thirty cents ($0.30) per
kilowatt of demand billed may be allowed when a customer owns, installs and
maintains transformation and substation apparatus, thereby relieving the
Division of these costs.
   (n)   Combined Billing. At the option of the Commissioner of the Division of
Cleveland Public Power, where plural connections supply the same customer in
the same general location, meter readings may be added for billing purposes and
the combined demand shall be the coincident demand or the sum of the
undiversified demands.
   (o)   Transmission, Taxes, and Other Charges. Customers under this schedule
shall be charged for transmission service, costs or charges imposed by federal
or state law, regulatory authorities, regional transmission operators, or
reliability authorities/organizations, and taxes of any kind, however measured,
paid directly or indirectly by the City. The KWH tax prescribed by RC Chapter
5727, or any successor tax, shall be charged to the same extent as such tax is
applied to customers under the standard Cleveland Public Power rate schedules.
(Ord. No. 957-2024. Passed 11-4-24, eff. 11-6-24) (BOC Res. No. 639-24. Adopted
12-18-24)
§ 523.05 Street Lighting Schedules
   Effective January 1 of each applicable year, the following schedules are
applicable to all electric street lighting service provided by the Division of
Cleveland Public Power to governmental entities. Such service shall include
installation and full maintenance. Usage charges are not prorated. The charge
used will correspond with the bill period end date.
   Any fixtures not identified in division (f) of this section, LED Street
Lights will require express written approval from the Commissioner of the
Division of Cleveland Public Power prior to installation.
   (a)   Non-ornamental Lighting Service.
 
High Pressure Sodium (Watt) KWH/Lamp Monthly Rate/Lamp
                                     2024   2025   2026
100                         52       $6.20  $8.25  $8.25
150                         71       $7.66  $10.19 $10.19
250                         112      $9.94  $13.22 $13.22
400                         174      $11.28 $15.00 $15.00
 
   (b)   Ornamental Lighting Service – Type I (thirty (30) ft. Steel Pole).
High Pressure Sodium (Watt) KWH/Lamp Monthly Rate/Lamp
                                     2024   2025   2026
100                         52       $10.58 $14.07 $14.07
100 (E & M only)            52       $6.15  $8.18  $8.18
150                         71       $12.04 $16.01 $16.01
150 (E & M only)            71       $7.55  $10.04 $10.04
250                         112      $14.62 $19.44 $19.44
250 (E & M only)            112      $9.25  $10.61 $10.61
400                         174      $18.00 $23.94 $23.94
400 (E & M only)            174      $12.25 $14.06 $14.06
 
 
Fluorescent (Watt*) KWH/Lamp Monthly Rate/Lamp
                             2024   2025   2026
200                 101      $10.45 $11.99 $11.99
* Not available for new installation
 
   (c)   Ornamental Lighting Service – Type II (thirty (30) ft. Concrete Pole).
 
High Pressure Sodium (Watt) KWH/Lamp Monthly Rate/Lamp
                                     2024   2025   2026
250                         112      $21.21 $28.21 $28.21
400                         174      $24.59 $32.70 $32.70
 
   (d)   Ornamental Lighting Service – Type III (forty-one (41) ft. Steel Pole
w/Breakaway Base).
 
High Pressure Sodium (Watt) KWH/Lamp Monthly Rate/Lamp
                                     2024   2025   2026
400                         174      $30.00 $34.43 $34.43
 
   (e)   Street and Highway Lighting Service – Energy Only.
High Pressure Sodium (Watt) KWH/Lamp Monthly Rate/Lamp
                                     2024  2025   2026
100 (Controlled)            52       $1.30 $1.73  $1.73
100 (Continuous)            110      $2.75 $3.66  $3.66
150 (Controlled)            71       $1.78 $2.04  $2.04
150 (Continuous)            150      $3.75 $4.30  $4.30
200 (Controlled)            88       $2.20 $2.93  $2.93
200 (Continuous)            185      $4.63 $5.29  $5.29
250 (Controlled)            112      $2.80 $3.72  $3.72
250 (Continuous)            236      $5.90 $6.77  $6.77
400 (Controlled)            174      $4.35 $5.79  $5.79
400 (Continuous)            366      $9.15 $10.50 $10.50
1,000 (Controlled)          396      $9.90 $13.17 $13.17
 
 
Metal Halide (Watt) KWH/Lamp Monthly Rate/Lamp
                             2024  2025   2026
1,000 (Controlled)  391      $9.78 $11.22 $11.22
 
   (f)   LED Street Lights.
LED Type Existing HID Wattage Equivalent LED Wattage Monthly Rate/Lamp
                                                     2025 2026
LED Type              Existing HID Wattage Equivalent LED Monthly Rate/Lamp
                                           Wattage        2025   2026
Cobra Head            150                  47             $5.56  $5.56
Cobra Head - 480 V    150                  47             $5.56  $5.56
Cobra Head            250                  111            $7.65  $7.65
Cobra Head - 480 V    250                  111            $7.65  $7.65
Cobra Head            400                  194            $32.34 $32.34
Cobra Head - 480 V    400                  196            $32.34 $32.34
Ornamental Epic -     175                  80             $71.49 $71.49
Bell
Ornamental Epic -     400                  150            $71.53 $71.53
Bell
Ornamental Acorn w/   71                   71             $44.50 $44.50
Cage
Ornamental Acorn w/   104                  71             $44.50 $44.50
o Cage
Ornamental Round      150                  75             $41.76 $41.76
Ornamental Octogonal  150                  60             $44.50 $44.50
Ornamental Octogonal  250                  80             $44.50 $44.50
Ornamental Icon       175                  75             $30.93 $30.93
(Small)
Ornamental Icon       400                  150            $50.82 $50.82
Ornamental Tear Drops 400                  200            $54.61 $54.61
Ornamental Tear Drops 400                  200            $54.61 $54.61
- 480V
Shoebox Classic       150                  87             $5.56  $5.56
Shoebox Classic - 480 150                  87             $5.56  $5.56
V
Shoebox Classic       250                  143            $7.65  $7.65
Shoebox Classic - 480 250                  143            $7.65  $7.65
V
Shoebox Classic       400                  163            $32.34 $32.34
Shoebox Classic - 480 400                  163            $32.34 $32.34
V
Shoebox Deluxe/       400                  262            $32.34 $32.34
E Cobra
Wallpack              150                  40             $16.23 $16.23
Wallpack              250                  55             $16.23 $16.23
Wallpack              400                  70             $29.15 $29.15
Wallpack - 480V       400                  70             $29.15 $29.15
 
   (g)   Terms and Conditions.
      (1)   Street lights will be operated by time clock, photoelectric
control, or similar technology, to provide illumination from dusk to dawn,
unless illumination is specified as continuous.
      (2)   The Division of Cleveland Public Power pays for the entire
installation of the fixture and amortizes the costs through the monthly rate.
      If the installation is paid for by governmental entities and the Division
maintains the installation:
         A.   If Non-LED lights, the Division shall charge the appropriate
“energy and maintenance only” (E & M only) rate;
         B.   If LED lights, the Division shall provide a thirty percent (30%)
discount off the appropriate rate found in the division (f) of this section.
      If the installation is paid for and maintained by governmental entities:
         A.   If Non-LED lights, the Division shall charge the appropriate
“energy only” rate;
         B.   If LED lights, the Division shall provide a sixty percent (60%)
discount off the appropriate rate found in the division (f) of this section.
      (3)   The Division may, at its discretion, meter “energy only”
installations. If such an installation is metered, the energy shall be billed
at the same rate as the traffic signal service rate schedules in division (a)
of Section
523.065.
      (4)   “Non-ornamental lighting service” means lights of an overhead-type
construction where the supply circuits are overhead wires and the lights are
attached or suspended from wooden poles, trolley poles or are wall-mounted.
      (5)   “Ornamental lighting service” means all lights other than non-
ornamental including lights of an underground-type construction where the
supply circuits are underground cables and lights are attached to ornamental
standards; lights of an overhead construction where the supply circuits are
overhead and the lights are attached to ornamental poles; and the lights that
are wall-mounted in which the supply circuit is enclosed in conduit.
   (h)   Environmental and Ecological Adjustment. An adjustment to the Power
Supply Recovery shall be applied to this rate as set forth and described in
Section
523.17.
   (i)   Power Supply Recovery. In accordance with Section
523.21, the Power Supply Recovery shall be determined and applied on a monthly
basis by the Division.
   (j)   For any street light fixtures not listed above, the Division of
Cleveland Public Power shall select the rate that most closely resembles the
type of fixture from the above schedules and shall base energy charges on the
rated consumption of the fixture.
   (k)   For any Street Lights powered by other utilities, the Division shall
charge each governmental entity the applicable fixture charge in divisions (a),
(b), (c), (d), (e) or (f) of this section and the energy cost charged to the
Division of Cleveland Public Power by the applicable entity, but not the Power
Supply Recovery in division (i) of this section.
(Ord. No. 957-2024. Passed 11-4-24, eff. 11-6-24) (BOC Res. No. 639-24. Adopted
12-18-24)
§ 523.06 Protective Lighting Schedules
   (a)   Effective January 1 of each applicable year, the following schedules
are applicable to all protective lighting service provided by the Division of
Cleveland Public Power. Such service shall include installation and full
maintenance. Usage charges are not prorated. The charge used will correspond
with the bill period end date.
   Rates are not available for new installation without written pre-approval
from CPP.
 
Area Lighting                 KWH/Lamp Monthly Rate/Lamp
                                       2024   2025   2026
100 Watt High Pressure Sodium 52       $12.67 $14.54 $15.88
250 Watt High Pressure Sodium 112      $15.16 $17.40 $19.01
400 Watt High Pressure Sodium 174      $19.14 $21.96 $23.99
1,000 Watt Metal Halide       391      $27.85 $31.96 $34.91
 
 
Flood Lighting                KWH/Lamp Monthly Rate/Lamp
                                       2024   2025   2026
250 Watt High Pressure Sodium 112      $14.41 $16.54 $18.07
400 Watt High Pressure Sodium 174      $20.45 $23.47 $25.64
1,000 Watt Metal Halide       391      $29.05 $33.33 $36.42
 
   (b)   LED Protective Lighting.
LED Type Existing HID Wattage Equivalent LED Wattage Monthly Rate/Lamp
                                                     2025 2026
LED Type           Existing HID Wattage Equivalent LED Monthly Rate/Lamp
                                        Wattage        2025   2026
Cobra Head         150                  47             $8.34  $8.34
Cobra Head - 480 V 150                  47             $8.34  $8.34
Cobra Head         250                  111            $11.48 $11.48
Cobra Head - 480 V 250                  111            $11.48 $11.48
Cobra Head         400                  194            $48.51 $48.51
Cobra Head - 480 V 400                  196            $48.51 $48.51
Cobra Head         1,000                280            $55.22 $55.22
 
   (c)   LED Flood Lighting.
 
LED Flood Lighting     LED Wattage Monthly Rate/Lamp
                                   2025   2026
180 Watt LED           180         $34.50 $34.50
270 Watt LED           270         $48.12 $48.12
270 Watt LED (2,200 K) 270         $53.37 $53.37
390 Watt LED           390         $51.83 $51.83
 
   (d)   Protective lighting and flood lighting shall be operated by time
clock, photoelectric control or similar technology, to provide illumination
from dusk.
   (e)   Environmental and Ecological Adjustment. An adjustment to the Power
Supply Recovery shall be applied to this rate as set forth and described in
Section
523.17.
   (f)   Power Supply Recovery. In accordance with Section
523.21, the Power Supply Recovery shall be determined and applied on a monthly
basis by the Division.
   (g)   For any powered bulbs not listed above, the Division shall base
charges on the wattage rating used per bulb. For protective lighting and flood
lighting that do not have a wattage rating, the Division of Cleveland Public
Power shall select the rate that most closely resembles the type of fixture
from the above schedules.
(Ord. No. 957-2024. Passed 11-4-24, eff. 11-6-24) (BOC Res. No. 639-24. Adopted
12-18-24)
§ 523.061 Charge for Outdoor Residential Lighting
   The charge for outdoor residential lighting equipment provided by the
Division of Cleveland Public Power shall be established in accordance with the
cost of service as computed by the Division. The Division may allow a customer
to pay such charges under a payment plan through installments included in the
customer's bill, for a period of twelve (12) months commencing with the first
billing period after installation, provided such customer has a good account
history, as determined by the Division.
(Ord. No. 472-2022. Passed 5-23-22, eff. 5-25-22)
§ 523.062 Homestead Discount for Outdoor Residential Lighting
   The charges for outdoor residential lighting established pursuant to Section
523.061 shall be discounted by ten percent (10%) for any customer who has
obtained a certificate of reduction of taxes pursuant to the Homestead
Exemption provisions of RC 323.151 through 323.157.
(Ord. No. 1277-98. Passed 7-29-98, eff. 8-5-98)
§ 523.065 Traffic Signal Service Rate Schedules
   Effective January 1 of each applicable year, the following are applicable to
all energy sold to governmental entities for the purpose of traffic signal
service. Usage charges are not prorated. The charge used will correspond with
the bill period end date.
   (a)   Kilowatt Hour Charge.
 
Rates                       2024   2025   2026
Traffic Signal Service Rate $0.023 $0.026 $0.029
 
   (b)   Environmental and Ecological Adjustment. An adjustment to the Power
Supply Recovery shall be applied to this rate as set forth and described in
Section
523.17.
   (c)   Power Supply Recovery. In accordance with Section
523.21, the Power Supply Recovery shall be determined and applied on a monthly
basis by the Division.
(Ord. No. 957-2024. Passed 11-4-24, eff. 11-6-24) (BOC Res. No. 639-24. Adopted
12-18-24)
§ 523.066 Security Equipment Rate Schedule
   The following schedule is applicable to all electric security equipment
service provided by the Division of Cleveland Public Power to governmental
entities:
   (a)   Kilowatt Hour Charge.
 
Rates                   2024   2025   2026
Security Equipment Rate $0.023 $0.026 $0.029
 
   (b)   Environmental and Ecological Adjustment. An adjustment to the Power
Supply Recovery shall be applied to this rate as set forth and described in
Section
523.17.
   (c)   Power Supply Recovery. In accordance with Section
523.21, the Power Supply Recovery shall be determined and applied on a monthly
basis by the Division.
(Ord. No. 957-2024. Passed 11-4-24, eff. 11-6-24) (BOC Res. No. 639-24. Adopted
12-18-24)
§ 523.067 Small Wireless Facility Rate Schedule
   Small wireless facilities are subject to the monthly consumption charges in
the small commercial rate schedule in Section
523.03 of these codified ordinances in addition to the items below.
   In accordance with the Federal Communications Commission ruling, FCC 18-133
dated September 27, 2018, the rates are:
 
Service                                                                  Charge
Application Fee (Up to five (5) Wireless Facilities)                     $500
Application Fee (for each Small Wireless Facility Above the Initial Five $100
(5))
Non-Recurring Fees for a New Pole Intended to Support One (1) or More    $1,000
Small Wireless Facilities
Annual Fee Per Small Wireless Facility                                   $270
 
(Ord. No. 957-2024. Passed 11-4-24, eff. 11-6-24) (BOC Res. No. 639-24. Adopted
12-18-24)
§ 523.07 Regulations for Applicants for Electrical Service
   (a)   All applicants for electrical service supplied by the Division of
Cleveland Public Power shall agree to abide by all of the rules and regulations
hereinafter set forth and all other rules and regulations as may be contained
in other City ordinances relating to electrical service supplied by the
Division.
   (b)   The consumer hereby agrees not to resell, sublet or divert any of the
electric service herein contracted for, except with the written consent of the
City.
   (c)   The consumer agrees not to allow the City’s wires or meters to be
interfered with in any way.
   (d)   In case of loss or damage to the property of the City from an act of
negligence of the consumer or its agents or servants, or of failure to return
equipment supplied by the City, the consumer shall pay to the City the value of
such property.
   (e)   No other electric service shall be used by the consumer in conjunction
with the City’s service, either by means of an automatic or manually operated
switch, or by any other device, connection or arrangement, without the express
consent of the City especially obtained for that purpose. Any violation of this
rule shall authorize the City to discontinue its service entirely and remove
its property.
   (f)   The City will furnish the electric meter, metering equipment and the
necessary service drop to connect the City’s mains with the consumer’s system
at the service entrance. All wiring, meters, equipment, appurtenances and
material of any nature furnished by the City shall remain its property, and may
be removed by it at any time after the termination of this agreement or the
discontinuance of the service.
   (g)   It is further expressly agreed that the undertaking of the City shall
be completed by the supplying of the electric service at the conditions stated
to the wire entrance of the consumer’s premises, and that any appliances or
equipment required to transform, control, regulate or utilize energy shall be
furnished and maintained by the consumer, and particularly that the City shall
not be under any requirements to furnish lamps of any kind, nor maintenance or
renewals of the same, nor fuses, nor the service of repairmen or inspectors for
the consumer’s property.
   (h)   In case the City is prevented from delivering or the consumer
prevented from receiving electric service for any cause reasonably beyond their
control, then the City shall not be obligated to deliver nor the consumer to
receive electric service during such interruptions, but both parties shall be
prompt and diligent in removing or overcoming the causes of the interruptions,
and nothing contained herein shall be construed as permitting the City to
refuse to deliver or the consumer to decline to receive the aforesaid service
after the cause of interruption is removed.
   (i)   If meter readings are for a period of two (2) or more months, interim
monthly bills may be rendered based on estimated use.
   (j)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Service connection” means a metered supply of electrical energy.
      (2)   “Premises” means a building or contiguous buildings occupied by the
customer.
      (3)   “Commercial light service connection” means a supply where the
principal use is for lighting purposes.
      (4)   “Load factor” means the ratio of the actual kilowatt hours used to
the product of the monthly measured or metered demand and the total number of
hours in the billing period.
      (5)   “Low load factor service connection” means special, temporary,
welding or intermittent service.
      (6)   “Demand” means the maximum thirty (30) minute kilowatt demand
registered during the billing period.
      (7)   “Combined demand” means the sum of the undiversified demands
computed as for separate billings, except that the combined demand may be the
diversified demand at the option of the Division of Cleveland Public Power.
(Ord. No. 472-2022. Passed 5-23-22, eff. 5-25-22)
§ 523.08 Provisions Governing Advance Deposits
   (a)   A cash deposit equal to one hundred thirty percent (130%) of the
estimated average bill may be required as security for the payment of services
rendered. The applicant and/or consumer may, however, file a satisfactory
guarantee with the Division of Cleveland Public Power that will serve to insure
payment of bills. All such guarantees, written or otherwise, shall be subject
to the approval of the Division. If a deposit is required, it shall be billed
at the time of application for service.
   (b)   A cash deposit may be required to cover the entire cost of line
extensions or service connections which do not form a part of the permanent
distribution system or in such cases where the revenue received by the Division
will not be sufficient to cover the carrying charges thereof.
   (c)   Failure of the consumer to give advance notice of termination of
service may result in forfeiture of the security deposit.
   (d)   No cash or guaranteed deposit shall be refunded or released until
termination of service is complete and after all unpaid bills or other
indebtedness to the Division have been paid in full. A cash deposit may be
refunded, however, if the consumer files a satisfactory guarantee with the
Division in lieu thereof.
   (e)   No cash deposit will be refunded except where sufficient revenue
either has been collected or is anticipated to cover carrying charges for line
extensions and service connections, as hereinbefore described.
(Ord. No. 957-2024. Passed 11-4-24, eff. 11-6-24) (BOC Res. No. 639-24. Adopted
12-18-24)
§ 523.09 Accounting System
   In order to satisfy the requirements of the mortgage indenture and provide
for the proper operation of the Division of Cleveland Public Power, accounting
methods and procedures shall conform to the requirements of the uniform system
of accounts prescribed for public utilities and licensees by the Federal Power
Commission.
(Ord. No. 472-2022. Passed 5-23-22, eff. 5-25-22)
§ 523.10 Statements for Service Supplied
   (a)   Statements for electrical service supplied shall be computed and
billed on a monthly basis. At the discretion of the Division of Cleveland
Public Power, budget billing may be allowed for consumers having established a
satisfactory payment record.
   In the event that an incorrect billing should be rendered to the consumer,
it shall be subject to adjustment.
   (b)   Statements for service supplied shall carry an account number assigned
on the basis of service location. Such account number once assigned shall be
not changed and shall be reassigned to each new occupant of the premises
served.
(Ord. No. 472-2022. Passed 5-23-22, eff. 5-25-22)
§ 523.11 Delinquent Accounts
   (a)   If a statement rendered to a consumer is not paid on or before the due
date stated thereon, the consumer’s account shall be termed “delinquent” and
shall be subject to discontinuation of service.
   (b)   The Division of Cleveland Public Power shall give notice to the
consumer prior to termination of service. The first notice shall be sent by
first class mail at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the date after which
termination could occur. If the Division receives no response from the consumer
within five (5) days after the date of mailing of the first notice, then a
second notice shall be sent by first class mail, or personal contact shall be
made with an adult on the premises (telephone or physical visitation). All
notices shall be provided to the account name and address and, if different, to
the address where service is provided, as well as any other party previously
designated by a residential customer to receive a copy of a termination notice.
The termination notice shall be provided to residential customers in alternate
languages where appropriate.
   (c)   When terminating service to elderly or handicapped residential
customers, the Division’s final notice shall be by personal contact with an
adult on the premises (telephone or physical visitation). If personal contact
cannot be made, the notice of termination shall be posted in a conspicuous
location at the service address at least forty-eight (48) hours (two (2)
working days) before the date after which termination could occur.
   For the purpose of this section, “elderly” means any residential customer,
sixty-two (62) years of age or older, who resides at the service address and
who has notified the Division of his or her status. For the purpose of this
section, “handicapped” means any residential customer who resides at the
service address and has any physical or mental impairment which substantially
limits one (1) or more of such person’s life activities, and such person:
      (1)   Is certified as being physically disabled by a licensed physician;
or
      (2)   Is certified as being mentally disabled by a licensed psychiatrist,
registered psychologist, Veterans Administration, Social Security
Administration or local board of health; and
      (3)   Has notified the Division of his or her status.
   (d)   Tenants who pay for electric service as part of their rent in master-
metered buildings, shall be individually notified, when practical, of any
proposed termination. Tenants shall be collectively notified by posting a
termination notice in a conspicuous location, such as near mailboxes, building
entrances and exits or other areas of common usage. Tenants may collectively
pay the delinquent amount in order to avoid termination of service.
   (e)   A notice of termination of service shall include the following
information:
      (1)   The name, address and account number of the customer to be
terminated;
      (2)   A statement of the reasons for termination;
      (3)   The date after which the termination could occur;
      (4)   The charge for service reconnection;
      (5)   A statement that the consumer has the right to appear before a
Arbitration Panel to present objections and to examine all data related to his
or her account; and
      (6)   In cases where termination is based on failure to pay, the amount
owed, the time period over which the amount was incurred and whether the amount
was based on actual meter readings or on an estimated consumption.
   (f)   The Division shall determine when termination of service to a customer
would be especially dangerous to health because of extreme environmental
conditions or because a residential customer or party residing at the
customer’s address has provided the Division with certification by a licensed
physician that he or she is likely to become seriously ill or more seriously
ill if such service is terminated. The Division shall not terminate service
during the time any such condition exists, provided that the customer furnishes
sufficient information to the Division’s customer service representative to
establish, to the satisfaction of the Division, that:
      (1)   He or she is unable to pay for such service; or
      (2)   He or she is able to pay for such service but only in installments.
   Upon establishment of the customer's eligibility for relief under this
section, the Division shall refrain from terminating service so long as the
conditions established prevail. The Division may, from time to time, require
recertification of serious illness, if applicable. The Division shall make
arrangements with the customer for the payment of delinquent bills in
installments, taking into consideration the amount of money owed, the
customer's ability to pay, the customer's payment history, the time that the
debt has been outstanding, the reasons why the debt has been outstanding and
any other relevant factor. If a customer does not meet the requirements of such
installment plan, service shall be subject to termination upon notice given
after such failure to pay, in accordance with divisions (a) through (c) hereof.
   (g)   All disputes regarding any of the provisions of Chapter
523 or rates charged thereunder shall be arbitrated before a Cleveland Public
Power Arbitration Panel as set forth in Section
523.115.
(Ord. No. 957-2024. Passed 11-4-24, eff. 11-6-24)
§ 523.115 Cleveland Public Power Arbitration Panel
   (a)   The Cleveland Public Power Arbitration Panel shall consist of three
(3) individuals. Two (2) shall be selected by the Director of Public Utilities
and serve at the Director's discretion. One (1) shall be selected by the
Council President and serve at the Council President's discretion.
      (1)   The two (2) individuals appointed by the Director shall be
impartial, in that neither the person who approved the act or omission under
review, nor that person's subordinates, shall participate in the matter; be
knowledgeable about the operations and procedures of Cleveland Public Power;
and be available to perform all of their duties in connection with the
Arbitration Panel in a timely manner.
      (2)   The appointed Council Member must recuse themselves from hearing,
reviewing, or making any determination for a dispute, claim, or complaint
involving a resident or business owner of their Ward and be available to
perform all of their duties in connection with the Arbitration Panel in a
timely manner.
   (b)   The Arbitration Panel has the exclusive authority to review all
disputes under this Chapter and to make determinations with regard to the
matters presented to it. These determinations shall be binding on the City and
the petitioning customer, except that the Commissioner shall have the authority
to order that electric service not be terminated.
   The Arbitration Panel shall have the authority to reduce amounts claimed due
by Cleveland Public Power and the authority to defer payments of amounts it
finds due and owing.
   (c)   The Arbitration Panel may prescribe installment plans for payment of
amounts due and owing, and shall prescribe such a plan for any amount found due
and owing when part or all of such amount is based on a meter reading
reflecting a greater usage in a billing cycle than the estimated or average
usage for previous billing cycles, and where the customer is deemed unable to
pay upon demand.
   (d)   The Director of Public Utilities shall convene an Arbitration Panel
upon request of the customer in accordance with the rules and regulations
established by the Director.
   (e)   The Director of Public Utilities shall adopt rules and regulations
governing procedures for applications, notice, hearing and determination of
disputes submitted to the Arbitration Panel.
(Ord. No. 472-2022. Passed 5-23-22, eff. 5-25-22)
§ 523.12 Special Charges
   (a)   Penalty for Late Payments.
 
Service                                       Charge
Penalty for late payment of large commercial,
small industrial, large industrial, street    1.5% per month on unpaid balance
lighting and traffic signal invoices
 
   (b)   Disconnect/Reconnect at Meter or Pole/Service Fee.
 
Service                                                               Charge
Reconnect at Meter Fee - First Trip within a rolling 12 month period  $8.00
Reconnect at Meter Fee - Second trip within a rolling 12 month period $35.00
and trips thereafter
Reconnect at Meter Fee - Customer Reconnection-Faulty Meter           $35.00
Investigation
Disconnect/Reconnect at Pole Fee - Per Trip                           $232.00
Disconnect/Reconnect at Pole Fee - Per Trip after working hours       $310.00
 
   (c)   Temporary Service.
 
Service                    Charge
Temporary Electric Service Actual cost
                           ($120.00 min.)
 
   (d)   Refasten/Relocate Facilities.
 
Service                                         Charge
Loosen/Refasten Service Pipe After Construction Actual cost
                                                ($80.00 min.)
 
   (e)   Meter Test.
 
Service                        Charge
Meter Test at Customer Request $84.00
 
   (f)   Repeat Trip/Broken Appointment.
 
Service                                                              Charge
Repeat Trip/Broken Appointment (within 24 hours of appointment time) $80.00
 
   (g)   Special Service Calls.
 
Service               Charge
Special Service Calls $80.00
 
   (h)   Investigation Fee .
 
Service           Charge
Investigation Fee $175
 
   (i)   For purposes not named in the foregoing sections, or for the use of
power under special circumstances, special rates shall be established by the
Commissioner of the Division of Cleveland Public Power.
(Ord. No. 957-2024. Passed 11-4-24, eff. 11-6-24) (BOC Res. No. 639-24. Adopted
12-18-24)
§ 523.13 Access to Consumer’s Property
   Representatives of the Division of Cleveland Public Power shall have access
at all reasonable times, to all electrical equipment, appliances, etc.,
belonging to or owned by the Division erected upon the consumer's premises.
(Ord. No. 472-2022. Passed 5-23-22, eff. 5-25-22)
§ 523.14 Changes of Electrical Service
   Notice of intention to make any material change in the connected electrical
load shall be made to the office of the Division of Cleveland Public Power at
least ten (10) days prior to the date of such change. In the absence of such
notice, the consumer making the change shall be responsible for any damages to
transformers, meters or other equipment belonging to or owned by the Division.
Material changes in the connected electrical load may not be made without
approval of the Division.
(Ord. No. 472-2022. Passed 5-23-22, eff. 5-25-22)
§ 523.15 Provisions Governing Electrical Construction and Apparatus
   (a)   All electrical construction and apparatus that are to be connected to
the distribution system of the Division of Cleveland Public Power shall be
subject to the approval of the Division, and in accordance with the regulations
of the National Electrical Code and such City ordinances that may apply to the
same. The consumer agrees not to connect any motors or other devices to the
City's system which, because of excessive starting currents or other
objectionable intermittent demands, may cause a disturbance in the electric
service unless the motor or devices are equipped with current-limiting
accessories satisfactory to and approved by the City. The Division reserves the
right to refuse to install or connect to any wiring such appliances, apparatus,
etc., that do not conform with the requirements.
   (b)   In the event that appliances, apparatus, etc., are found to be
installed upon the consumer’s premises that do not conform with the rules and
regulations contained herein, the Division reserves the right to remove all
appliances, appurtenances, etc. belonging to or owned by the Division from the
consumer’s premises without notice. Electrical service thus discontinued may be
restored after the consumer has corrected the unsatisfactory condition that
existed theretofore. Such consumer shall be charged a reconnecting fee as
provided in Section
523.12 and all costs incident to restoring the electrical service.
(Ord. No. 472-2022. Passed 5-23-22, eff. 5-25-22)
§ 523.16 Faulty Meters
   Whenever a meter has failed to register correctly, the bill for such period
shall be adjusted on the basis of the estimated amount of electricity used. In
the event that a meter should be found to be registering incorrectly due to
tampering or any illegal device attached thereto, electrical service will be
discontinued immediately without notice. In the event the customer commits or
is the beneficiary of any tampering or fraudulent practice in obtaining
electric service, the Division of Cleveland Public Power shall assess the
customer an investigation charge as stated in Section
523.12. The charge shall also be assessed where any connection or device is
found on the service entrance equipment or premises of the customer or consumer
which prevents the meter from accurately registering total consumption used or
to be used, or where the service entrance equipment or other property used to
supply electric service has been altered to avoid accurate metering or has been
damaged.
   The Division of Cleveland Public Power shall also assess the customer an
estimated or actual bill representing the electric service fraudulently or
falsely obtained and the actual costs to repair or replace any damaged or
missing service entrance equipment or other property used to supply electric
service. The customer shall also be assessed any additional charges for all
costs of disconnection and reconnection as stated in Section
523.12.
(Ord. No. 957-2024. Passed 11-4-24, eff. 11-6-24) (BOC Res. No. 639-24. Adopted
12-18-24)
§ 523.17 Environmental and Ecological Adjustment
   (a)   The costs of special apparatus and equipment required for compliance
with Federal, State or City environmental protection laws and directives as
have been or may be installed and operated from time to time or on a continuing
basis shall be prorated on a ¢/KW.-hr. basis and assessed against the
appropriate rate schedule. The provisions of this section may be applied to
rate schedules described in Sections
523.02 to
523.06 or any other rate schedules as may later be enacted and approved; or
   (b)   The costs for which an adjustment can be incurred shall include but
are not limited to voluntary or involuntary research and development charges,
purchase and installation of emission control equipment for sulphur, nitrogen
and particulate emissions, purchase and installation of control equipment for
protection of the natural water supply, purchase and installation of power
supply apparatus and power from remote sources and any other charges levied on
the Division of Cleveland Public Power in lieu of precise compliance with
statutes and directives.
(Ord. No. 472-2022. Passed 5-23-22, eff. 5-25-22)
§ 523.18 Liability for Damages
   The Division of Cleveland Public Power shall not be liable for any damages
caused by an interruption or discontinuance of the supply of electricity,
variations in service characteristics, high or low voltage, the single phasing
of three (3) phase service, phase reversals, the use of electrical appliances
or attachments. Protective devices, mechanisms or regulators designed to
prevent appliances, motors, generators and other equipment receiving electric
current from incurring damage caused by interruptions in service, variations in
service characteristics, high or low voltage, the single phasing of three (3)
phase service and phase reversals are commercially available and shall be
provided by the consumer.
(Ord. No. 472-2022. Passed 5-23-22, eff. 5-25-22)
§ 523.19 Electric Service Agreement
   (a)   By application for and receipt of electric service, each consumer
shall be deemed to have entered into an electric service agreement in the form
prescribed in division (b) of this section. At the option of the Division of
Cleveland Public Power, application for residential or small commercial service
may be accepted by telephone, or by using a preprinted mail-in type card
contract.
   (b)   The service agreement is as follows:
 
Division of Cleveland Public Power
1201 Lakeside Avenue
Cleveland, Ohio 44114
   THIS AGREEMENT, made and entered into by and between the City of Cleveland,
Ohio, Division of Cleveland Public Power ("the City"), acting by and through its
Director of Public Utilities or his or her authorized representative, and
____________________________________________ ("the Consumer").
   WITNESSETH: In consideration of the agreements, promises, and undertakings
herein set forth, the City, for itself, its successors and assigns and the
Consumer for __________ self, heirs, executors, administrators, successors and
assigns, do hereby mutually agree as follows:
   ART. 1: The City will supply nominal 60 cycle, __________ volts, phase,
__________ wire, alternating current from its electric system to the Consumer’s
premises located at __________.
   ART. 2: The Consumer states that the maximum demand or capacity required from
the City's electric system is __________ kW and in the event that said maximum
demand is changed, the Consumer will promptly notify the City in writing of any
increase or decrease in required capacity.
   ART. 3: For the electric service furnished under this contract, the Consumer
agrees to pay the City in accordance with the terms, conditions and applicable
rate schedule(s) established by or as may be amended from time to time by the City
and approved by City Council, and said rates, terms and conditions are hereby made
a part of this agreement the same as if incorporated herein.
   ART. 4: The Consumer agrees to comply with all the rules and regulations as may
be established by the City, including the rules and regulations associated with
all rates, terms and conditions of the applicable rate schedule(s), as may be
amended from time to time by the City and approved by City Council, all of which
are by reference made a part of this agreement.
   ART. 5: The City will furnish the equipment necessary to bring electric service
to the Consumer which shall remain the property of the City and the City shall be
permitted to remove the same at the termination of the agreement.
   ART. 6: The Consumer agrees that the City shall have the convenient and
practical access, location and right-of-way to and upon the Consumer's property as
may be necessary to properly furnish and maintain the electric equipment required
to serve the Consumer.
   ART. 7: The Consumer agrees to pay the City monthly for electric service
supplied and shall be deemed to be in default of this agreement for non-payment.
Non-receipt of bills by Customer does not release or diminish the obligation of
Consumer with respect to payment.
   ART. 8: The Consumer agrees that the exclusive forum for all disputes regarding
rates and charges for service provided by the Division of Cleveland Public Power
or other issues arising from
Chapter 523 or this agreement shall be resolved by the Arbitration Panel as set
forth in Section
523.115.
   ART. 9: The City shall not be liable to the Consumer for any loss, injury, or
damage resulting from the Consumer's use of its electric service, the Consumer's
connection to the City's system, interruption of service, consequential damage, or
any cause reasonably beyond the City's control. The Consumer acknowledges that the
rates, terms and conditions established by ordinance and assessed by the Division
of Cleveland Public Power are lawful and reasonable until such time as they are
set aside as being discriminatory or unreasonable by a court of competent
jurisdiction.
   ART. 10: This agreement shall be in force beginning on the date hereof and
continuing for a period of __________ (____) years from the date electric service
is initially provided and shall continue in force thereafter until cancelled by
thirty (30) days written notice given by either party. The Consumer shall not
contract with any other electric utility for electric service to be supplied
during the term of this agreement.
   IN WITNESS WHEREOF, said parties have hereunto set their hands this __________
day of __________, ______.
CONSUMER ____________________________________________
ACCOUNT NO. ____________________________________________
METER NO. ____________________________________________
MAIL BILLS TO:
   REMARKS:
   CITY OF CLEVELAND
   APPROVED
COMMISSIONER, DIVISION OF CLEVELAND PUBLIC POWER
DATE SERVICE STARTS
CONTRACT NO. ____________________________________________
DATE METER INSTALLED ____________________________________________
SECURITY DEPOSIT ____________________________________________
 
   (c)   Service contracts may include an agreement for the direct purchase of
primary service installations owned by the consumer owner of the premises or by
any utility, provided such installation complies with the City’s construction
standards and such purchase is economically feasible.
(Ord. No. 472-2022. Passed 5-23-22, eff. 5-25-22)
§ 523.195 Electrical Service Agreements with Government and Charitable Entities
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, rates and other charges
to the United States, to the State of Ohio, to any political subdivision of the
State of Ohio, or to any entity engaged in charitable functions, fairs or
expositions may be established in accordance with the cost of service to each
such customer as computed by the Division of Cleveland Public Power. All
contracts and agreements made or entered into by the Commissioner pursuant to
this section are valid and enforceable at law.
(Ord. No. 472-2022. Passed 5-23-22, eff. 5-25-22)
§ 523.196 Electric Service Agreements with Commercial Customers
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the Commissioner of
Cleveland Public Power is authorized to enter into electric service agreements
with commercial customers whose peak demand is or will be equal to or in excess
of one hundred fifty (150) kilowatts that provide for the adjustment of the
commercial customer's rates and other charges under the following terms and
conditions:
   (a)   The Division of Cleveland Public Power must recover not less than the
incremental cost to provide service to the commercial customer as computed by
the Division of Cleveland Public Power;
   (b)   The adjusted rates and other charges may not exceed the rates and
charges in the otherwise applicable rate schedule in this chapter;
   (c)   The adjustment must be made at a level to retain net margins and so
that the resulting rates and charges in combination with service levels and
length of contract provide competitive terms; and
   (d)   The necessity for the adjustment of rates and other charges must be
based on uniform criteria determined by the Commissioner and approved by the
Director of Public Utilities, including, if applicable, that a commercial
customer's existing contract is approaching expiration; a bona fide offer has
been made to a commercial customer from an electric competitor of the Division
of Cleveland Public Power; the agreement generates a positive contribution
margin in excess of that which would be obtained by not entering into the
agreement; the agreement is necessary to protect Cleveland Public Power's
service area, customer base and revenue stream; the commercial customer's load
profile provides a beneficial contribution to Cleveland Public Power's load
profile; and that similarly situated commercial customers receive similar
adjustments.
   All electric service agreements entered under this section shall have a term
of at least five years and shall be valid and enforceable at law.
(Ord. No. 567-14. Passed 5-19-14, eff. 5-20-14)
§ 523.20 Refusal of Electrical Service
   Electrical service may be refused to any applicant who is indebted to the
Division of Cleveland Public Power for service previously supplied. Electrical
service may also be refused to any applicant wherever the facilities of
Cleveland Public Power prove inadequate to take on new consumers.
(Ord. No. 472-2022. Passed 5-23-22, eff. 5-25-22)
§ 523.21 Power Supply Recovery
   (a)   An additional charge for fuel, power production, and purchase power
costs shall be applied to the rates prescribed in Sections
523.02 to
523.065 and any other rate schedules as may be adopted by the City.
   (b)   The charge shall be based on the power cost, per kilowatt hour
delivered calculated under divisions (c)(1) and (c)(2) of this section.
   (c)   (1)   The power supply costs per kilowatt hour for residential
ratepayers shall be determined by dividing the sum of the cost of the kilowatt
hours purchased from the Power Authority of the State of New York (PASNY) and
the average cost of kilowatt hours purchased or produced from other sources
needed to supply the residential customers by the total kilowatt hours
distributed to residential customers. The charge calculated herein shall be
adjusted by subtracting fifteen (15) mils per kilowatt hour for residential
customers who provide the Division of Cleveland Public Power with a certificate
of reduction of taxes obtained pursuant to the Homestead Exemption provisions
of RC 323.151 through 323.157, and nine and three-quarters (9.75) mils per
kilowatt hour for all other residential customers.
      (2)   Except as provided in Section
523.048, the power supply costs per kilowatt hour for all other ratepayers
shall be determined by dividing the sum of the total power supply costs by the
total kilowatt hours distributed, except that the computation shall exclude the
cost of PASNY power and the amount of PASNY power allocable to kilowatt hours
distributed. The charge calculated herein shall be adjusted by subtracting
three (3.0) mils per kilowatt hour.
   (d)   At the end of each month, the Division of Cleveland Public Power shall
determine the actual power supply costs during such month as herein provided
and may adjust this charge for future months to defer or over-recover the total
power supply costs in order to stabilize customer bills.
(Ord. No. 957-2024. Passed 11-4-24, eff. 11-6-24) (BOC Res. No. 639-24. Adopted
12-18-24)
§ 523.215 Customer Information
   (a)   Pursuant to the Public Utilities Regulatory Policies Act of 1978, the
Division of Cleveland Public Power shall send to each of its customers a clear
and concise explanation of the existing rate schedule(s) applicable to such
customer. Such statement shall be transmitted to each customer not more than
sixty (60) days after commencement of service to such customer.
   (b)   The Division shall send to each of its customers, not less frequently
than once each year, a clear and concise summary of the existing rate schedules
applicable to each of the major classes of customers for which there is a
separate rate. The Division shall also identify any classes whose rates are not
summarized.
   (c)   Upon customer request, the Division shall provide a clear and concise
statement of the actual consumption of electric energy by such customer for
each billing period during the prior year (unless such consumption data is not
reasonably ascertainable by the Division).
   (d)   A current general policy statement regarding termination of service
shall be sent to all existing customers and to all new customers when they
initiate service.
   (e)   All rate summaries and policy statements may be transmitted together
with a customer’s bill. Failure by the Division, for any reason, to comply with
any provision of this section shall not in any way excuse, waive, alter, modify
or otherwise affect any customer’s obligation to timely pay in full any bill
rendered by the Division.
(Ord. No. 472-2022. Passed 5-23-22, eff. 5-25-22)
§ 523.22 Further Rules and Regulations
   (a)   The Director of Public Utilities is hereby authorized to make such
further rules and regulations not in conflict with the foregoing rules and
which he or she may deem necessary for carrying the aforementioned rules into
effect and for the safe, economical management and protection of the Municipal
Electric Power System.
   (b)   Such rules and regulations, when published in the City Record as
required for ordinances after passage, shall have the same force and effect as
ordinances of the City when not repugnant thereto or to the Constitution or
laws of the State.
(Ord. No. 1629-73. Passed 1-28-74, eff. 1-28-74)
§ 523.23 Pole and Anchor Attachments; Fee
   The following schedule is applicable to any attachment of communication
facilities to poles owned by the Division of Cleveland Public Power
("attachments") by any person or entity ("permittee") other than a joint owner
of such pole or a party to any joint use agreement.
   (a)   Application for Attachment. Any person or entity desiring to install
attachments shall make a written request for permission to install attachments
on any pole owned by the Division of Cleveland Public Power. The request shall
specify the location of each pole, the identifying number of each pole, the
nature of the proposed attachment and the amount and location of space desired.
Within thirty (30) days after receipt of a written request, the Division shall
notify the applicant whether or not it will permit the attachment and under
what conditions. The Division shall have the sole right to determine whether an
attachment would adversely affect its electric utility services and its ability
to provide such services in an economic and safe manner, including
considerations for the future needs of its customers.
   (b)   Conditions of Attachment. All attachments shall be placed on
Division's poles in a manner satisfactory to the Division and shall not
interfere with the present or future use of the pole by the Division. All
attachments shall be installed and at all times maintained by the permittee so
as to comply with the requirements of the National Electrical Safety Code and
other applicable Federal, State, County, or Municipal codes, as well as
operating procedures of the Division of Cleveland Public Power. The permittee
shall be responsible for obtaining any right, license or permit from any
governmental body, authority, or other person or persons which may be required
for the construction and maintenance of the attachments of the permittee,
including easements, rights-of-way, or rights of entry upon premises.
   If the Division desires to replace an existing pole, or add facilities to an
existing pole, to which the permittee has made attachments, the permittee
shall, where required by the Division, relocate its facilities at its own
expense.
   In the event that a permittee fails to make or maintain any attachments in
conformance to all applicable codes and procedures, the Division, after fifteen
(15) days’ written notice, shall have the right to make, or cause to be made,
the necessary corrections or shall have the right to remove such attachments,
without liability, at the entire expense of the permittee.
   In the event of any emergency which, in the opinion of the Division, affects
or threatens to affect the operations of the Division, the Division shall have
the right to perform such detachment, disconnection, relocation or alteration,
at the permittee’s expense, of such attachments as may be necessary to meet
such emergency.
   (c)   Attachment Rental Fee.
 
Service                          Charge
Pole Attachment per Month        $0.36
Each Anchor Attachment per Month $0.58
 
   Attachment rental fees shall be billed monthly and shall be due and payable
on or before twenty-one (21) calendar days following the date on which the bill
is issued. Payments received after the due date shall be subject to the same
penalty as prescribed in Section
523.12. The bill for attachment rental fees will reflect the total number of
attachments in place during the previous month.
   Within five (5) days following the end of each calendar month, the permittee
shall notify the Division, in writing, of the completion of all attachments, or
removal thereof, during the preceding month.
   The Commissioner of the Division of Cleveland Public Power may waive the
monthly pole attachment fee, and as an alternative to the monthly pole
attachment fee, the Commissioner of the Division of Cleveland Public Power, at
his or her discretion, may charge the per pole attachment rental fees on an
annual basis. Any payments for authorized annual rental fees shall be made in
advance on the 31st day of January of each year.
   (d)   Reimbursement of Costs. If attachment to the Division’s poles imposes
on the Division costs which would not otherwise be incurred, the party
requesting attachment shall reimburse the Division for all such costs. Such
costs may include, but are not necessarily limited to any change in or
strengthening of poles, any rearrangement, alteration or addition, or other
changes in existing facilities, which in the opinion of the Division are
necessary to accommodate the attachments of the party or entity requesting an
attachment. Such costs may also include billing, engineering, and any necessary
evaluation of the applicant’s request for attachments. The Division reserves
the right to require the permittee to have all necessary work performed at the
permittee’s expense by a contractor engaged by the permittee and approved by
the Division, performing work in construction standards of the Division.
   (e)   Multiple Applicants for Attachment. When the Division receives
application from more than one (1) applicant for permission to attach to any
pole and, because of such multiple attachments, either the pole must be
replaced or the facilities thereon must be rearranged to provide additional
space for the attachments, the Division may apportion the additional total
costs resulting from the pole replacement or rearrangement among all
permittees. Such apportioned costs shall include common engineering, material
and other expenses which result from the multiple applications and the multiple
attachments. The permittee shall be bound by the Division’s determination as to
any such apportionment of costs.
   (f)   Power Supplies and Amplifiers. Power supplies and amplifiers may be
mounted on the Division’s poles at the sole discretion of the Division.
Permittee shall request permission to mount such facilities in writing to the
Division. The location and design shall be approved by the Division prior to
installation.
   Any electric service for power supplies and amplifiers shall be paid for by
the permittee at the Division’s applicable electric rate. The meter, if
required, will be furnished by the Division. The meter base will be furnished
by the Division and installed by the permittee according to standards set forth
by the Division. The permittee’s service conductors, if required, shall be
furnished and installed by the permittee with weatherhead included. Sufficient
conductor shall be left to reach the Division’s secondary circuit. The
permittee shall ensure that all equipment is effectively grounded to an earth
ground, separate and apart from any ground wire belonging to the Division, and
shall observe the National Electrical Safety Code and all other applicable
codes in the installation of these facilities.
   Power supplies and amplifiers will not be permitted on poles which have
transformers, reclosers, cut-outs, oil switches, capacitors, or other equipment
of a size or type which would impair climbing or working space if an additional
pole-mounted facility were installed. Power supplies and amplifiers may be
prohibited in situations deemed sensitive from the standpoint of pole line
appearance. The permittee shall install all of its attachments so as to not
interfere with climbing space as defined by the National Electrical Safety Code
or specifically defined by the Division.
   (g)   Inspection of Facilities. The Division shall have the right to inspect
each installation of the permittee upon its poles and thereafter to make
periodic inspections. The permittee shall reimburse the Division for the
expense of such inspection, which reimbursement for any pole subject hereto,
shall not exceed in any year the expense of one (1) inspection.
   The right to make such inspections and any inspection made shall not impose
any obligation or liability on the Division nor shall it relieve the permittee
of any responsibility, obligation, or liability.
   (h)   Indemnification. The permittee shall indemnify, hold harmless, and
defend the Division from and against any and all actions or causes of actions,
claims, demands, liabilities, loss, damage, or expense whatsoever, including
attorney’s fees, which the Division may suffer or incur by reason of the
failure of the permittee to secure any right, license, permit, or easement
required for the construction or maintenance of permittee’s attachments to the
Division’s poles, by reason of interruption of permittee’s service to
permittee’s subscribers, by reason of bodily injury, including death, to any
person or persons, or by reason of damage to or destruction of any property,
including the loss of use thereof, arising out of or in any manner connected
with the facilities of the permittee to be installed hereunder, or the
installation, maintenance, removal, rearrangement or alteration of such
facilities by the Division or permittee, or which the Division may sustain or
incur in connection with any litigation, investigation, or other expenditures
incident thereto including any suit instituted to enforce contractual
obligations whether or not due in whole or part to any act, omission, or
negligence of the Division, or any of its representatives or employees.
   (i)   Right of Termination. If the permittee fails to comply with any of the
provisions of this section or defaults in the performance of any of its
obligations under this section and fails to correct such default or non-
compliance, the Division may, at its option, remove the permittee’s facilities
from the Division’s poles and no liability shall be incurred by the Division
because of such action. The permittee shall be liable for the entire cost of
removing its attachments from the Division’s poles.
   (j)   Unauthorized Attachments. If equipment or facilities are attached to
the Division’s poles for which no attachment is authorized, the Division may
require the owner of the attached facilities to remove the attachments
immediately at the owner’s cost, or the Division may remove the facilities at
the expense of the owner of the attachments without liability to the Division.
(Ord. No. 957-2024. Passed 11-4-24, eff. 11-6-24) (BOC Res. No. 639-24. Adopted
12-18-24)
§ 523.24 Electric Service Policy
   The Division of Cleveland Public Power shall offer electric service to any
and all residential and commercial customers in the City to the extent feasible
without jeopardizing the efficient operation, economy, or planning of the
electric system.
(Ord. No. 472-2022. Passed 5-23-22, eff. 5-25-22)
§ 523.25 Interconnection Service for Distributed Generation
   (a)   Applicability. Interconnection shall be available to residential and
non-residential customers who purchase their requirements of electric service
from the Division under the applicable rate schedule and own and operate
distributed generation located on the customer’s premises. The total rated
capacity of such generators shall not exceed one thousand (1,000) kW per
customer premises.
   (b)   Definitions.
      (1)   “Distributed generation” is electrical generation located on the
customer’s premises that:
         A.   Is primarily intended to offset part or all of the customer’s own
electrical requirements on the premises;
         B.   Is interconnected with the Division’s electric system in
compliance with the terms of division (c) of this section; and
         C.   Operates in parallel with the Division’s distribution system.
   (c)   Interconnection. No customer shall connect distributed generation to
the Division’s distribution system except upon the Division’s approval of a
written application in a form prescribed by the Division. The customer shall be
responsible for the permitting, design, installation, operation, and
maintenance of the distributed generation; the costs of any necessary
modification of the Division’s facilities; and payment of the Division’s cost
to review the application and perform any necessary studies. The distributed
generation shall comply with all applicable safety, power quality, and
interconnection requirements established by the National Electric Code (“NEC”),
the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (“IEEE”), Underwriters
Laboratories (“UL”), and any applicable local and state agencies.
   The Division shall have the right to approve the type of generation
installed by the customer based on considerations of health, safety, regulatory
compliance by the Division, and the reliability of the Division’s distribution
system.
   The Division may limit interconnected distributed generation to fifteen
percent (15%) of the peak load of the line or line segment, or such other limit
as the Division deems appropriate for reliability purposes.
   (d)   Standby Power Charge. Distributed generation installations of any kind
totaling ten (10) kilowatts or less at a single premise shall not be subject to
standby power charges. There shall be no standby power charge for wind or solar
distributed generation of any size. All other distributed generation
installations totaling more than ten (10) kilowatts at a single premises shall
be subject to the standby rate contained in Section
523.12 multiplied by the rated capacity of the distributed generation.
   (e)   Liability. The City shall not be liable directly or indirectly for
permitting or allowing the connection of customer’s distributed generation to
the Division’s distribution system or for the acts or omissions of the customer
generator that cause property damage, loss, injury, or death to any person.
(Ord. No. 1662-09. Passed 12-7-09, eff. 12-9-09)
   Note: Former section 523.25 was repealed by Ord. No. 910-98, passed 2-14-00,
eff. 2-22-00.
§ 523.251 CEI Lawsuit Surcharge; Amount – Repealed
(Ord. No. 910-98. Passed 2-14-00, eff. 2-22-00)
§ 523.26 Net Metering Service
   (a)   Applicability. Net metering shall be available to residential and non-
residential customers who:
      (1)   Purchase their requirements of electric service from the Division
under the applicable rate schedule;
      (2)   Own and operate distributed generation as defined in Section
523.25 that uses advanced energy resources; and
      (3)   Are interconnected according to the terms of Section
523.25.
   (b)   Definitions. As used in this section:
      (1)   “Advanced Energy Resources” means generation produced by fuel
cells, waste-to energy generation, low-impact hydropower, wind power, biomass,
solar power, landfill gas, solar photovoltaic, and solar thermal resources.
      (2)   “Net energy” is the difference, positive or negative, between the
amount of electricity supplied by the Division to the customer through the
Division’s electric distribution system and the amount of electricity generated
by the customer’s distributed generation which is fed back into the Division’s
electric distribution system.
      (3)   “Net metering” is a method of measuring the difference, positive or
negative, between the kilowatt hours of electricity supplied by the Division to
the customer through the Division’s electric distribution system and the
kilowatt hours of electricity generated by the customer’s distributed
generation which is fed back into the Division’s electric distribution system.
   (c)   Billing and Charges. The customer shall pay for the net energy used in
accordance with the following rules:
      (1)   For electricity supplied by the Division to the customer in excess
of the electricity generated by the customer during any billing period, the
customer shall pay the rates and charges under the applicable rate schedule.
      (2)   The customer shall receive a credit in kilowatt hours for
electricity generated by the customer in excess of the kilowatt hours of
electricity supplied by the Division during any billing period. Such credit
shall be carried over and applied to offset the customer’s consumption during
subsequent months until termination of customer’s service.
      (3)   If a customer terminates service, any remaining credit balance in
favor of the customer shall be zeroed out with no liability to the Division.
   Participating customers shall be subject to all other charges, rates, terms
and conditions of the applicable rate schedule except as expressly altered by
this rate schedule.
   (d)   Metering. Net energy shall be measured using a single meter which
shall be installed, owned, and maintained by the Division and shall be capable
of registering the flow of electricity in two (2) directions. The Division may
offer advanced metering, which shall be supplied at the customer’s cost and
shall be installed, owned, and maintained by the Division.
   (e)   Application. Customers requesting service under this schedule must
submit a written application for interconnection pursuant to Section
523.25.
(Ord. No. 1662-09. Passed 12-7-09, eff. 12-9-09)
§ 523.27 Effect of Rates Assessed by the Division of Public Power
   (a)   All rates, charges, rate schedules, and classifications assessed by
the Division of Cleveland Public Power shall be in force and prima-facie lawful
from the day they take effect until changed or modified by City Council or by
an order of a competent court finding such rates to be discriminatory or
unreasonable.
   (b)   Nothing in this Chapter shall be interpreted as creating a right of
action for damages or for the recovery of any rate, or portion thereof, upon
the ground that the prior rate was discriminatory or unreasonable unless this
Chapter explicitly confers such a right.
(Ord. No. 472-2022. Passed 5-23-22, eff. 5-25-22)
§ 523.28 Charges for Work Provided
   In addition to all other charges in this chapter, the Division of Cleveland
Public Power shall have the right to recover costs for work completed and
materials furnished for repairs or improvements made on behalf of an account
holder or owner(s) of the premise, as deemed appropriate by the Commissioner.
(Ord. No. 957-2024. Passed 11-4-24, eff. 11-6-24) (BOC Res. No. 639-24. Adopted
12-18-24)
§ 523.29 Extension of Time for Payment
   Cleveland Public Power bills shall be paid on or before the date stated on
the bill but the Director of Public Utilities may after investigation, grant an
extension of time in cases of indigency, emergency, relief and similar
conditions. Partial payments may be accepted, properly approved, but bills must
be paid in full pursuant to the rules and regulations of the Division of
Cleveland Public Power.
(Ord. No. 957-2024. Passed 11-4-24, eff. 11-6-24) (BOC Res. No. 639-24. Adopted
12-18-24)
TITLE V: WATER SUPPLY
   Chapter
531   Water and Fire Service Connections
   Chapter
533   Water Meters
   Chapter
535   Water Rates and Billings
CHAPTER 531 – WATER AND FIRE SERVICE CONNECTIONS
531.01   Service Line Installations, Connections and Taps by the Division of
Water and Authorized Contractors
531.02   Application for Installation of Service Connection
531.03   Charges for Installation of Service Connections, Tapping Sleeves and
Valves
531.04   Lead Required for Tapping Sleeves and Valves – Repealed
531.05   Service Connection Extension and Inspection
531.06   Charge for Service Pipe beyond Curb
531.07   Abandoned Service Connections
531.08   Provisions for Additional Supply to Premises
531.09   Size of Service Connections
531.10   Tapping Mains with 16-inch Inside Diameter
531.11   Material for Service Pipes
531.12   Standard Weight of Lead Pipe – Repealed
531.13   Standard Dimensions and Weight of Copper Pipe
531.14   Length of Copper Pipe
531.15   Depth of Service Pipe
531.16   Service Pipe Not to be Laid in Sewer Trench
531.17   Backfilling Regulations
531.18   Regulations for Stop Cocks or Valves and Boxes
531.19   Temporary Service Connections; Deposit
531.20   Extension on Stop Cocks
531.21   Stop Cock or Valve Boxes in Flagging or Pavements
531.22   Regulations for Compression Stop and Waste Cocks and Valves; Space for
Meter
531.23   Backflow Prevention Control Device Required
531.24   Qualification and Certification of Persons to Inspect and Maintain
Backflow Prevention Devices
531.25   Two or More Services for One Premises; Connecting Pipe Specifications
531.26   Applications or Changes in Fire Service Connections
531.27   Plans and Information to be Furnished for Fire Service Connections
531.28   Fire Service System to Comply with City’s Standards
531.29   Fire Service Pipe Use Restricted
531.30   Size of Fire Protection Connections
531.31   Location of Fire Service Connection Restricted
531.32   Check Valves for Sprinkler System Pipes
531.33   Tanks for Fire Purposes to Have Metered Supply Pipe
531.34   Overflow Pipe
531.35   Tank Supply Pipes
531.36   Drip or Blow-Off Pipes
531.37   Pumps for Fire Protection
531.38   Outlet Valves to be Sealed
531.39   No Connection Allowed Between Different Pressure Service Systems
531.40   Fire Service Pipes to be Accessible for Inspection
531.41   Use of Fire Service Water
531.42   Use of System by Division of Fire
531.43   Permit for Extension of Fire Service Connections
531.44   Plumber to Turn Water Off after Construction
531.45   Approval of Permit for Building Demolition
531.46   Permit and Written Return for Plumbing Work
531.47   Permit to Open Street, Lane or Alley
531.48   Permission to Let Water on Premises
531.49   Monthly Return
531.50   Persons Authorized to Make Connections – Repealed
531.51   Location of Service Pipes
531.52   Location of Boxes and Fixtures
531.53   Responsibility for Service Pipe Upkeep
531.54   Regulations for Connecting Two or More Service Pipes
531.55   Service Pipes Supplying Elevators or Large Motors
531.56   Inspection, Approval and Repair of Fixtures
531.57   Reserved
531.58   Connecting High and Low Service Systems Prohibited
531.59   Changing Fire Pipe System; Permit
531.60   Inspection of Fire Pipes
531.61   Permit for Special Use of Hydrants
531.62   Responsibility for Violations
531.63   Revocation of License
531.64   Interfering with Fire System
531.65   Removing Covers, Valves, etc. from Cisterns or Hydrants
531.66   Waste in Reservoirs; Bathing; Walking or Riding on Turf
531.67   Fouling or Tampering with Hydrants and Waters Fixtures
531.68   Obstructing Use of Water System Apparatus
531.69   Turning Valves on Stop Cocks
531.70   Obstructing Hydrants, Valves, etc.
531.71   Air Chambers for Motor Pipes
531.72   Water Supply from Other Sources Not to be Connected with City Water
Supply
531.73   Repairs to Damaged Fire System Property; Costs
531.74   Procedure and Costs for Moving Hydrants, etc.
531.75   Access to Premises Where Water Is Supplied
531.76   Conditions When Water Shut off Without Notice
531.77   Refusal or Neglect to Pay for Service Connections or Repairs; Fee
531.78   Conditions When Connections May be Plugged; Fee
531.79   Additional Rules and Regulations
531.81   Fees for Engineering Services
531.99   Penalty
   Note: The legislative history of this chapter, except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 63410-A, passed
September 22, 1924.
Cross-reference:
   Conditions when fire service connections are metered, CO
533.04
   Provisions for water rates: billing and payment, CO
Ch. 535
   Size of fire protection water connections, CO
535.36
   Water connections required on premises with sewer connections, CO
541.06
Statutory Reference:
   Compulsory water connections, RC 729.06, 743.23
   Fluoridation, RC 6109.20
   Management and control of water works, RC 743.02 et seq.
   Power to provide and regulate water system, RC 715.08, 717.01, 743.01
   Tampering with water hydrants, pipes or meters: unauthorized connections, RC
4933.22
   Water pollution, RC 715.08, 743.23
   Weekly deposit of water works money collected, RC 743.06
§ 531.01 Service Line Installations, Connections and Taps by the Division of
Water and Authorized Contractors
   All service line installations from all distribution mains within the
Division of Water’s service area to approximately two (2) feet back of the curb
line, or proposed curb line, including the stop cock or valve and stop cock or
valve box, and all connections and taps made to the main, shall be installed by
properly authorized employees or contractors of the Division of Water acting
under the direction of the Commissioner of Water, except that, upon written
application and prior approval by the Commissioner of Water, an applicant, his
or her agent or contractor, or contractors acting under the authority of inter-
governmental agreements to which the Division of Water is a party, may be
authorized to make taps in service lines in accordance with the rules and
regulations of the division. Upon payment of requisite fees and issuance of a
permit or permits, applicants shall install the service line from the
corporation of water main to the curb stop. The applicant, his or her agent, or
contractor shall employ a trench safety system in accordance with Occupational
Safety and Health Administration Standard 1926.650 or other applicable safety
requirements, inclusive of appendices and amendments. All installations shall
be inspected by the Division of Water prior to backfill of trenches.
(Ord. No. 246-06. Passed 4-10-06, eff. 4-13-06)
§ 531.02 Application for Installation of Service Connection
   Before an application shall be accepted by the Division of Water for the
installation of a water service connection from the water main in the street to
not less than approximately two (2) feet back of the curb line, and for the
construction of a meter vault in the street where such vault is necessary, the
person making the application for a service connection shall submit a copy of a
permit obtained from the municipality in which the service connection will be
located, as evidence that arrangements conforming to the requirements of such
municipality have been made by the applicant for making openings in streets or
public highways, excavating trenches, disposing of excavating material,
backfilling the trench with sand tamped in place, applying temporary wearing
surface, maintaining of such surface in advance of permanent repairs, permanent
replacing of surfacing or of pavement, sidewalks and driveways, including the
erection and maintenance of lights, signs and barricades.
(Ord. No. 1329-58. Passed 9-17-58, eff. 9-17-58)
§ 531.03 Charges for Installation of Service Connections, Tapping Sleeves and
Valves
   (a)   The charges for work performed by the Division of Water, including,
but not limited to, service connection installations, hydrant relocations,
tapping sleeve and valve installations and fire line installations, shall be in
accordance with Section
535.06 of the Codified Ordinances.
   (b)   The applicant for a service connection shall pay in advance to the
Division for the furnishing of material specified and the labor for tapping the
water main and installing the service connection and pipe from the water main
to approximately two (2) feet back to the curb line, or proposed curb line,
including the setting of the stop cock box or valve box in a trench excavated
by the applicant, his or her agent or contractor.
   (c)   All excavating, backfilling and repaving done within and without the
territorial limits of the City are to be provided by the applicant by
arrangement with the particular municipality.
(Ord. No. 778-06. Passed 6-5-06, eff. 6-9-06)
§ 531.04 Lead Required for Tapping Sleeves and Valves – Repealed
(Ord. No. 778-06, § 3. Passed 6-5-06, eff. 6-9-06)
§ 531.05 Service Connection Extension and Inspection
   Extension of the service connection from the stop cock box or valve at or
near the curb into the premises to be supplied with water shall be at the
expense of the customer and may be made by the Division of Water or by a
licensed plumber. If extended by a plumber the pipe must be left uncovered in
the trench until it has been tested and inspected by the Division. The water
shall not be turned on until the pipe has been inspected and approved.
(Ord. No. 99566. Passed 5-22-33)
§ 531.06 Charge for Service Pipe beyond Curb
   In case the service pipe is extended by the Division of Water beyond one (1)
foot back of the curb line it shall be done at cost of material and labor plus
fifteen percent (15%), to cover general expense.
(Ord. No. 99566. Passed 5-22-33)
§ 531.07 Abandoned Service Connections
   (a)   No building permit under Section
3105.01 or water service connection permit shall be issued until the Division
of Water has determined the location of any previously installed service
connections and arrangements have been made with the Division of Water to plug
or cap previously installed service connections under rules and regulations
promulgated by the Commissioner. All necessary work involving plugging or
capping previously installed service connections shall be done by the Division
of Water, and the applicant shall pay the fees established in Section
535.06 of the Codified Ordinances for each connection to be plugged or capped.
   (b)   The City shall not be responsible for any damages resulting from
previously installed service connections which have not been plugged or capped
under this section.
(Ord. No. 778-06. Passed 6-5-06, eff. 6-9-06)
§ 531.08 Provisions for Additional Supply to Premises
   (a)   Any existing connections to a premises for the general supply of water
or for fire protection may be altered or the total number of connections to a
premises increased upon application to the Commissioner of the Division of
Water. Such alterations or increases in connections shall be made only when the
Commissioner determines, based upon engineering analysis, that such alteration
or additional connections are necessary to adequately provide service to the
premises.
   (b)   Where a general or fire protection supply is being serviced by a four
(4) inch or larger service connection and additional connections of the same
size or larger size are installed, a control valve must be located between the
two (2) connections. Such control valves shall be installed by the Division of
Water at the expense of the applicant pursuant to rules and regulations
promulgated by the Commissioner.
(Ord. No. 776-91. Passed 5-13-91, eff. 5-22-91)
§ 531.09 Size of Service Connections
   The Division of Water shall determine the size of service connection that is
to be granted for any purpose. No connection shall be inserted in any of the
distributing mains within the metropolitan area above the size of one (1) inch
diameter of opening unless by special consent of the Commissioner of Water, and
such size shall in no case exceed eight (8) inches in diameter. Nor shall any
two (2) ferrules or corporation cocks be inserted into any of the distributing
mains within the distance of eighteen (18) inches from each other.
(Ord. No. 501-51. Passed 4-10-51)
§ 531.10 Tapping Mains with 16-inch Inside Diameter
   Mains with an inside diameter of more than sixteen (16) inches shall not be
tapped for any purpose except to make connections with other mains.
(Ord. No. 99566. Passed 5-22-33)
§ 531.11 Material for Service Pipes
   (a)   All service pipe one (1) inch or less in nominal diameter that is to
be installed between the main and the stop cock or valve at the curb shall be
of copper material. All service pipe greater than one (1) inch and less than
three (3) inches in nominal diameter shall be of extra heavy copper, extra
heavy brass or extra heavy galvanized wrought iron or steel material. All
service pipes greater than three (3) inches in nominal diameter shall be of
cast iron or extra heavy galvanized wrought iron or steel material.
   (b)   All pipe that is to be installed between the stop cock or valve at the
curb and the building, whether the meter is outside or inside of the building,
shall be of copper or brass material where the pipe is one (1) inch or less in
nominal diameter. Where the pipe is greater than one (1) inch and less than
three (3) inches in nominal diameter, it shall be of extra heavy brass, extra
heavy copper or extra heavy galvanized wrought iron or steel material. Where
the pipe is greater than three (3) inches in nominal diameter, it shall be of
cast iron or extra heavy galvanized wrought iron or steel material.
   (c)   Any pipe made of any other material than herein specified shall not be
used without special permission, in writing, for each proposed installation.
(Ord. No. 1195-16. Passed 10-31-16, eff. 11-2-16)
§ 531.12 Standard Weight of Lead Pipe – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1195-16. Passed 10-31-16, eff. 11-2-16)
§ 531.13 Standard Dimensions and Weight of Copper Pipe
   Weights of copper pipes or tubes shall be not less than the following:
 
3/4 in. bore thickness .065 inch, weight per foot 0.640 lb.
1 in. bore   thickness .065 inch, weight per foot 0.838 lb.
 
(Ord. No. 99566. Passed 5-22-33)
§ 531.14 Length of Copper Pipe
   The copper service pipe shall be made at least one and one-half (1-1/2) feet
longer than the length required to connect the tap in the main and the stop
cock at the curb. The pipe shall be laid in the trench so that the stop cock
shall be at least one (1) foot back of the curb line. The extra length shall be
at the main.
(Ord. No. 1195-16. Passed 10-31-16, eff. 11-2-16)
§ 531.15 Depth of Service Pipe
   Service pipe between the main and the street line shall be laid not less
than six (6) feet below the established grade of the street, and between the
street line and the building, shall not be less than five and one-half (5-1/2)
feet below the surface of the ground.
(Ord. No. 99566. Passed 5-22-33)
§ 531.16 Service Pipe Not to be Laid in Sewer Trench
   Service pipes between the main and the meter shall not be laid in a sewer
trench except in rock excavation, in which case the service pipe may be put in
on a shelf not less than eight (8) inches wide, cut in on the side of the
trench. In all other cases there shall be not less than five (5) feet between
centers of sewer pipe and water service pipe.
(Ord. No. 99566. Passed 5-22-33)
§ 531.17 Backfilling Regulations
   Backfilling of earth into any water service trench in any street or other
public way or place shall not be commenced until the pipe has been inspected
and approved by the Commissioner of Water, or his or her authorized agent.
Backfilling over the service pipe with cinders, slag or rubbish shall not be
permitted.
(Ord. No. 99566. Passed 5-22-33)
§ 531.18 Regulations for Stop Cocks or Valves and Boxes
   Every service connection from five-eighths (5/8) inch to one (1) inch
inclusive, shall be provided with a stop cock. Every service connection over
one (1) inch shall be provided with a square head valve. Each stop cock shall
be placed within an iron box extending from the same to the surface of the
sidewalk or lawn. The word “water” in raised letters shall be cast on the top
of the stop cock box and the box shall be placed in the sidewalk or lawn within
one (1) foot of the line of the curb stone, so that the word “water” can be
read from the sidewalk. Square head valves on the larger connections may be
placed in roadways and provided with adjustable valve boxes at the option of
the Commissioner of Water. All stop cocks shall be of the pattern known as the
round waterway and all valves shall be straightway valves. All connections up
to and including one (1) inch shall be provided with corporation cocks, and all
corporation cocks, stop cocks and valves and all boxes for the same and the
pipe from the water main to one (1) foot back of the curb line shall be
furnished by the Division of Water. Stop cock boxes must be set truly vertical
and the plug in top of the box must be screwed in tightly by the person setting
the box. In backfilling around the boxes the earth must be thoroughly tamped.
(Ord. No. 99566. Passed 5-22-33)
§ 531.19 Temporary Service Connections; Deposit
   Where a service pipe is permitted to be connected with a main in one (1)
street to be used to supply premises on another street having no main, the
person making the application shall deposit in advance with the Commissioner of
Water, an estimated amount to cover the cost of the service connection from the
main pipe to approximately one (1) foot back of the curb line and the building
of a brick vault for a meter between the curb and property line. This estimated
amount is also to cover the cost of installing a new permanent service
connection in front of the premises supplied after a main is laid in the
street, and the plugging at the main of the temporary connection.
(Ord. No. 99566. Passed 5-22-33)
§ 531.20 Extension on Stop Cocks
   In cases where any stop cock or valve has to be placed deeper than six (6)
feet, an extension coming up to the ordinary depth of the cock or valve must be
put in. The top of this extension shall be formed like the top of the stop cock
or valve, and the rod of such extension shall work in a guide immediately below
its top or handle.
(Ord. No. 99566. Passed 5-22-33)
§ 531.21 Stop Cock or Valve Boxes in Flagging or Pavements
   In cases where stop cock boxes or meter covers are set into the flagging or
pavement of the sidewalk, the stones shall be neatly and accurately cut, and
the top of the boxes set even with the surface of the pavement or flagging. In
all cases they shall be set flush with the surface of the sidewalk or lawn. If
from any cause the stop cock box or other fixture is above or below the surface
of the sidewalk or lawn, it must be brought to the surface of the same at the
expense of the customer.
(Ord. No. 99566. Passed 5-22-33)
§ 531.22 Regulations for Compression Stop and Waste Cocks and Valves; Space for
Meter
   Every service pipe must be provided with a compression stop and waste cock
or valve at the entrance of the pipe into any cellar, basement or building and
also with a compression stop and waste cock or valve for each separate tenement
or place supplied with water; all shall be easily accessible and so situated
that the water can be conveniently shut off and drained from the pipes. Every
service pipe shall also be provided with a nipple two (2) feet in length and
with a union attached, immediately back of the main stop and waste cock in the
basement to provide a suitable space for a meter which is to be set on the
service pipe and so arranged that the meter will be above the floor line of the
basement.
(Ord. No. 99566. Passed 5-22-33)
§ 531.23 Backflow Prevention Control Device Required
   (a)   If, in the judgment of the Commissioner of Water, an approved backflow
prevention device is necessary for the safety of the public water system, the
Commissioner will give notice to the water consumer to install such an approved
device immediately. The water consumer shall, at his or her own expense,
install such an approved device at a location and in a manner approved by the
Commissioner and shall have inspections and tests made of such approved devices
as required by the Commissioner.
   (b)   No person, firm or corporation shall establish or permit to be
established or maintain or permit to be maintained any connection whereby a
private, auxiliary or emergency water supply other than the regular public
water supply of the City of Cleveland may enter the supply or distributing
system of said Municipality, unless such private, auxiliary or emergency water
supply and the method of connection and use of such supply shall have been
approved by the Commissioner of Water of the City of Cleveland and by the Ohio
Environmental Protection Agency.
   (c)   It shall be the duty of the Commissioner to cause surveys and
investigations to be made of industrial and other properties served by the
public water supply where actual or potential hazards to the public water
supply may exist. Such surveys and investigations shall be made a matter of
public record and shall be repeated as often as the Commissioner shall deem
necessary.
   (d)   The Commissioner or his or her duly authorized representative shall
have the right, after obtaining all necessary warrants, to enter at any
reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water supply
or distributing system of the City of Cleveland for the purpose of inspecting
the piping system or systems thereof. On demand, the owner, lessees or
occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the Commissioner any
information which he or she may request regarding the piping system or systems
or water use on such property. The refusal of such information, when demanded,
shall, within the discretion of the Commissioner, be deemed evidence of the
presence of improper connections as provided for in this ordinance.
   (e)   The Commissioner is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue,
after reasonable notice to the occupant thereof, the water service to any
property wherein any connection in violation of the provisions of this
ordinance is known to exist, and to take such other precautionary measures as
he or she may deem necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the
public water supply distribution mains. Water service to such property shall
not be restored until such conditions shall have been eliminated or corrected
in compliance with the provisions of this ordinance and until the occupant has
received written approval from the Commissioner indicating that a proper
prevention control device has been installed in accordance with this ordinance
and all rules and regulations pertaining to same.
   (f)   The Director of Public Utilities is hereby authorized to promulgate
all necessary rules and regulations as to the installation and maintenance of
backflow prevention control devices. Said regulations shall at all times be on
file in the offices of the Division of Water of the City of Cleveland and shall
be available for inspection during regular business hours. All backflow
prevention control devices required by this ordinance shall be installed in
accordance with said regulations.
(Ord. No. 1069-80. Passed 11-10-80, eff. 11-14-80)
§ 531.24 Qualification and Certification of Persons to Inspect and Maintain
Backflow Prevention Devices
   (a)   No person shall be deemed qualified to inspect and maintain backflow
prevention devices unless his or her qualifications have been established to
the satisfaction of the Commissioner of Water as hereinafter required. To
determine the qualifications of any person to inspect and maintain backflow
prevention devices, the Commissioner shall have the authority to conduct
examinations to determine the qualifications. Upon successful completion of
such examination and such training as the Commissioner shall prescribe, the
person so examined shall receive from the Division of Water a Certificate of
Competence. Any limitations or conditions imposed by the Division on the
examinee in the inspection and maintenance of backflow prevention devices shall
be stated upon the fact of the certificate issued to the examinee. The Division
shall make available to owners of properties on which backflow prevention
devices are maintained, a list of persons qualified to inspect and maintain
devices. Every person, after receiving a Certificate from the Division shall be
issued such identification as the Division deems appropriate. Such
identification shall be kept in the immediate possession of every person
holding a Certificate while the person is inspecting or maintaining any
backflow prevention device.
   (b)   Every person desiring to qualify to inspect or maintain backflow
prevention devices shall make application to the Division. At the time of
making application every such person shall pay a fee as set by the Commissioner
and subject to the approval of the Board of Control and Council. The fee shall
not be refundable, and shall cover the expense of the Division in processing
the applications, Certificates and any documents of identification required by
the Division.
   (c)   Every person holding a Certificate issued by the Division under the
provisions of this section shall be required to renew the Certificate every
three (3) years.
   (d)   Every person receiving a Certificate under the provisions of this
section shall be responsible for the competency and accuracy of all inspections
and maintenance performed on any backflow prevention device by any person under
his or her authority and control.
   (e)   Any person issued a Certificate who violates or fails to comply with
any of the provisions of this section or willingly falsifies inspection or
maintenance reports shall have the Certificate immediately revoked, and shall
not be considered for recertification for a period of two (2) years.
   (f)   The Division may, at the request of the user and the discretion of the
Commissioner, make such tests or perform such installments and maintenance as
may be necessary for which the user shall pay the City the actual cost thereof,
plus administrative and overhead expenses.
   (g)   The Commissioner may promulgate rules necessary to effectuate the
provisions of this section. However, such rules shall not conflict with nor
waive any provisions of these Codified Ordinances or the laws of the State.
Such rules shall become effective ten (10) days after publication in the City
Record unless disapproved by ordinance of Council.
(Ord. No. 2246-74. Passed 5-5-75, eff. 5-12-75)
§ 531.25 Two or More Services for One Premises; Connecting Pipe Specifications
   (a)   Two (2) or more service pipes, intended for the supply of one (1)
premises, shall not be connected together except by special permission of the
Commissioner of Water. Before such permission is granted, plans in duplicate
showing how the proposed connection is to be made must be submitted to and be
approved by the Commissioner. One (1) set of plans shall be kept on file in the
office of the Division of Water.
   (b)   If the connecting pipes are outside of the building they shall be of
either copper or brass for sizes five-eighths (5/8) inch to one (1) inch; of
extra heavy brass or extra heavy galvanized wrought iron for one and one-half
(1-1/2) inch and two (2) inch pipe and of cast iron or extra heavy galvanized
wrought iron for all pipe over two (2) inches in diameter. On all sizes of pipe
one and three-fourths (1-3/4) inches and over a suitable check valve must be
placed in each service pipe as close as possible to the main valve. Such check
valve, if placed underground, must be located in a vault or pit easily
accessible through a manhole.
(Ord. No. 1195-16. Passed 10-31-16, eff. 11-2-16)
§ 531.26 Applications or Changes in Fire Service Connections
   (a)   Every person desiring a supply of water for a fire service connection
with any main in the metropolitan area, must make application for the same in
writing, upon blanks on file in the office of the Division of Water. Such
applicant must also furnish either directly or through the local fire
underwriters’ inspection office, plans of the piping and appliances to be used
in connection therewith to be filed at the office of the Division. Such plans
shall be made to a scale, and shall include the following:
   The size and location of all pipes, branches, risers, by-passes, valves,
check valves and all other appurtenances. The size and location of all
cisterns, tanks, pumps and all regulating and operating devices in connection
therewith, and the number, size and location of hydrants, hose connections and
other appliances shall also be included.
   (b)   The application shall give a description of the proposed method of
operation, that is, whether a wet or dry system, or both, or whether the City
pressure is to be maintained in the pipe system at all times, or whether a
pressure greater than City pressure is maintained by pumps, and any other
pertinent information necessary and required by the Commissioner of Water for a
complete description.
   (c)   No changes, alterations or extensions of any fire pipe system shall be
made without first making application for the same in the same manner and under
the same conditions as for a new connection.
(Ord. No. 99566. Passed 5-22-33)
§ 531.27 Plans and Information to be Furnished for Fire Service Connections
   Plans of and information pertaining to fire pipes now in use so far as
required by the Commissioner of Water, shall be furnished as required with an
application for a new fire service supply, within sixty (60) days after receipt
of a written notice from the Commissioner.
(Ord. No. 99566. Passed 5-22-33)
§ 531.28 Fire Service System to Comply with City’s Standards
   If at any time a fire service or supply system is found to be contrary to or
in violation of any of the City ordinances or rules of the Division of Water,
all changes necessary to make the system comply therewith must be made within
sixty (60) days after receipt of written notice from the Commissioner of Water.
(Ord. No. 99566. Passed 5-22-33)
§ 531.29 Fire Service Pipe Use Restricted
   Pipes intended for fire protection must not be tapped or used for the
general supply of any premises.
(Ord. No. 99566. Passed 5-22-33)
§ 531.30 Size of Fire Protection Connections
   No fire protection connection shall be inserted in any of the distribution
mains within the metropolitan area below the size of two (2) inches. Such size
in no case shall exceed twelve (12) inches in diameter.
(Ord. No. 1593-87. Passed 9-14-87, eff. 9-18-87)
§ 531.31 Location of Fire Service Connection Restricted
   No fire service connection will be allowed on premises that do not also have
a separate pipe for the general supply of the same.
(Ord. No. 99566. Passed 5-22-33)
§ 531.32 Check Valves for Sprinkler System Pipes
   Pipes used for hose service or sprinkler systems shall be furnished with
gate and check valves at entrances to premises, and a test valve shall be
placed between the gate valve and check valve, except that the check valve and
test valve shall not be required at the premises if a back-flow prevention
device of the type approved by the State of Ohio Environmental Protection
Agency and the Commissioner of Water has been installed at the premises.
(Ord. No. 124-77. Passed 4-4-77, eff. 4-12-77)
§ 531.33 Tanks for Fire Purposes to Have Metered Supply Pipe
   All tanks or cisterns maintained for fire purposes shall be supplied by a
pipe separate from the fire service pipe and connected directly with the main
in the street or with the service pipe used for the general supply of the
premises. If connected directly with the main in the street, such supply shall
be metered at the expense of the premises or parties supplied. The use of
bypasses for filling tanks, cisterns, etc., shall not be permitted.
(Ord. No. 99566. Passed 5-22-33)
§ 531.34 Overflow Pipe
   Overflow pipes for fire service tanks shall not connect with drains, and
shall be open to inspection at all times.
(Ord. No. 99566. Passed 5-22-33)
§ 531.35 Tank Supply Pipes
   The outlet end of the supply pipe to a gravity tank shall be at least six
(6) inches above the maximum water line of the tank, and the supply pipe to a
pressure tank shall be so arranged as to prevent the water in the tank from
flowing back into the main in the street. Each tank shall have a suitable check
valve in the pipe leading from it to the distribution pipes of the fire system
for the purpose of preventing the flowing of the water from the fire system
pipes into the tank.
(Ord. No. 99566. Passed 5-22-33)
§ 531.36 Drip or Blow-Off Pipes
   The use of drip or blow-off pipes for draining fire pipes shall be allowed
only in cases of absolute necessity, and in no case shall their installation be
permitted unless furnished with a sealed valve. The end of every such pipe
shall be exposed to view at all times. Such drip or blow-off pipes shall not
exceed three- fourths (3/4) inch inside diameter.
(Ord. No. 99566. Passed 5-22-33)
§ 531.37 Pumps for Fire Protection
   Pumps intended for fire protection and taking water from a tank or cistern,
supplied wholly or in part from a fire service pipe connected with the main in
the street, shall under no circumstances be used for any boiler or general
supply of the premises, and shall not be connected with the general supply
pipe.
(Ord. No. 99566. Passed 5-22-33)
§ 531.38 Outlet Valves to be Sealed
   In all pipes used for fire protection and not metered, all outlet valves on
hydrants, hose connections, drips and blow-offs, etc., exclusive of main
controlling valves, shall be closed and sealed by the Division of Water. All
such valves, hydrants, etc., must be so constructed or altered at the expense
of the owner that they can be easily and securely sealed by the Division.
(Ord. No. 99566. Passed 5-22-33)
§ 531.39 No Connection Allowed Between Different Pressure Service Systems
   There shall be no arrangement of pipes whereby the different pressure
service systems are connected. All connections now existing contrary to this
rule shall be disconnected within six (6) months after notification in writing
by the Commissioner of Water.
(Ord. No. 99566. Passed 5-22-33)
§ 531.40 Fire Service Pipes to be Accessible for Inspection
   (a)   Fire services pipes, valves and equipment shall be so installed as to
be accessible for purposes of inspection at all times.
   (b)   Fire service pipes shall not be supplied with water until they and
their fixtures have been duly inspected by the Commissioner of Water or his or
her authorized agent.
(Ord. No. 99566. Passed 5-22-33)
§ 531.41 Use of Fire Service Water
   Water shall not be used from any fire pipe, nor seals broken or removed
except in case of fire or for purposes of testing the system and apparatus. In
all cases where seals are broken or removed, written notice of the same must be
given to the Commissioner of Water within twenty-four (24) hours after its
occurrence.
(Ord. No. 99566. Passed 5-22-33)
§ 531.42 Use of System by Division of Fire
   In case of fire, the Division of Fire shall have the right to use any public
or private hydrant, cistern, hose, pipe or other fixtures supplied wholly or in
part from any pipe used for fire protection.
(Ord. No. 99566. Passed 5-22-33)
§ 531.43 Permit for Extension of Fire Service Connections
   (a)   Permits to extend any service connection within the metropolitan area,
or put in any water pipe or fixtures, or make any other attachments or
additions to the service pipes supplied with water by the Division of Water, or
repairs in any tap, service pipe, stop cock or other fixture, shall be granted
to licensed plumbers only, except that in manufacturing plants employing their
own machinists or pipe fitters, special permits may be granted at the option of
the Commissioner of Water for the work to be done on the premises only, and
provided that such work shall not be done for other parties.
   (b)   At the option of the Commissioner, such permission may also be granted
to fire sprinkler companies.
(Ord. No. 99566. Passed 5-22-33)
§ 531.44 Plumber to Turn Water Off after Construction
   No plumber after making any connection with the service pipe for the supply
of any premises or after making repairs to any service pipe that has been
turned off by the Division of Water, shall leave the stop cock or valve at the
curb open in order to supply such premises with water without first obtaining
permission from the Commissioner of Water.
(Ord. No. 99566. Passed 5-22-33)
§ 531.45 Approval of Permit for Building Demolition
   Before a permit for tearing down or removing a building from any premises
within the metropolitan area shall be given by the Commissioner of Building, or
officer in charge of such permits in the various municipalities or other
political subdivisions of the metropolitan area, the application for such
permit must have the approval of the Commissioner of Water.
(Ord. No. 99566. Passed 5-22-33)
§ 531.46 Permit and Written Return for Plumbing Work
   No plumber shall make any attachments, additions to or alterations in any
service pipe cock or other fixture connected with the service water pipes,
unless he or she first procures a permit from the Commissioner of Water for
such work, and makes a written return of the same as prescribed in these rules
and regulations.
§ 531.47 Permit to Open Street, Lane or Alley
   Before permits for extending connections are issued, the plumber must
present a permit from the Director of Public Service authorizing him or her to
open the street, lane or alley in which connection is to be made. No licensed
plumber will be granted a permit for work to be done by a person not in the
employ of such plumber.
§ 531.48 Permission to Let Water on Premises
   No plumber after making any connection with the service pipes, or after
making repairs or putting in any new attachment, shall leave the stop cock
open, or let the water on the premises without permission from the Director of
Public Utilities.
§ 531.49 Monthly Return
   Not later than the fifth of each month, all licensed plumbers shall make a
true return in writing on blanks furnished at the office of the Division of
Water, of all work, authorized by permit of the Commissioner of Water,
completed during the previous calendar month, or if no such work has been
completed, the return shall be made bearing a statement to that effect.
§ 531.50 Persons Authorized to Make Connections – Repealed
(Ord. No. 246-06. Passed 4-10-06, eff. 4-13-06)
§ 531.51 Location of Service Pipes
   Service pipes between the main and the street line shall be laid not less
than six (6) feet below the surface of the street, and between the street line
and the building shall not be less than five and one-half (5-1/2) feet below
the surface of the ground.
§ 531.52 Location of Boxes and Fixtures
   In cases where stop cock boxes and street washers are set into the flagging
or pavement of the sidewalk, the stones shall be neatly and accurately cut, and
the top of the boxes set even with the surface of the pavement or flagging. In
all other cases they shall be set flush with the surface of the sidewalk or
lawn. If from any cause the stop cock box or other fixture is above or below
the surface of the sidewalk or lawn, it must be brought to the surface of the
same.
§ 531.53 Responsibility for Service Pipe Upkeep
   The service pipe between the main and the stop cock at the curb, including
stop cock and box, shall be kept in repair and protected from the frost by the
Commissioner of Water, except that in case any service pipe, corporation cock,
stop cock, valve or box is damaged, broken, removed or covered with pavement,
flagging, cement sidewalk or any other way, by or on account of the neglect or
carelessness of any plumber, sewer builder, contractor or any other person,
occupant or owner of premises, all necessary repairs shall be made by the
Commissioner at the expense of the party who caused the same. The service pipe
from the stop cock at the curb into the building, and all fixtures connected
therewith, must be kept in good repair and protected from frost by and at the
expense of the occupant or owner of the premises.
§ 531.54 Regulations for Connecting Two or More Service Pipes
   Two (2) or more service pipes shall not be connected together except upon
special permit of the Commissioner of Water, and in this case a suitable check
valve must be placed on each pipe as close as possible to the main valve. Such
check valve if placed underground, must be located in a vault or pit easily
accessible through a manhole.
§ 531.55 Service Pipes Supplying Elevators or Large Motors
   All service pipes for supplying hydraulic elevators or other large motors
must have suitable air chambers attached thereto for the purpose of preventing
water ram in the pipes. The owners or users of such elevators or motors must
keep the same in good repair so as to prevent all leakage or waste of water.
§ 531.56 Inspection, Approval and Repair of Fixtures
   (a)   All stop cocks or valves and all other fixtures used on any service
pipe shall be subject to the inspection and approval of the Commissioner of
Water, and must be repaired or changed promptly when so ordered by the
Commissioner.
   (b)   At the Director's discretion and in order to prevent waste or to
protect the integrity of the water system, the Division may, at its expense,
perform ancillary plumbing service to the service pipe or connected fixtures in
the building when replacing or installing a meter or stop cock pursuant to a
Division-sponsored system improvement.
(Ord. No. 563-13. Passed 5-13-13, eff. 5-16-13)
§ 531.57 Reserved
§ 531.58 Connecting High and Low Service Systems Prohibited
   No arrangement of pipes whereby the high and low service systems may be
connected shall be allowed.
§ 531.59 Changing Fire Pipe System; Permit
   No changes, alterations or extensions of any fire pipe system shall be made
without first securing a permit from the Commissioner of Water. Application for
the same shall be made in the same manner and under the same conditions as for
a new connection.
§ 531.60 Inspection of Fire Pipes
   Fire pipes shall not be supplied with water until they and their fixtures
have been duly inspected by the Commissioner of Water.
§ 531.61 Permit for Special Use of Hydrants
   At the discretion of the Commissioner of Water, a special permit may be
issued for the use of a fire hydrant for building or construction purposes upon
payment of charges as fixed by the provisions of the Building Code, and subject
to such conditions as the Commissioner imposes and stipulates in the special
permit.
§ 531.62 Responsibility for Violations
   In all cases where any servant, employee, apprentice or minor is guilty of
any violation of the provisions of this chapter, or any other ordinance for the
management and protection of the City water system, the master, employer,
parent or guardian of such person shall be held responsible for such violation,
as well as the person committing the offense.
§ 531.63 Revocation of License
   In case any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or any
other ordinance for the management and protection of the City water system has
a license as a sewer builder or plumber, or is an employee of such licensee,
the license shall be revoked by the officer issuing such license. Such person
or licensee, or both, shall, in addition thereto, be prosecuted and fined as
provided in Section
531.99(b).
§ 531.64 Interfering with Fire System
   No person shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or any other
ordinance for the management and protection of the City water system, when such
violation is designed or tends to interfere with, diminish or prevent the
supply of water for extinguishing fires.
§ 531.65 Removing Covers, Valves, etc. from Cisterns or Hydrants
   No person, unless authorized by the Director of Public Utilities through the
Commissioner of Water shall, except in time of fire, displace or remove the
cover from any public cistern or fire hydrant or turn any public or private
valve or stop cock, or remove the cover from any valve or stop cock.
§ 531.66 Waste in Reservoirs; Bathing; Walking or Riding on Turf
   No person shall put filth, animal matter, chips, shavings or any substance
into any City reservoir, or bathe therein, or do any injury thereto, or walk or
ride on the turf thereof.
§ 531.67 Fouling or Tampering with Hydrants and Waters Fixtures
   No person shall place or deposit any dirt or material in any fire hydrant or
in any valve box or stop cock box, or commit any act tending to obstruct the
use thereof, or injure in any manner any fixture connected with the City water
system.
§ 531.68 Obstructing Use of Water System Apparatus
   No person shall commit any act tending to obstruct the use thereof in any
manner, any building, machinery, pipe, apparatus or other fixture of the City
water system.
§ 531.69 Turning Valves on Stop Cocks
   No person unless authorized by the Commissioner of Water shall, except in
time of fire, displace or remove the cover from any public cistern or fire
hydrant, or turn any public or private valve or stop cock, or remove the cover
from any valve or stop cock.
(Ord. No. 99566. Passed 5-22-33)
§ 531.70 Obstructing Hydrants, Valves, etc.
   No person shall place or deposit any dirt or material in a fire hydrant or
in a valve box or stop cock box, commit an act tending to obstruct the use
thereof; fail to remove any snow or ice from or on a hydrant situated on a tree
lawn immediately adjacent to property which the person owns, occupies or is in
charge of; or injure in any manner a fixture connected with the system of the
Division of Water.
(Ord. No. 448-81. Passed 5-4-81, eff. 5-7-81)
§ 531.71 Air Chambers for Motor Pipes
   All service pipes for supplying hydraulic elevators or other large motors
must have suitable air chambers attached thereto for the purpose of preventing
water ram in the pipes. The owners or users of such elevators or motors must
keep the same in good repair so as to prevent all leakage or waste of water.
(Ord. No. 99566. Passed 5-22-33)
§ 531.72 Water Supply from Other Sources Not to be Connected with City Water
Supply
   (a)   No arrangement shall be allowed whereby there may be any possibility
of rain, river or other polluted water flowing into the City’s mains.
   (b)   No service pipe connected with the City’s mains shall be connected
with any pipes supplied with water from any other source.
(Ord. No. 99566. Passed 5-22-33)
§ 531.73 Repairs to Damaged Fire System Property; Costs
   In all cases where fire hydrants, meters, covers, vaults or other fixtures
or property belonging to the Division of Water have been broken or injured in
any way or manner, the person causing such break or injury shall pay to the
Division the cost of making all necessary repairs of replacements.
(Ord. No. 99566. Passed 5-22-33)
§ 531.74 Procedure and Costs for Moving Hydrants, etc.
   Upon request of a customer or owner of premises, for the removal or change
in location of a fire hydrant, meter vault or other fixture connected with the
water supply system, such work shall be done by the Division of Water at the
expense of the party making the request. The estimated cost of such work shall
be paid in advance, subject to adjustment after the work is completed.
(Ord. No. 101523. Passed 5-28-34)
§ 531.75 Access to Premises Where Water Is Supplied
   The Commissioner of Water or his or her authorized agent shall have free
access at all reasonable hours of the day to all parts of the premises to which
water is supplied.
(Ord. No. 99566. Passed 5-22-33)
§ 531.76 Conditions When Water Shut off Without Notice
   In the case of leaks or breaks in mains, services, pumping and auxiliary
machinery, reservoirs or other Division of Water equipment, or other emergency
arising, the water may be shut off by the Division without notice and without
incurring any responsibility or liability for any inconvenience, damage or
injury or other losses arising therefrom.
(Ord. No. 99566. Passed 5-22-33)
§ 531.77 Refusal or Neglect to Pay for Service Connections or Repairs; Fee
   If any person refuses or neglects to pay for a service connection put in, or
for repairs made on service pipes or private meters, or permits any waste or
use of water contrary to the provisions of these rules or ordinances for the
management and protection of the Division of Water, the water shall be
immediately turned off without any preliminary notice, and not turned on again
until all charges and damages have been paid. In case the water has been turned
off on account of waste or unauthorized use of the same, the Commissioner of
Water may charge and collect the further sum contained in Section
535.06 of the Codified Ordinances for turning it off and on.
(Ord. No. 778-06. Passed 6-5-06, eff. 6-9-06)
§ 531.78 Conditions When Connections May be Plugged; Fee
   In cases where the water has been turned off for nonpayment of water rent or
for any other cause, and it is found turned on again, or when in the opinion of
the Commissioner of Water the turning off of the water at the stop cock is not
a sufficient protection against the use or waste of water, the Commissioner may
cause the ferrule to be drawn or the corporation cock to be turned off and
disconnected. On a re-application for water where the service pipe has been so
disconnected, the charges set forth in Section
535.06 of the Codified Ordinances will be made together with all additional
expense for opening and closing the street and repaving.
(Ord. No. 778-06. Passed 6-5-06, eff. 6-9-06)
§ 531.79 Additional Rules and Regulations
   The right is further reserved to the Director of Public Utilities to make
such further rules and regulations not in conflict with those herein
established as he or she may deem necessary for the safe, economical and
efficient management and protection of the water works.
(Ord. No. 99566. Passed 5-22-33)
§ 531.81 Fees for Engineering Services
   The Division of Water shall charge for engineering services it performs,
such as plan reviews, hydraulic calculations, provision of copies of
engineering drawings. processing of backflow device test and maintenance forms,
conducting testing to certify contractors to perform backflow device testing
and processing as-built drawings. A deposit for as-built drawings shall be
collected prior to construction and shall be refunded, less the processing fee,
when as-built drawings have been approved by the Division of Water. The deposit
will not be refunded when the as-built drawings are incomplete or have not been
submitted, Fees for processing as-built drawings shall be charged based upon
the submittal format. All charges shall be under Section
535.06 of the Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 462-11. Passed 5-23-11, eff. 6-22-11)
§ 531.99 Penalty
   (a)   In case any person guilty of a violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter or any other ordinance for the management and protection of the
City water system cannot be reached or compelled to comply with these
provisions, by a stoppage of the supply of water, such person shall be fined
not more than fifty dollars ($50.00), with the costs of prosecution, and all
damages that may accrue to the Division of Water by reason of such violation.
   (b)   Whoever violates Section
531.63 or
531.64 shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or
imprisoned not more than six (6) months, or both.
CHAPTER 533 – WATER METERS
533.01   General Provisions
533.02   One Meter Allowed per Service Connection
533.03   Meters for Lawn Sprinklers and Emergency Supplies; Costs
533.04   Conditions when Fire Service Connections Shall be Metered
533.05   Conditions when Customer Furnishes Meter
533.06   Meters for Building Purposes
533.07   Private Meter Setting to be Paid in Advance
533.08   Meter Space to be Unobstructed
533.09   Customers to Protect Meters; Liability
533.10   Lost or Stolen Meters
533.11   Meter Testing Required
533.12   Tests of Private Meters
533.13   Meter Inspection; Fee
533.14   Repairs to Private Meters; Costs
533.15   Tampering with Meters; Fee
533.16   Charges for Reading Registering Meters
533.17   Metering Service to Elevators or Large Motors
533.18   Meter Inspection Within City; Fee – Repealed
533.19   Charges for Installation of Meters
   Note: The legislative history of this chapter, except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 63410-A, passed
September 22, 1924.
Cross-reference:
   Tampering with water hydrants, pipes or meters, CO
531.67
   Water connections: regulations and specifications, CO
Ch. 531
Statutory reference:
   Power to regulate and provide water system, RC 715.08, 717.01, 743.01
   Tampering with water hydrants, pipes or meters, RC 4933.22
§ 533.01 General Provisions
   (a)   All Connections.
      (1)   All water service connections and service pipes from water
distribution mains supplied with water by the City shall be metered by a water
meter, except connections for construction purposes or fire protection.
      (2)   Metering devices shall be supplied by the Division of Water, and
shall remain the property of the City.
      (3)   Charges for metering devices and their installation and/or
replacement shall be under Section
535.06 of the Codified Ordinances.
      (4)   Charges for metering devices supplied by the City and for their
installation by the City shall be borne by the owner of or the person applying
for water service to the premises.
      (5)   Excepting private re-registering and sewer-exempt meters, the
following apply:
         A.   Metering devices shall be replaced and/or repaired by and at the
expense of the Division; and
         B.   At the Director's discretion, ancillary plumbing repair, for the
service pipe or connected fixtures in the building, necessary for the
replacement or installation of a meter or for the purpose of a Division-
sponsored system improvement, may be performed by and at the expense of the
Division pursuant to the rules and regulations by the Director.
   (b)   New Connections.
      (1)   All new service connections and service pipes from all water
distribution mains supplied with water by the City shall be metered by a water
meter pursuant to the rules and regulations of the Division of Water.
      (2)   When vaults are required, they shall be furnished by the owner or
customer and approved by the Commissioner. Vaults shall be installed by the
owner or customer in strict conformity with the rules and regulations of the
Department of Public Utilities.
      (3)   Once access to domestic water is established, but prior to a meter
being installed, water consumption shall be estimated and billed at the amounts
shown in the table below, at the applicable service district rates where the
premise is located.
Connection (Size) Daily MCF to be Billed
Connection (Size) Daily MCF to be Billed
5/8 in.           0.04
3/4 in.           0.04
1 in.             0.05
1-1/2 in.         0.25
2 in.             0.43
3 in.             1.15
4 in.             2.45
6 in.             7.36
8 in.             13.13
10 in.            20.00
12 in.            25.65
 
   (c)   Existing Connections.
      (1)   Meters on existing service connections and service pipes shall be
replaced on request of the owner or when deemed necessary by the Commissioner,
subject to approval by the Director, to prevent waste or to protect the
integrity of the water system or to continue the policy of metering all
consumers, pursuant to rules and regulations by the Commissioner, subject to
approval by the Director.
      (2)   Replacement, repair and maintenance of metering devices shall be
performed only by authorized employees of the Division or by other authorized
representatives of the Division.
      (3)   Charges for installation and/or replacement of metering devices may
be prorated on the water bill for a period of not more than four (4) years or
may be paid in a lump sum.
   (d)   Rules and Regulations. The Director shall make and amend written rules
and regulations necessary to effectuate the provisions of this chapter. The
rules and regulations shall not conflict with nor waive any provisions of these
Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 563-13. Passed 5-13-13, eff. 5-16-13)
§ 533.02 One Meter Allowed per Service Connection
   One (1) meter only shall be set on one (1) service connection, except re-
registering meters which shall be set by the Division of Water at the expense
of the customer.
(Ord. No. 99566. Passed 5-22-33)
§ 533.03 Meters for Lawn Sprinklers and Emergency Supplies; Costs
   The setting and housing of meters on service pipes used for lawn sprinklers
only, or for emergency or temporary or intermittent supply, including gas
service stations or ice stations, shall be done by the Division of Water at the
expense of the customer.
(Ord. No. 99566. Passed 5-22-33)
§ 533.04 Conditions when Fire Service Connections Shall be Metered
   Water meters shall also be furnished and set by the Division of Water at the
expense of the owner of the premises supplied or the customer, on any fire
service connection from which water has been or is being wasted, or used,
contrary to the laws, ordinances and regulations governing the same.
(Ord. No. 99566. Passed 5-22-33)
§ 533.05 Conditions when Customer Furnishes Meter
   In cases where service pipes larger than those allowable for the general
supply of the premises are used for the general supply and also for fire
protection, such service pipes shall be metered. The meter shall be of a make
satisfactory to the Commissioner of Water, and shall be furnished at the
expense of the customer. The setting of the meter including meter vault or box,
shall be at the expense of the Division of Water.
(Ord. No. 99566. Passed 5-22-33)
§ 533.06 Meters for Building Purposes
   Water meters for building purposes shall be set by the Division of Water at
the expense of the contractor or person making application therefor.
(Ord. No. 99566. Passed 5-22-33)
§ 533.07 Private Meter Setting to be Paid in Advance
   In all cases where private meters are to be installed, whether upon the
order of the Commissioner of Water or upon application of a customer or owner
of premises, the total charges comprising the setting of the meter and a
suitable meter vault or box, are to be at the expense of the consumer or owner,
and must be paid in advance at the office of the Division of Water.
(Ord. No. 99566. Passed 5-22-33)
§ 533.08 Meter Space to be Unobstructed
   Whenever a meter is set, whether in the sidewalk or area vault, or any part
of the basement of any building, the space occupied by the meter and the box
for the same must at all times be kept free from rubbish or obstructions of any
kind.
(Ord. No. 99566. Passed 5-22-33)
§ 533.09 Customers to Protect Meters; Liability
   Customers shall protect all meters from frost and hot water or injury of any
kind, but such meters shall under no circumstances be removed for repairs or
otherwise, by any person except an employee of the Division of Water, working
under the direction of the Commissioner of Water. The customer will be held
responsible for all damage to meters from frost or hot water.
(Ord. No. 99566. Passed 5-22-33)
§ 533.10 Lost or Stolen Meters
   Customers shall be held responsible for and shall reimburse the Division of
Water for the loss or theft of any meter set on the service pipe supplying the
premises occupied by them.
(Ord. No. 99566. Passed 5-22-33)
§ 533.11 Meter Testing Required
   The Division of Water shall require the manufacturer or vendor of water
meters to furnish the City, with each shipment of water meters, an affidavit of
compliance attesting to the accuracy of the meters supplied.
(Ord. No. 1296-83. Passed 6-20-83, eff. 6-23-83)
§ 533.12 Tests of Private Meters
   The Commissioner of Water shall, whenever in his or her opinion it is deemed
necessary, test any private meter. Any meter found to vary two (2) or more
percent from the correct amount shall be repaired at the expense of the owner.
(Ord. No. 99566. Passed 5-22-33)
§ 533.13 Meter Inspection; Fee
   On written application made to the Commissioner of Water by any consumer of
water, accompanied by the inspection fee required under Section
535.06 of the Codified Ordinances, the Division of Water shall test the meter.
If upon such inspection the meter is found to be more than two percent (2%)
fast, that is, registers a greater amount of water than actually passes through
it, the Division shall return to the consumer the above inspection fee and
shall make such reduction in the current bill as the facts warrant. If,
however, the meter does not over-register the amount of water that actually
passes through it, the Division shall retain the above inspection fee as the
expense for the testing.
(Ord. No. 778-06. Passed 6-5-06, eff. 6-9-06)
§ 533.14 Repairs to Private Meters; Costs
   The Division of Water, after notification to the owner, shall repair all
private meters whenever deemed necessary, at the expense of the owner.
(Ord. No. 99566. Passed 5-22-33)
§ 533.15 Tampering with Meters; Fee
   (a)   No person shall tamper, or cause or knowingly permit the tampering of,
any component of a Division of Water system ("System"), including but not
limited to:
      (1)   Breaking the seal on a water meter or bypass valve;
      (2)   Removing a water meter from the meter setting;
      (3)   Installing an unapproved bypass around the meter, or drawing water
before the meter;
      (4)   Damaging the water meter or related components;
      (5)   Reversing the water meter;
      (6)   Removing the meter register;
      (7)   Causing the meter register to not register or to under register;
      (8)   Cutting or disconnecting the wire between the meter and the
endpoint;
      (9)   Removing or damaging the endpoint;
      (10)   Opening the curb stop or other meter bypass valve or other
Division of Water control valve that the Division of Water has shut off,
without the Division of Water's prior authorization;
      (11)   Using water from a hydrant or other unmetered part of water system
without the Division of Water's prior authorization, except that municipal
firefighting and service department use are allowed uses not requiring pre-
authorization;
      (12)   Using water from a private fireline for other than firefighting
and testing purposes; or
      (13)   Improperly tapping or tying into an existing water main or service
connection.
   (b)   Any person found by the Division of Water to have violated division
(a) of this section shall be subject to any or all of the following:
      (1)   The Tampering Fees as specified in Section
535.06;
      (2)   The labor and material costs to repair any damaged equipment;
      (3)   The payment of the cost of twice the estimated amount of water
which has not been registered because of tampering with a System, billed at the
applicable additional MCF rate; and
      (4)   Shutting or re-shutting off of water service in accordance with the
Division of Water's Rules and Regulations.
(Ord. No. 178-2021. Passed 10-25-21, eff. 11-24-21)
§ 533.16 Charges for Reading Registering Meters
   The charge for reading each private re-registering meter shall be under
Section
535.06 of the Codified Ordinances. This charge shall be added to and made a
part of the monthly or quarterly charge for water furnished through the main
meter.
(Ord. No. 462-11. Passed 5-23-11, eff. 6-22-11)
§ 533.17 Metering Service to Elevators or Large Motors
   Any and all service pipes for supplying hydraulic elevators or other large
motors requiring service pipes larger than those allowable for the general
supply of the premises shall be metered at the expense of the owner or parties
using the same.
§ 533.18 Meter Inspection Within City; Fee – Repealed
(Ord. No. 778-06, § 3. Passed 6-5-06, eff. 6-9-06)
§ 533.19 Charges for Installation of Meters
   The charge for installation of any water meter shall be under Section
535.06 of the Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 778-06. Passed 6-5-06, eff. 6-9-06)
CHAPTER 535 – WATER RATES AND BILLINGS
535.01   Definitions
535.02   Division of Metropolitan Area into Zones
535.03   Water Furnished Free for Certain Purposes
535.04   Water Rates
535.041   Fixed Water Charges to Westlake to Cover Costs Associated with
Separation from the Cleveland Water System
535.05   Affordability Programs
535.051   Testing and Monitoring Programs; Water Bill Credits
535.06   Fees and Charges
535.07   Conditions for Furnishing Water outside of Cuyahoga County – Repealed
535.08   Competitive Response Water Service Rates
535.09   Assessment and Collection of Water Charges
535.10   Water Billing Cycle
535.11   Reserved
535.12   Extension of Time for Payment
535.13   Payment of Service Charges
535.14   Delinquent Accounts; Rights of Tenants
535.15   New Applications for Water Service; Owner Liability; Deposits
535.16   Termination for Nonpayment of Water or Waste Water Bill; Notice
535.17   Reserved
535.18   Rates for Water Sold Through Master Meters – Repealed
535.19   Reserved
535.20   Payment for Auxiliary Supply
535.21   Charges for Unmetered Fire Protection Service within the City and
Direct Service Metropolitan Area
535.22   Disinfection, Chlorination and Flushing of Water Mains
535.23   Restricted Water Mains
535.24   Charges for Water from Fire Hydrants
535.25   Charges for Water for Building and Construction Purposes
535.26   Special Rates
535.27   Use of Fire Hydrants for Construction Purposes
535.28   Annual Fee for Use of Water from Fire Hydrants by Direct Service
Municipalities
535.29   Provisions for Charges in Case of Leaks
535.30   Charges for Water Not to be Combined
535.31   Rates when Meter Registers Incorrectly
535.32   Charges when Water is Turned Off – Repealed
535.33   New Application for Water
535.34   Size of Water Mains
535.35   Approval of Water Main Plans within City and Direct Service
Metropolitan Area
535.36   Size of Fire Hydrants
535.37   Using Water without Permission, Penalty – Repealed
535.38   Waste of Water
535.39   Unmetered Service; Regulation of Sprinkling
535.40   Unmetered Service; Yard Fountains
535.41   Property Seller to Supply Statement of Status of Water Bill
535.42   Escrow Agent Not to Disburse Funds without Statement
535.43   Rights of Buyer
535.44   Reserved
535.45   Water Use Emergency
535.46   Fees for Returned Checks
535.99   Penalty
   Note: The legislative history of this chapter, except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 63410-A, passed
September 22, 1924.
Cross-reference:
   Tampering with water fixtures, CO
531.67
   Tampering with water meters, CO
533.15
Statutory reference:
   Weekly deposit of water works money collected, RC 743.06
§ 535.01 Definitions
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   “Metropolitan area” means the territory within and without the limits
of the City of Cleveland to which water is supplied by the Division of Water.
   (b)   “Zone” means that part of the metropolitan area which, for convenience
in reading water meters and rendering water bills, may be so designated by the
Director of Public Utilities.
   (c)   “Low service district” means that part of the metropolitan area which
has an elevation above the level of Lake Erie and not exceeding one hundred
twenty (120) feet above City datum.
   (d)   “First high service district” means that part of the metropolitan area
which has an elevation of more than one hundred twenty (120) feet and not more
than two hundred fifty (250) feet above the City datum.
   (e)   “Second high service district” means that part of the metropolitan
area which has an elevation of more than two hundred fifty (250) feet and not
more than five hundred (500) feet above the City datum.
   (f)   “Third high service district” means that part of the metropolitan area
which has an elevation of more than five hundred (500) feet above the City
datum.
   (g)   “Water supply” means water furnished into pipes connected with
premises on which the water may be used, but regardless of the amount of water,
if any, which may be actually used on the premises. “Water used” means the
water taken on the premises from the water supply installed for that purpose,
irrespective of the manner in which the water may be disposed of.
   (h)   “Premises supplied with water” means a lot of land with or without
buildings or other structures standing thereon, used as one (1) plant, place of
business, residence or other single purpose, to which water has been supplied,
ready for use, but shall not include more than one (1) plant or place of
business, residence or location used for a single purpose, although the same
may be owned, used or controlled by one (1) owner.
   (i)   “Customer” means any person, partnership, corporation or association
to whom or upon whose request water is supplied, including the premises so
supplied with water.
   (j)   “City Water Department” means the Division of Water of the Department
of Public Utilities of the City.
   (k)   “Director” means the Director of Public Utilities.
   (l)   “Commissioner” means the Commissioner of Water.
   As used in division (b) of Sections
535.04,
535.05, and
535.06:
   (m)   “Homestead” means a dwelling or unit in a multiple-unit dwelling or
condominium which has a separate water connection and is owned and occupied as
a home by an individual.
   (n)   “Sixty-five (65) years of age or older” means a person who has
attained age sixty-four (64) prior to January 1 of the year of application for
the homestead rate.
   (o)   “Total income” means the adjusted gross income of the owner and the
owner’s spouse for the year preceding the year in which application for the
homestead rate is made, as determined under the “Internal Revenue Code of
1954,” 68A Stat. 3, 26 U.S.C. 1, as amended, minus the amount of disability
benefits included in adjusted gross income but not to exceed fifty-two hundred
dollars ($5,200.00), plus old age and survivors benefits received pursuant to
the “Social Security Act”; retirement, pension, annuity, or other retirement
payments or benefits not included in federal adjusted gross income; tier I and
tier II railroad retirement benefits received pursuant to the “Railroad
Retirement Act,” 50 Stat. 307, 45 U.S.C. 228; and interest on federal, state,
and local government obligations. Disability benefits paid by the veterans’
administration or a branch of the armed forces of the United States on account
of an injury or disability shall not be included in total income. For purposes
of computing total income, “old age and survivors benefits received pursuant to
the “Social Security Act”’ or “tier I railroad retirement benefits received
pursuant to the “Railroad Retirement Act”’ means:
      (1)   For those persons receiving the homestead property tax exemption
for the first time for tax years 1976 and earlier, the benefits payable under
the social security or railroad retirement laws in effect on December 31, 1975,
except in those cases where a change in social security or railroad retirement
benefits would result in a reduction of income;
      (2)   For those persons receiving the homestead property tax exemption
for the first time for tax years 1977 and thereafter, the benefits payable
under the social security or railroad retirement laws in effect on the last day
of the calendar year prior to the year for which the homestead exemption is
first received, except in those cases where a change in social security or
railroad retirement benefits results in a reduction in income.
   (p)   “Permanently and totally disabled” means a person who has, on January
1 of the year of application for the homestead rate, some impairment in body or
mind that makes him or her unfit to work at any substantially remunerative
employment which he or she is reasonably able to perform and which will with
reasonable probability, continue for an indefinite period of at least twelve
(12) months without any present indication of recovery therefrom or has been
certified as permanently and totally disabled by a state or federal agency
having the function of so classifying a person. An application for reduction
based upon a physical disability shall be accompanied by a certificate signed
by a physician, and an application based upon a mental disability shall be
accompanied by a certificate signed by a physician or psychologist licensed to
practice in Ohio, attesting to the fact that the applicant is permanently and
totally disabled.
   (q)   “Owner” includes a vendor in possession under a purchase agreement or
a land contract, a mortgagor, one (1) or more joint tenants with rights of
survivorship and tenants in common.
(Ord. No. 1974-89. Passed 9-11-89, eff. 9-15-89)
§ 535.02 Division of Metropolitan Area into Zones
   For the purpose of assessing charges for water, reading meters and
collecting such charges, the metropolitan area so supplied with water shall be
divided into zones by the Director of Public Utilities, who shall also fix the
dates for reading such water meters and for payment of bills for water so
furnished, the amount of which shall be determined in the manner provided in
the following sections.
(Ord. No. 91877-A. Passed 12-29-30)
§ 535.03 Water Furnished Free for Certain Purposes
   (a)   The Director of Public Utilities shall cause water to be furnished
free of charge to the Division of Fire for the purpose of extinguishing fire
and cleaning fire apparatus. No charge shall be made by the Director for the
furnishing of supplying connections with fire hydrants within the territory of
the City, nor shall there be a charge for repair and maintenance of fire
hydrants. The Director shall cause water to be furnished free of charge to
market houses within the territory of the City for the purpose of cleaning
market houses, and to public buildings owned by the City for use therein.
   (b)   In accordance with Charter Section
113, the accounts of the Division of Water shall reflect the value of the
services so rendered. If at any time any department or division shall collect
for water used from lessees or occupants of all or portions of any public
buildings and market houses, such collections shall be at the regular rates for
such service and be remitted to the Division. However, in the event only a
portion of a building or market house is so used, a pro rata charge
satisfactory to the Commissioner of Water shall be made.
(Ord. No. 1817-A-74. Passed 11-18-74, eff. 11-20-74)
§ 535.04 Water Rates
   (a)   Water Rates.
      (1)   Monthly Water Rate Schedule for Direct Service Accounts.*
Monthly Fixed Charges* 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029
Monthly Fixed Charges*    2024    2025    2026    2027    2028    2029
5/8 in. - 1 in. Meter     $9.50   $9.85   $9.90   $9.90   $9.90   $9.90
1-1/2 in. and 2 in. Meter $18.70  $19.35  $19.45  $19.45  $19.45  $19.45
3 in. and 4 in. Meter     $63.50  $65.70  $66.05  $66.05  $66.05  $66.05
6 in. Meter               $112.90 $116.85 $117.45 $117.45 $117.45 $117.45
8 in. Meter               $169.30 $175.25 $176.15 $176.15 $176.15 $176.15
10 in. Meter              $215.10 $222.65 $223.75 $223.75 $223.75 $223.75
12 in. Meter              $257.50 $266.50 $267.85 $267.85 $267.85 $267.85
Homestead                 $6.00   $6.20   $6.25   $6.25   $6.25   $6.25
 
* Fixed charges are not prorated. The charge used will correspond with the bill
period end date.
Monthly Consumption Charge
Usage Rates (per MCF)** 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029
Monthly Consumption Charge
Usage Rates (per MCF)** 2024   2025   2026   2027   2028   2029
Cleveland
0 to 0.2 MCF            $22.65 $23.44 $24.32 $25.23 $26.18 $27.16
Additional MCFs         $38.49 $39.84 $41.33 $42.88 $44.49 $46.16
Homestead               $14.72 $15.24 $15.81 $16.40 $17.02 $17.66
Low / 1st High
0 to 0.2 MCF            $29.45 $30.48 $31.62 $32.81 $34.04 $35.32
Additional MCFs         $50.04 $51.79 $53.73 $55.74 $57.83 $60.00
Homestead               $19.13 $19.80 $20.54 $21.31 $22.11 $22.94
2nd High
0 to 0.2 MCF            $36.23 $37.50 $38.91 $40.37 $41.88 $43.45
Additional MCFs         $61.61 $63.77 $66.16 $68.64 $71.21 $73.88
Homestead               $23.55 $24.37 $25.28 $26.23 $27.21 $28.23
3rd High***
0 to 0.2 MCF            $41.89 $43.36 $44.99 $46.68 $48.43 $50.25
Additional MCFs         $71.22 $73.71 $76.47 $79.34 $82.32 $85.41
Homestead               $27.23 $28.18 $29.24 $30.34 $31.48 $32.66
 
** Water consumption charges are prorated if a billing cycle covers a multi-
year period.
*** Includes all direct service communities in Medina, Summit and Geauga
Counties.
      (2)   Monthly Master Meter Water Rate Schedule.
 
Master Meter Customer (per MCF)
Community       2024   2025   2026   2027   2028   2029
Bedford         $37.97 $39.30 $40.77 $42.30 $43.89 $45.53
Chagrin Falls   $43.90 $45.44 $47.14 $48.91 $50.75 $52.65
Geauga County   $44.09 $45.63 $47.34 $49.12 $50.96 $52.87
Lakewood        $30.85 $31.93 $33.13 $34.37 $35.66 $37.00
Portage County*
 
* Portage County shall pay the negotiated rate usage with the Division of
Water, which shall be adjusted annually based on the Consumer Price Index and
shall also pay the Division of Water's annual impact fee set forth in the then
existing contract between the City and the County.
      (3)   Additional Transition Rate to Be Charged to Customers of Cleveland
Heights' Water System Converting to Cleveland Direct Service (Customers shall
also be charged Cleveland's Suburban Direct Service First and Second High
Rates, as appropriate):
 
                             Regular                  Homestead/Affordability
Community                    Transition Rate          Transition Rate
                             Rate ($/MCF) Duration    Rate ($/MCF) Duration
Cleveland Heights' Customers $11.81       2017 - 2026 $4.72        2018 - 2026
in University Heights
 
      (4)   Emergency Stand By Water Rate Schedule.
 
Emergency Stand By Charge (per MCF)
Community      2024   2025   2026   2027   2028   2029
Berea          $37.97 $39.30 $40.77 $42.30 $43.89 $45.54
Lake County    $30.85 $31.93 $33.13 $34.37 $35.66 $37.00
Medina County  $44.09 $45.63 $47.34 $49.12 $50.96 $52.87
Hudson         $44.09 $45.63 $47.34 $49.12 $50.96 $52.87
Portage County $42.60 $44.09 $45.74 $47.46 $49.24 $51.09
 
   (b)   For Master Meter Communities. All bills for water furnished shall be
rendered monthly to the municipality or district to which water is so
furnished, and if not paid within fifteen (15) days after the date of billing
by the City of Cleveland, such bills shall be subject to a penalty of five
percent (5%) each month to all past due balances. In the event that any monthly
bill is not paid within four (4) months after written notice is given by the
City of Cleveland, the City of Cleveland may, at its option, cease to furnish
water to such municipality or district pending payment of any overdue amount.
   (c)   Rates for Standby Emergency Water Service. The rates to be charged for
standby emergency water service shall consist of a monthly fee of three hundred
dollars ($300.00) in addition to the charge for consumption provided in
division (a) of this section. Standby fees for standby emergency water service
shall be payable in advance. All bills for water furnished under this section
shall be rendered upon the termination of customer's emergency period or, if
the duration of the emergency is longer than thirty (30) days, in thirty (30)
day intervals. Any outstanding balance not paid within fifteen (15) days after
the date of billing by the City of Cleveland, such bills shall be subject to a
penalty of five percent (5%) each month to all past due balances. In the event
that any standby fee is not paid in advance or any consumption bill is not paid
within four (4) months after written notice is given by the City of Cleveland,
the City of Cleveland may at its option, cease to furnish standby emergency
water service to such customer pending payment of any overdue amount.
   (d)   Large Industrial Customers. All water used in excess of sixty-two
million five hundred thousand (62,500,000) cubic feet during a three (3) month
billing period shall be charged at a rate of seventy-five percent (75%) of the
rate prescribed in this section for water used at the additional mcf rate.
   (e)   Water rates shall be charged based on the location of the water meter
when determining whether a water account is located within City of Cleveland or
a suburban community, or whether it is located within Cuyahoga County.
   (f)   The rates in this section are effective beginning January 1 of each
year.
(Ord. No. 446-2024. Passed 6-3-24, eff. 7-3-24) (BOC Res. No. 347-24. Adopted
7-24-24)
§ 535.041 Fixed Water Charges to Westlake to Cover Costs Associated with
Separation from the Cleveland Water System
   (a)   Effective January 1, 2014 and in addition to the fixed and water
consumption charges assessed under Section
535.04, all accounts for direct water service to the City of Westlake shall
contain a fixed charge based on meter size to cover costs associated with the
separation of Westlake from the Cleveland Water System as provided in this
section.
   (b)   The fixed charge on a quarterly billing statement shall be as follows:
 
Meter Size    Fixed Charge
1" or smaller $291.00
2" and 1-1/2" $569.00
3" and 4"     $1,942.00
6"            $3,468.00
8"            $5,272.00
 
   (c)   If billed monthly, the fixed charge on a monthly billing statement
shall be as follows:
 
Meter Size    Fixed Charge
1" or smaller $97.00
2" and 1-1/2" $189.00
3" and 4"     $647.00
6"            $1,156.00
8"            $1,757.00
 
   (d)   Fixed charges assessed under this section may be prorated during a
billing cycle.
   (e)   The fixed charges under this section shall be assessed to direct
service accounts in Westlake for a period of seventeen (17) quarters or fifty-
one (51) months.
(Ord. No. 1354-13. Passed 11-11-13, eff. 12-11-13)
§ 535.05 Affordability Programs
   (a)   Homestead Rate. Homestead rates are eligible for single family
residential property owned and occupied by a person sixty-five (65) years of
age or older whose total annual income does not exceed the annual income limits
set by the Director of Public Utilities starting with the 2024 year with an
annual income of forty thousand eight hundred dollars ($40,800.00). Income
limits shall increase annually based on the Consumer Price Index (CPI) annual
inflation, but shall not exceed three percent (3%) annually. Eligible
properties approved shall be charged the homestead rate established for the
service district in which the homestead is located under Section
535.04 of these Codified Ordinances. The Director of Public Utilities shall
prescribe the application form for the homestead rates and have final approval
of all applications.
   (b)   The Director of Public Utilities may establish an affordability
program to provide assistance to eligible low-income customers. The program
will offer rates equal to the Homestead Rate with an annual income that does
not exceed two hundred percent (200%) of the Federal Poverty Income Guideline
Level. The Director of Public Utilities shall set the guidelines for
administering the affordability program and have final approval of all
applications.
(Ord. No. 446-2024. Passed 6-3-24, eff. 7-3-24) (BOC Res. No. 347-24. Adopted
7-24-24)
§ 535.051 Testing and Monitoring Programs; Water Bill Credits
   (a)   The Director of Public Utilities may conduct programs for testing and
monitoring of water distributed to residential and commercial premises to be
performed by the customers. These programs shall relate to various aspects of
the Division of Water and may include distribution operations, water quality,
and other testing and monitoring determined to be necessary by the Director of
Public Utilities.
   (b)   The Director of Public Utilities is authorized to provide water bill
credits, to be established by the Board of Control, to eligible water customers
after successfully completing monitoring and testing performed under a program
offered under division (a) of this section. The total amount of all water bill
credits authorized by this division shall not exceed twenty-five thousand
dollars ($25,000.00) per year.
   (c)   The Director of Public Utilities shall establish guidelines for
program eligibility and for administering the programs under this section. The
Director shall have the final approval of all applications.
(Ord. No. 178-2021. Passed 10-25-21, eff. 11-24-21)
§ 535.06 Fees and Charges
   For all fees and charges listed in this section, if the size is not listed,
the fee will be assessed based on the next size larger on the schedule.
   (a)   Account Setup.*
Tap Connection 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029
Tap Connection   2024   2025   2026   2027   2028   2029
1 in. or smaller $248   $253   $261   $270   $278   $287
1-1/2 in.        $518   $529   $546   $564   $582   $601
2 in.            $1,283 $1,311 $1,354 $1,397 $1,442 $1,488
4 in.            $1,647 $1,683 $1,737 $1,793 $1,850 $1,910
6 in.            $1,733 $1,771 $1,828 $1,887 $1,947 $2,010
8 in.            $1,949 $1,992 $2,056 $2,122 $2,190 $2,261
10 in.           $2,320 $2,371 $2,447 $2,526 $2,607 $2,691
12 in.           $3,248 $3,320 $3,426 $3,536 $3,650 $3,767
16 in.           $4,344 $4,440 $4,583 $4,730 $4,882 $5,039
 
* Prices assume tap is a ductile iron pipe. For concrete pipe, a fifty-five
percent (55%) surcharge shall be added.
   (b)   Direct Tap / Tapping Sleeve Installation Fee.*
Tap / Connection 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029
Tap / Connection                    2024   2025   2026   2027   2028   2029
1 in. or smaller                    $187   $191   $197   $203   $210   $217
1-1/2 in.                           $394   $401   $414   $428   $441   $456
2 in.                               $973   $992   $1,024 $1,057 $1,091 $1,126
4 in.                               $1,248 $1,272 $1,313 $1,355 $1,399 $1,444
6 in.                               $1,313 $1,338 $1,381 $1,426 $1,472 $1,519
8 in.                               $1,477 $1,505 $1,554 $1,604 $1,655 $1,708
10 in.                              $1,758 $1,792 $1,850 $1,909 $1,971 $2,034
12 in.                              $2,461 $2,509 $2,589 $2,673 $2,758 $2,847
16 in. or larger (deposit + cost)** $3,293 $3,357 $3,465 $3,576 $3,691 $3,801
 
* Prices assume tap is a ductile iron pipe. For concrete pipe, a fifty-five
percent (55%) surcharge shall be added.
** Fee listed is a deposit; actual final cost of labor and materials shall be
assessed to customer.
   (c)   New Connection Rescheduling Fee (if not cancelled 24 hours prior to
appointment).
 
2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029
$141 $152 $158 $164 $170 $176
 
   (d)   Curb Valves. Fee includes labor for installation only. Excavation,
sheeting, testing, and restoration are the customer's responsibility.
Curb Valves 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029
Curb Valves 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029
1-1/2 in.   $192 $192 $192 $194 $201 $207
2 in.       $192 $192 $192 $194 $201 $207
3 in.       $384 $384 $384 $388 $402 $414
4 in.       $384 $384 $384 $388 $402 $414
6 in.       $384 $384 $384 $388 $402 $414
8 in.       $384 $384 $384 $388 $402 $414
10 in.      $576 $576 $576 $582 $603 $621
12 in.      $576 $576 $576 $582 $603 $621
 
   (e)   Plugging Connections. Fee only includes actual plugging of connection.
Excavation and restoration shall be invoiced at cost to the customer.
 
Plugging Connections     2024   2025   2026   2027   2028   2029
Smaller than 2 in.       $2,205 $2,830 $2,915 $3,003 $3,094 $3,187
2 in. to 12 in.          $2,939 $3,764 $3,877 $3,994 $4,115 $4,239
Larger than 12 in.       $3,673 $4,726 $4,868 $5,015 $5,167 $5,322
Connection Containment   $210   $216   $223   $229   $236   $243
Connection Reinstatement $155   $161   $168   $174   $181   $189
 
   (f)   Assembling Meter Settings for Vault Meters. Fee includes labor only.
Meter Size 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029
Meter Size 2024   2025   2026   2027   2028   2029
1-1/2 in.  $348   $348   $348   $357   $369   $381
2 in.      $348   $348   $348   $357   $369   $381
3 in.      $348   $348   $348   $357   $369   $381
4 in.      $452   $452   $452   $464   $480   $495
6 in.      $1,018 $1,018 $1,018 $1,049 $1,083 $1,119
8 in.      $1,318 $1,318 $1,318 $1,357 $1,401 $1,448
10 in.     $1,677 $1,677 $1,677 $1,728 $1,784 $1,842
12 in.     $2,037 $2,037 $2,037 $2,098 $2,166 $2,237
 
   (g)   Install / Replace Meters.
Meter Size                     2024    2025    2026    2027    2028    2029
1 in. or smaller - Inside      $344    $354    $362    $370    $378    $387
Setting
1 in. or smaller - Vault       $391    $400    $409    $418    $428    $439
Setting
1-1/2 in. - Inside Setting     $577    $603    $614    $625    $636    $648
1-1/2 in. - Vault Setting      $577    $603    $614    $625    $636    $648
2 in.                          $646    $659    $670    $681    $692    $704
3 in.                          $1,489  $1,597  $1,630  $1,663  $1,697  $1,733
4 in.                          $1,561  $1,684  $1,717  $1,750  $1,784  $1,820
6 in.                          $2,579  $2,581  $2,627  $2,675  $2,724  $2,774
8 in.                          $2,984  $3,231  $3,277  $3,325  $3,374  $3,424
10 in.                         $3,684  $4,031  $4,077  $4,125  $4,174  $4,224
12 in.                         $4,829  $5,646  $5,692  $5,740  $5,789  $5,839
2 in. Compound                 $2,189  $2,311  $2,357  $2,405  $2,454  $2,504
3 in. Compound                 $2,154  $2,514  $2,557  $2,605  $2,654  $2,704
4 in. Compound                 $2,744  $2,771  $2,817  $2,865  $2,914  $2,964
6 in. Compound                 $3,504  $3,681  $3,727  $3,775  $3,824  $3,874
8 in. Compound                 $5,029  $5,881  $5,927  $5,975  $6,024  $6,074
10 in. Compound                $7,705  $9,270  $9,316  $9,364  $9,413  $9,463
12 in. Compound                $12,402 $15,188 $15,234 $15,282 $15,331 $15,381
Specialty meter (labor costs
only - meter hardware involved $3,000  $3,000  $3,000  $3,000  $3,000  $3,000
at actual cost)
Endpoint                       $128    $105    $108    $111    $115    $118
Transmitter Wire               $50     $10     $11     $11     $11     $11
 
   (h)   Assembling Regulator Setting. Fee includes labor for assembling
setting only. Material, material delivery, excavation, sheeting, transporting
the assembly, testing, installation, and restoration are the customer’s
responsibility.
 
Regulator Size 2024   2025   2026   2027   2028   2029
8 in.          $1,681 $1,726 $1,782 $1,839 $1,898 $1,959
12 in.         $2,800 $2,883 $2,975 $3,071 $3,170 $3,271
 
   (i)   Regulator Controls Setup. Fee includes labor for installation only.
Excavation, sheeting, testing, and restoration are the customer’s
responsibility.
 
Regulator Size 2024   2025   2026   2027   2028   2029
8 in.          $1,681 $1,726 $1,782 $1,839 $1,898 $1,959
12 in.         $2,800 $2,883 $2,975 $3,071 $3,170 $3,271
 
   (j)   Water Use from Hydrants and Other Unmetered Sources.
 
                       2024   2025   2026   2027   2028   2029
Permit                 $66    $73    $76    $80    $84    $88
Volume Charge          Charged at additional MCF rate in applicable rate
($/MCF/Service Area)   district where hydrant is located
Meter/Valve/BF
Assembly Refundable    $1,450 $1,475 $1,500 $1,525 $1,550 $1,575
Deposit
Meter Rental Fee First $48    $53    $56    $59    $62    $65
Week
Meter Rental Fee Each  $34    $38    $40    $42    $44    $46
Week After
 
   (k)   Miscellaneous Engineering Services. 
 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029
                                           2024  2025  2026  2027  2028  2029
Minimum (for engineering services          $61   $67   $69   $71   $73   $76
Plan reviews - plan and profile drawing
containing water work (per foot, 50-foot   $1.22 $1.33 $1.37 $1.42 $1.46 $1.51
minimum)
Deposit for proper submittal of customer
created As-Builts - fully refundable when
approved. As-Builts received within 180    $10   $10   $10   $10   $10   $10
days of main going into service (per foot,
50-foot of water main minimum.)
As-Built processing fee - plan profile
drawing containing water work (per foot)
Hard or paper copy                         $0.70 $0.70 $0.70 $0.70 $0.70 $0.70
GIS format per CWD
Standards                                  $0.07 $0.07 $0.07 $0.07 $0.07 $0.07
Backflow prevention testing fee - CWD      $18   $19   $20   $21   $22   $23
processing fee*
Additional review due to plan change       $58   $59   $60   $61   $62   $63
without prior approval (per hour)
 
* Backflow prevention testing fee - These are direct Cleveland Water Division
costs for managing the backflow program. Additional fees charged by the
Cleveland Water Division’s backflow vendor will shall also be passed on charged
to the customer.
   (l)   Disinfection of Water Mains.*
 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029
                                   2024   2025   2026   2027   2028   2029
4 in.                              $0.78  $0.81  $0.84  $0.87  $0.91  $0.95
6 in.                              $0.78  $0.81  $0.84  $0.87  $0.91  $0.95
8 in.                              $1.02  $1.06  $1.10  $1.14  $1.18  $1.23
10 in.                             $1.02  $1.06  $1.10  $1.14  $1.18  $1.23
12 in.                             $1.22  $1.27  $1.32  $1.37  $1.42  $1.47
16 in.                             $1.35  $1.40  $1.45  $1.51  $1.57  $1.63
20 in. or greater (deposit + cost) $4,160 $4,310 $4,470 $4,630 $4,800 $4,970
Service Fee**                      $480   $500   $520   $540   $560   $580
 
* 1,200-foot minimum.
** Service is charged each time the disinfection crew has to set up its
equipment/trip.
 
   (m)   Meter Inspections / Meter Tests at Customer Request.
 
                   2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029
1 in. or smaller   $135 $135 $135 $138 $143 $147
1-1/2 in. to 4 in. $270 $270 $270 $276 $286 $294
Larger than 4 in.  $540 $540 $540 $552 $572 $588
 
   (n)   Special Service Calls.
 
2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029
$48  $48  $49  $51  $53  $54
 
   (o)   Special Service Calls – Expedited.
 
2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029
$96  $96  $99  $102 $105 $109
 
   (p)   Appointment Broken by Customer.
 
2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029
$42  $43  $44  $45  $46  $47
 
   (q)   Returned Check (per check).
 
2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029
$34  $34  $34  $34  $34  $34
 
   (r)   Tampering.
 
                         2024   2025   2026   2027   2028   2029
First Incident           $250   $250   $250   $250   $250   $250
Second Incident          $2,300 $2,300 $2,300 $2,300 $2,300 $2,300
Each Incident thereafter $3,700 $3,700 $3,700 $3,700 $3,700 $3,700
 
   (s)   Lab Testing.
 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029
                                                  2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029
Bacteria Colilert - 18                            $23  $23  $23  $23  $23  $23
Bacteria Ecoli for LT2                            $24  $24  $24  $24  $24  $24
Halo Acetic Acids 552.2                           $151 $151 $151 $151 $151 $151
Metals                                            $112 $112 $112 $112 $112 $112
Total Organic Carbon                              $25  $25  $25  $25  $25  $25
Ion Chromatography *                              $63  $100 $100 $100 $100 $100
Trihalomethanes 524.2                             $45  $75  $75  $75  $75  $75
Total Microcystins ELISA-ADDA                     $34  $100 $100 $100 $100 $100
Total Microcystins ELISA-ADDA follow-up sample ** $700 $700 $700 $700 $700 $700
Quantitative Polymerase Chain Reaction (aPCR) *** $250 $250 $250 $250 $250 $250
General Wet Chemistry ****                        $50  $50  $50  $50  $50  $50
 
* Includes fluoride, phosphate, bromide, chloride, nitrate, nitrite, and
sulfate.
** Resample and repeat samples following a routine sample detection (price per
day of sampling).
*** aPCR screening for cyanobacteria and cyanotoxin gene detection meeting Ohio
EPA analytical requirements.
**** Includes pH, alkalinity, hardness, free and total chorine residual, and
turbidity.
   (t)   Private Fire Protection Charges.
Fire Line Size 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029
Fire Line Size 2024    2025    2026    2027    2028    2029
1-1/2 in.      $17.15  $17.71  $18.04  $18.09  $18.53  $18.75
2 in.          $17.15  $17.71  $18.04  $18.09  $18.53  $18.75
3 in.          $17.15  $17.71  $18.04  $18.09  $18.53  $18.75
4 in.          $46.60  $48.13  $49.02  $49.15  $50.35  $50.96
6 in.          $67.20  $69.41  $70.69  $70.87  $72.61  $73.48
8 in.          $119.95 $123.89 $126.18 $126.51 $129.60 $131.17
10 in.         $187.80 $193.96 $197.55 $198.07 $202.92 $205.36
12 in.         $256.35 $264.76 $269.66 $270.36 $276.98 $280.32
 
   (u)   The fees and charges are effective beginning January 1 of each year.
   (v)   The Commissioner may enter into payment arrangements for installment
payments of the fees and charges contained in this section or in Section
535.23 and Section
535.24 when determined to be reasonable by the Commissioner. Failure to make
any payment under an arranged payment plan when due shall cause the total
unpaid amount to become payable on demand and may lead to termination of water
service.
(Ord. No. 446-2024. Passed 6-3-24, eff. 7-3-24) (BOC Res. No. 347-24. Adopted
7-24-24)
§ 535.07 Conditions for Furnishing Water outside of Cuyahoga County – Repealed
(Ord. No. 462-11. Passed 5-23-11, eff. 6-22-11)
§ 535.08 Competitive Response Water Service Rates
   The Director of Public Utilities may enter into direct-service and master-
meter water service agreements with municipal corporations or public
authorities for water service under rates, terms, and conditions that differ
from those contained in Chapter
535 for the purpose of meeting competition from alternative water suppliers if
all of the following apply:
   (a)   The municipal corporation or public authority has access to an
alternative water supplier or is likely to gain such access in the reasonably
foreseeable future;
   (b)   The revenue to be generated under the contract is not below the cost
of service, as determined by the Division of Water;
   (c)   The contract is for a term of at least twenty (20) years;
   (d)   The contract, with the exception of negotiated provisions, is
substantially in the form of the Division of Water’s standard direct-service
and master-meter agreements;
   (e)   The contract has been approved by the Director of Law; and
   (f)   The contract has been approved by the City Council upon a finding that
entering into the contract is necessary to meet competition from current or
potential alternative suppliers and is in the best interests of the Division of
Water and its water customers and bondholders.
(Ord. No. 911-04. Passed 6-7-04, eff. 6-8-04) (BOC Res. No. 321-04. Adopted 5-
26-04)
§ 535.09 Assessment and Collection of Water Charges
   The Director of Public Utilities shall assess and collect proper charges for
water, materials supplied and work done.
(Ord. No. 235-A-45. Passed 5-14-45)
§ 535.10 Water Billing Cycle
   Water accounts shall be billable and payable at intervals of one (1) or
three (3) months, as determined by the Director of Public Utilities.
(Ord. No. 462-11. Passed 5-23-11, eff. 6-22-11)
§ 535.11 Reserved
§ 535.12 Extension of Time for Payment
   Water bills shall be paid on or before the date stated on the bill but the
Director of Public Utilities may after investigation, grant an extension of
time in cases of indigency, emergency, relief and similar conditions. Partial
payments may be accepted, properly approved, but bills must be paid in full
pursuant to the rules and regulations of the Division of Water.
(Ord. No. 462-11. Passed 5-23-11, eff. 6-22-11)
§ 535.13 Payment of Service Charges
   Charges for work done or materials furnished by the Division of Water shall
be chargeable against the owners of the premises served as in the case of
charges for water. Charges for work done or materials furnished, contract bills
on main extensions, improvement charges, main pipe extension charges, meter
repairs and final water bills, shall be payable forthwith.
(Ord. No. 235-A-45. Passed 5-14-45)
§ 535.14 Delinquent Accounts; Rights of Tenants
   Where the account is unpaid by the due date, the Director of Public
Utilities may cause a notice of delinquency to be mailed to the account holder.
Tenants of a residential premises who have received the notice provided for in
Section
535.16 may maintain service to the premises if:
   (a)   Any or all of the tenants, through a representative acting on behalf
of all the tenants, pay a deposit on the account as determined by Section
535.15, and assume responsibility for paying future bills as they become due;
or
   (b)   At least fifty percent (50%) of the tenants:
      (1)   Deposit the rent when it becomes due with the Clerk of the
Municipal Court having jurisdiction over the premises, as provided in RC
5321.07(b)(1); and
      (2)   Apply to the Court for an order to use the rent deposited to pay
the account delinquency as provided in RC 5321.07(b)(2); and
      (3)   Continue to deposit rent as it becomes due until such time as the
account delinquency is removed.
   If service to a tenant-occupied residential premises has been terminated
pursuant to Section
535.16, such service shall be restored and maintained for such time as the
tenants comply with the above procedures. The Director of Public Utilities
shall establish such rules and regulations as are necessary to implement this
section.
(Ord. No. 284-A-88. Passed 2-6-89, eff. 2-10-89)
§ 535.15 New Applications for Water Service; Owner Liability; Deposits
   (a)   Applications for the use of water shall be made and accepted in a
manner prescribed by the Director of Public Utilities. All accounts for water
service shall be established and maintained in the name of the record title
owner of the premises served thereby. Any owner of real estate premises to
which water is supplied shall be deemed primarily liable for all water and
service charges for such premises, whether or not the premises is occupied by
the owner, tenant or other persons, and whether or not the account has been
established in the name of some other person or entity. In addition, any user
and/or occupant of the premises where water service is provided shall be liable
for payment for such services.
   (b)   The Director of Public Utilities may require a deposit to be placed on
an account whenever the account holder:
      (1)   Does not have an established credit history with the Division of
Water;
      (2)   Has received delinquency or termination of service notices and
wishes to avoid such termination;
      (3)   Has had service terminated for nonpayment;
      (4)   Is a debtor in a pending case in U.S. Bankruptcy Court;
      (5)   Refuses to allow employees of the Division of Water to enter upon
the premises served for the purposes of meter reading, repairs and/or testing.
   The deposit amount shall equal six (6) average monthly bills or two (2)
average quarterly bills on that account which shall be calculated based on the
previous twelve (12) months’ consumption at the premises served.
   (c)   Deposits held by the Division of Water shall not be applied to current
water or sewer bills. However, a deposit held on an account shall be returned
to the depositor if, subsequent to the date of the deposit, twelve (12)
consecutive monthly bills or four (4) consecutive quarterly bills are timely
paid. If a deposit is held on an account at the time it is closed, the deposit
shall be applied to any final amount outstanding, and the balance, if any,
shall be returned to the depositor.
(Ord. No. 462-11. Passed 5-23-11, eff. 6-22-11)
§ 535.16 Termination for Nonpayment of Water or Waste Water Bill; Notice
   Water service may be terminated at any premises where any water or waste
water bill remains unpaid after the date payment is due, subject to the
following:
   (a)   The Division of Water shall send to the account holder a notice of
termination of service at least fifteen (15) days prior to such termination;
   (b)   Where the Division of Water has reason to believe that the premises
where service is to be terminated is occupied by residential tenants, the
Division shall provide at least thirty (30) days' notice to any such tenants by
mail or by posting a notice of termination on all accessible building entrances
and, where possible, at the door of each dwelling unit. The notice shall inform
the tenants of the remedies available to them under Section
535.14 of this chapter.
   Except as provided in Section
535.14, water service at a premises terminated for nonpayment shall not be
restored until all charges due and payable have been paid, whether or not there
has been in the meantime a change of ownership or possession of the premises
supplied.
(Ord. No. 565-13. Passed 5-13-13, eff. 5-16-13)
§ 535.17 Reserved
§ 535.18 Rates for Water Sold Through Master Meters – Repealed
(Ord. No. 778-06, § 3. Passed 6-5-06, eff. 6-9-06)
§ 535.19 Reserved
§ 535.20 Payment for Auxiliary Supply
   (a)   Whenever any premises have their own water supply but in addition
service connections extend from the mains in the street into such premises for
use only in case of failure or insufficiency of their own supply, the same
minimum semi-annual payments shall be made for such service connections as are
established by Sections
535.04 and
535.05.
   (b)   Such payments shall be required whether the connection is on or off
and shall cease to be required only when and if the connection with the City’s
main has been cut and plugged.
(Ord. No. 99566. Passed 5-22-33)
§ 535.21 Charges for Unmetered Fire Protection Service within the City and
Direct Service Metropolitan Area
   Water shall be furnished to an unmetered fire protection service connection
only for fire protection, testing and maintenance purposes. A charge shall be
made for each unmetered fire supply connection within the limits of the City
and direct service suburbs. The charge shall be determined by the size of the
fire supply connection through which water passes for use on the premises so
supplied at the rate for unmetered fire line service under Section
535.06(p) of the Codified Ordinances. Unauthorized water use through unmetered
fire protection service connections shall be billed and charged at the
additional MCF rate in the applicable service district. Additional penalties
and charges based on consumption may be charged for unauthorized uses of an
unmetered fire protection service connection.
   Charges shall be collected monthly or quarterly for each fire supply
connection to cover inspection, testing, sealing and resealing of such service
connections, stand-by pumpage capacity, and replacement or cleaning of
distribution or trunk water mains to improve the water supply for fire
protection purposes.
(Ord. No. 462-11. Passed 5-23-11, eff. 6-22-11)
§ 535.22 Disinfection, Chlorination and Flushing of Water Mains
   The Director of Public Utilities is authorized to provide for the
disinfection of water mains by chlorination or flushing, including sampling.
The charges associated with the work shall be under Section
535.06 of the Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 778-06, § 4. Passed 6-5-06, eff. 6-9-06)
   Note: Former Section
535.22 was repealed by Ord. No. 1593-87, passed 9-14-87, eff. 9-18-87.
§ 535.23 Restricted Water Mains
   Whenever the Division of Water installs a water main less than twenty (20)
inches in diameter within the corporate limits of a municipal customer, and the
main is designated to be a restricted main, the Division of Water shall have
the right to restrict the use of the main so that it would not be permitted to
be tapped for service connections or connecting water mains. The Division of
Water shall have the right to allow service connections to be tapped to the
main, and shall have the right to condition the permission on the payment of a
tap-in charge representing a fair portion of the Division of Water’s cost of
installation of the main.
(Ord. No. 347-08. Passed 6-2-08, eff. 6-6-08)
§ 535.24 Charges for Water from Fire Hydrants
   (a)   In addition to other charges, if water is used from a public fire
hydrant, upon special permit only, a charge for the permit and a hydrant rental
must be paid in advance under Section
535.06 of the Codified Ordinances. A separate permit shall be issued for each
hydrant which shall identify its location.
   (b)   Water may be furnished from a fire hydrant for any special purpose
authorized by the Commissioner of the Division of Water. The charge for water
so furnished shall be at the additional MCF rate under Section
535.04 for the service district in which the fire hydrant is located. The
quantity of water used may be estimated by the Commissioner based on
information provided by the user as to the user’s purpose and needs, or the
Commissioner may require the installation of a meter at the connection to the
hydrant to be used, in which event the user shall pay the cost of installing
the meter and the cost of all water measured.
(Ord. No. 462-11. Passed 5-23-11, eff. 6-22-11)
§ 535.25 Charges for Water for Building and Construction Purposes
   All water for building or construction purposes, whether public or private,
shall be paid for under Sections
535.04 and
535.06 of the Codified Ordinances. In the case of water to be used for building
purposes, the Director of Building and Housing, before granting any permit to
erect, repair, change or alter any building or structure, shall first require
the owner of the building to pay in advance an amount as is justly chargeable
for water to be used in erecting, repairing, changing or altering such building
or structure, and on the refusal of the owner to pay the charges in advance,
the Director shall refuse to grant the permit. Charges shall be based on
estimates of the amount of masonry, walls, plastering and other work for which
water is used in construction, computed according to the accepted rules of the
Division of Water. If desired by the property owner or contractor, water for
building or construction purposes may be taken through a meter, furnished and
set at the expense of the owner or contractor, and paid for at the rate set
forth in Sections
535.04 and
535.06 of the Codified Ordinances. However, the advance payment for water in
any case shall be made, as previously stated, and if the supply of water is
taken entirely through a meter, the charge shall be adjusted under the amount
registered by the meter, and the excess of the advance payment, if any, shall
be refunded on the completion of the work.
(Ord. No. 778-06. Passed 6-5-06, eff. 6-9-06)
§ 535.26 Special Rates
   For purposes not named in the foregoing sections, or for the use of water
under special circumstances, special rates shall be made by the Commissioner of
Water.
(Ord. No. 99566. Passed 5-22-33)
§ 535.27 Use of Fire Hydrants for Construction Purposes
   (a)   No person shall use any hydrant for construction or other purposes
without first obtaining a permit for such use from the Commissioner of Water.
Such permit shall be charged under Section
535.06 of the Codified Ordinances.
   (b)   All hydrants used for any construction purpose, such as sewers,
buildings, paving, etc., must have reducing couplings attached to the nozzles
of the hydrants, with an independent valve for regulating the supply.
   (c)   The main valve of the hydrant must be opened full at the beginning of
work each day, and remain open until the stoppage of work at night. The water
supply shall be regulated by the independent valve. The hydrant shall be
operated only by a proper hydrant key, which shall be obtained from the
Division of Water.
   (d)   Water must not be allowed to run except when used. No leaking hose,
pipe or joints shall be permitted. All persons using hydrants shall immediately
obey any instructions or orders that may be issued by the Commissioner of
Water, or his or her authorized agents, to regulate the use of these hydrants.
   (e)   In case of failure to comply with the requirements of the Division,
the water supply shall be stopped immediately, the hydrant permit revoked and
no new permits for the use of any hydrant shall be issued until all damages or
charges for the waste of water have been paid.
   (f)   If required by the Commissioner, a meter shall be applied to the
connection made with the hydrant, at the expense of the party using the same
and the party shall pay for all water by meter measure.
(Ord. No. 778-06. Passed 6-5-06, eff. 6-9-06)
§ 535.28 Annual Fee for Use of Water from Fire Hydrants by Direct Service
Municipalities
   Each direct service municipality shall pay an annual fee, in advance, for
the use of water from fire hydrants located in the municipality, for a purpose
other than the extinguishment of a fire. The annual fee per hydrant shall be
calculated as of January 1 of each year by multiplying one-half (1/2) mcf (five
hundred (500) cf) by the highest rate then authorized to be charged to a direct
service customer located in the service district in which such hydrant is
located.
   A certified statement of the number of fire hydrants located in each service
district in the municipality on January 1 of each year shall be submitted to
the Commissioner of the Division of Water by an officer of each municipality on
or before January 10 of each year. The total annual fee shall be paid by each
direct service municipality on or before January 20 of each year.
(Ord. No. 2457-82. Passed 12-13-82, eff. 12-16-82)
§ 535.29 Provisions for Charges in Case of Leaks
   The Commissioner of Water may make such abatement as seems to him or her
right and proper in the case of excess consumption because of a leak or other
event, where it does not appear that the owner or user could be reasonably
expected to know of or prevent the leak or event and to have had a fair chance
to repair the same. The final billed amount after reduction granted by the
Commissioner shall not be less than the average consumption for the property
prior to the leak or other event, unless otherwise determined by the
Commissioner with the approval of the Director of Law.
   The authority vested in the Commissioner to make abatement shall be without
prejudice to and not in derogation of the power and authority of the Director
of Law conferred by Section
125.03.
(Ord. No. 1158-14. Passed 6-6-16, eff. 6-7-16)
§ 535.30 Charges for Water Not to be Combined
   (a)   All charges for water shall be made against the premises supplied or
against the customer contracting for the service.
   (b)   Upon special request, made by a customer accompanied by a list of
premises owned by him or her, bills for water rent of all such premises shall
be sent or delivered to such customer.
   (c)   However, the amounts of water used by separate premises shall not be
pooled or combined into one (1) charge, but separate charges shall be computed
for separate premises.
(Ord. No. 99566. Passed 5-22-33)
§ 535.31 Rates when Meter Registers Incorrectly
   If the meter fails to register correctly, the customer shall be charged for
water at the average daily rate of consumption estimated by the Commissioner of
Water, as based upon use under similar conditions when the meter is in good
order. The Commissioner may establish reasonable limitations within which a
meter shall be deemed to register correctly.
(Ord. No. 99566. Passed 5-22-33)
§ 535.32 Charges when Water is Turned Off – Repealed
(Ord. No. 462-11. Passed 5-23-11, eff. 6-22-11)
§ 535.33 New Application for Water
   Every person desiring a supply of water from the mains in the metropolitan
area must make application at the office of the Division of Water for a service
pipe and connection with such mains; except that arrangements may be made for
applicants outside of the City to make application for service connections at
the office of their respective municipalities, provided an agreement to this
effect has been entered into between the Division and such municipality.
(Ord. No. 99566. Passed 5-22-33)
§ 535.34 Size of Water Mains
   (a)   Distribution mains shall be not less than eight (8) inches and no more
than sixteen (16) inches in nominal diameter.
   (b)   The distribution water mains shall be laid out in a properly segmented
grid system, so that the interruption of service to consumers is kept to a
minimum in case of breaks or repairs.
   (c)   The Commissioner of Water shall determine the size of and materials
used for all water mains with the following minimums as to sizes for new
improvements or replacement of existing distribution water mains:
      (1)   Streets within residential areas, eight (8) inches size, provided
such streets do not exceed one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet in length
between intersecting streets improved with water mains;
      (2)   In county roads, crossings under freeways and railroads, crossing
in bridges and in streets adjoining commercial or industrial developments,
twelve (12) inches in size;
      (3)   In streets extending through several municipalities and designated
as State or county streets, roads or highways, sixteen (16) inches in size.
(Ord. No. 1824-68. Passed 9-30-68, eff. 10-1-68)
§ 535.35 Approval of Water Main Plans within City and Direct Service
Metropolitan Area
   (a)   No water mains shall be laid or extended within the City or in any
direct service suburb unless properly submitted plans have been approved by the
Commissioner of Water as being in accordance with the Department of Public
Utilities construction and material specifications.
   (b)   After installation no water main laid in the City or in any direct
service suburb shall be placed into service carrying potable water unless the
installation has been approved by the Commissioner as meeting the Department of
Public Utilities Construction and Material Specifications, and samples of water
taken from the new main installation have passed bacteriological testing as
required by the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency.
   (c)   Authority to approve water mains in subsections (a) and (b) hereof and
as outlined in service agreements with master meter suburbs shall be vested
solely in the Commissioner.
(Ord. No. 1231-74. Passed 4-14-75, eff. 4-17-75)
§ 535.36 Size of Fire Hydrants
   Fire hydrants shall be placed on all new distribution water main
improvements or replacements of existing distribution water mains and shall be
of six (6) inch size having a six (6) inch nominal diameter of the main valve
opening. Each hydrant shall be connected to the water main with a six (6) inch
branch with gate valve installed on each hydrant branch approximately three (3)
feet from the water main, and of the same size as hydrant. Fire hydrants shall
be placed at street intersections wherever spacing will permit. Fire hydrants
in residential streets are to be installed at the center of sublots and spaced
on an average of three hundred (300) feet apart. In commercial and industrial
areas, hydrants shall have an average spacing of two hundred fifty (250) feet
apart, with a maximum distance of two hundred eighty (280) feet apart.
(Ord. No. 1824-68. Passed 9-30-68, eff. 10-1-68)
§ 535.37 Using Water without Permission, Penalty – Repealed
(Ord. No. 178-2021. Passed 10-25-21, eff. 11-24-21)
§ 535.38 Waste of Water
   No person shall permit water to run when not in actual use, and the owner or
occupant of the premises must prevent all waste of water.
§ 535.39 Unmetered Service; Regulation of Sprinkling
   No person, when the service is not metered, shall sprinkle any lot, street
or sidewalk, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., nor more than five
(5) hours in any day.
§ 535.40 Unmetered Service; Yard Fountains
   Yard fountains, when the service is not metered, shall not be used longer
than three (3) hours per day during the summer season, unless especially
permitted and on additional payment. The right is reserved to suspend their use
whenever the public exigency may require it.
§ 535.41 Property Seller to Supply Statement of Status of Water Bill
   No person, agent, firm or corporation shall sell by deed, land contract or
otherwise any interest in any premises within the metropolitan area as defined
in Section
535.01 (a) which is supplied with City water without furnishing the buyer prior
to such sale, a statement from the Division of Water setting forth the current
status of the water account of the premises, and when an escrow has been
established, depositing in escrow prior to delivery of possession or transfer
of title a statement from the buyer acknowledging the receipt of this document
and accepting responsibility for all future water bills in accordance with
these Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 963-72. Passed 9-18-72, eff. 9-20-72)
§ 535.42 Escrow Agent Not to Disburse Funds without Statement
   No person, firm or corporation acting in the capacity of an escrow agent in
any real estate transaction involving the sale of any premises situated in the
metropolitan area as defined in Section
535.01 (a) which is supplied with City water shall disburse any funds unless
the provisions of Section
535.41 have been met.
(Ord. No. 963-72. Passed 9-18-72, eff. 9-20-72)
§ 535.43 Rights of Buyer
   Conviction under this section shall not be a bar to the rights of a buyer to
recover by civil suit from either the previous owner (seller), real estate
agent or escrow agent the amounts for water supplied to the previous owner and
paid by the buyer under the provisions of Section
535.44.
(Ord. No. 963-72. Passed 9-18-72, eff. 9-20-72)
§ 535.44 Reserved
§ 535.45 Water Use Emergency
   When the Director of Public Utilities determines that a shortage of water
supply exists which threatens the public health and safety and that the
shortage makes it necessary to curtail water use within all or any part of the
City the Director shall proclaim a water use emergency throughout all or any
part of the City.
   A water use emergency proclamation shall specify:
   (a)   The geographic area affected by the water use emergency;
   (b)   The length of time the emergency shall be in effect, which time shall
not exceed seven (7) days; and
   (c)   The degree of water use curtailment.
   During a water use emergency, the Director may order water use curtailment
by prohibiting unnecessary use or consumption of water during all or specified
hours of the day and/or may order that specified premises curtail necessary use
or consumption of water on specified days only as the Director shall determine
to be necessary.
   A proclamation of a water use emergency shall become effective at the time
of issuance by the Director. Notice thereof shall be given to a newspaper of
general circulation in the City and shall be reported to a local radio and
television station for broadcast.
   As used in this section, unnecessary use or consumption means the use or
consumption of water for purposes other than personal health, safety,
sanitation and bodily consumption. “Unnecessary use or consumption” of water
includes but is not limited to sprinkling or watering lawns, other land
irrigation, the washing of automobiles, houses or other structures and the use
of water for recreational purposes such as the maintenance of swimming pools.
The use of water for private construction such as the mixing and curing of
concrete, the puddling of backfill in excavations, the moistening of masonry
walls preparatory to pointing or sealing, and other similar uses is not an
unnecessary use or consumption of water. The use of water to scrub and rinse
areas such as hard-surfaced drives, garage floors, patios and similar uses
where necessary for the purpose of sanitation and the protection of health is
not an unnecessary use or consumption of water.
   No person or entity shall during a water use emergency use water in
violation of the terms and conditions of the Director’s water use emergency
proclamation.
   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. Whoever
violates this section having been previously convicted of a violation of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation or
noncompliance occurs or continues.
(Ord. No. 1760-88. Passed 6-12-89, eff. 6-19-89)
§ 535.46 Fees for Returned Checks
   The Division of Water shall charge an account holder under Section
535.06 of the Codified Ordinances for any check returned for lack of sufficient
funds.
(Ord. No. 778-06. Passed 6-5-06, eff. 6-9-06)
§ 535.99 Penalty
   Any person, firm or corporation including escrow agents, violating the
provisions of Sections
535.41 and
535.42, shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00).
(Ord. No. 963-72. Passed 9-18-72, eff. 9-20-72)
TITLE VII: SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
   Chapter
541   Sewer Connections and Sewer Use Code
   Chapter
543   Sewage Service Charges
CHAPTER 541 – SEWER CONNECTIONS AND SEWER USE CODE
541.01   Definitions
541.02   Jurisdiction Over Public Sewer System, Local Storm Sewer System and
Sewer Connections
541.03   Responsibility for Installation and Maintenance of Sewer Connections
541.04   Sewer Builder’s License and Bond
541.05   Sewer Connection Permits; Fee
541.06   Sewer Construction Requirements
541.07   Catch Basins
541.08   Storm Sewer Connections
541.081   Watercourse Protection
541.09   Sewer Inspection
541.10   Guarantee
541.11   Prohibition of Illicit Wastewater or Stormwater Discharges
541.12   Control of Unacceptable Discharges
541.13   Sewerage Test Tee Inspection, Installation, and Snaking
541.93   Strict Liability in Offenses
541.97   Abatement Orders; Stop Work Orders; Enforcement Procedures
541.98   Administration
541.99   Penalty
Charter reference:
   Sewer, water and other connections, Charter §
163
Cross-reference:
   Rules and regulations for sewerage system, CO
543.08
   Sewerage service charges; payment, CO
Ch. 543
   Tampering with or possessing manhole covers, CO
625.22,
625.23
Statutory reference:
   Compulsory sewer connections, RC 729.06
   Interference with sewage flow, RC 4933.24
   Management and control of sewerage system, RC 729.50
   Power to construct sewerage system, RC 715.40, 717.01
   Regulations to control house sewers and connections, RC 729.51
§ 541.01 Definitions
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following words, letters, and phrases,
or pronouns used in their stead, shall be construed as follows:
   (a)   "BOD" means biochemical oxygen demand, or the quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory conditions in five (5) days at twenty degrees Centigrade (20°C),
expressed in milligrams per liter.
   (b)   "Building drain" means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives, inside the walls of the building, the discharge
from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes, sump pumps, and other similar
conduits, and conveys it to the building sewer which begins three (3) feet
outside the building wall.
   (c)   "Building sewer" means that part of the horizontal piping of a
drainage system which extends from the end of the building drain, receives
discharge and conveys it to the public sewer, a private sewer, an individual
wastewater-disposal system, or other points of discharge.
   (d)   "C" means Centigrade degrees.
   (e)   "Capital financing charge" means that portion of the total sewer
charge assigned to each user to defray the cost of debt service on the sewer
system.
   (f)   "City" means the City of Cleveland, its officials and employees.
   (g)   "Clean Water Act" means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33
U.S.C. 1251 et seq.) and any subsequent amendments.
   (h)   "Combined sewer" means a sewer which intentionally serves as both a
sanitary sewer and a storm sewer.
   (i)   "Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Water Pollution Control.
   (j)   "Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses" means the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses of the City's Department of Finance.
   (k)   "Cooling water" means the water discharged from any use, including
without limitation air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, in the course of
which discharge the only pollutant added is heat.
   (l)   "Director" means the Director of Public Utilities.
   (m)   "Division of Streets" means the Division of Streets of the City's
Department of Public Works.
   (n)   "Domestic waste" means wastewater which originates as waste from
kitchens, water closets, lavatories, bathrooms and showers and which derives
principally from residences, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and
institutions.
   (o)   "F" means Fahrenheit.
   (p)   "Garbage" means solid waste from domestic or commercial preparation,
cooking and/or dispensing of food or from the handling, storage and/or sale of
produce.
   (q)   "Grease or fats" means any material which may be extracted from an
acidified sample of waste by the use of hexane or any other solvent designated
by the NEORSD or the Division of Water Pollution Control.
   (r)   "Hazardous materials" means any material, including any substance,
waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
   (s)   "Illicit connection" means either of the following:
      (1)   Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface that
allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system or natural
watercourse including, but not limited to, any conveyances that allows any non-
stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to
enter the storm drain system or natural watercourse and any connections to the
storm drain system from the indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said
drain or connection is new or preexisting; or
      (2)   Any drain or conveyance from a commercial or industrial land use to
the storm drain system or natural watercourse that has not been documented in
plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by the Division of Water
Pollution Control.
   (t)   "Illicit discharge" means any discharge to the local stormwater system
that is not composed entirely of stormwater with the exception of discharges
authorized under an NPDES permit (other than the NPDES permit for discharges
from the municipal sewer system) and discharges listed in the City of Cleveland
Division of Water Pollution Control's Illicit Discharge Detection and
Elimination Program Manual as not significant contributors.
   (u)   "Industrial activity" means activities subject to the NPDES Industrial
Storm Water Permits as defined in 40 C.F.R. 122.26(b)(14).
   (v)   "Industrial waste" means liquid waste resulting from processes
employed in industrial, manufacturing, trade or business establishments, and
does not include domestic waste of such establishments.
   (w)   "Lateral" means a tap made to the public sewer when said sewer is
originally installed, for the purposes of enabling future sewer connections to
be made.
   (x)   "Licensee" means a person to whom a sewer builder's license is issued.
   (y)   "Stormwater system" means the entire system of natural watercourses,
stormwater conveyance structures, or stormwater control and shall include those
natural watercourses that are wholly or partially within the political
subdivision of the City of Cleveland.
   (z)   "mg/l" means milligrams per liter.
   (aa)   "Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4)" means the system of
conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch
basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains) owned or
operated by the Federal government, State government, municipality, township,
county, district or other public body (created by or under State or Federal
law) including special districts under State law such as a sewer district,
flood control district, or drainage district, or similar entity or a designated
and approved management agency under Section 208 of the Clean Water Act that
discharges into surface waters of the State; and designed or used for
collecting or conveying solely stormwater, that is not a combined sewer, and
that is not part of a publicly owned treatment works.
   (bb)   "National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Discharge
Permit" means a permit issued by US EPA (or by the State of Ohio or NEORSD
under authority delegated under 33 U.S.C. 1342) that authorizes the discharge
of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable
to an individual, group, or general area-wide basis.
   (cc)   "NEORSD" means the Northeast Ohio Regional Sewer District.
   (dd)   "Permittee" means a person to whom a sewer connection permit is
issued.
   (ee)   "Person" means any individual, association, organization,
partnership, firm, corporation, the state, or any political subdivision, or
other entity including a property owner.
   (ff)   "pH" means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of
hydrogen ions in gram equivalents per liter.
   (gg)   "Pollutant" means anything that causes or contributes to pollution.
Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: dredged soil; paints,
varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid
or solid wastes, or yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other
discarded or abandoned objects; ordinances, and accumulations, so that the same
may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables, pesticides, herbicides, and
fertilizers; hazardous materials, substances and wastes; radioactive materials;
biological materials; medical waste; sewage, sewage sludge, fecal coliform and
pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; human wastes;
wastes or residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and
noxious of offensive matter of any kind.
   (hh)   "Premises" means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of
land, whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking
strips.
   (ii)   "Pretreatment" means the application of physical, chemical, and/or
biological processes to wastewater to reduce the amount of pollutants or to
alter the nature of the pollutant properties of the wastewater prior to its
discharge into a public sewer.
   (jj)   "Public sewer" means a sewer which is owned and/or controlled by a
governmental entity.
   (kk)   "Roadway" means that portion of a street which is used for vehicular
travel.
   (ll)   "Sanitary sewer" means a sewer which carries domestic, commercial,
and industrial wastewater, and limited amounts of stormwater, surface or ground
water.
   (mm)   "Sewer" means a pipe or conduit, other than a sewer connection, which
is located in the street and carries stormwater, surface water, groundwater or
wastewater.
   (nn)   "Sewer connection" means that privately owned portion of a building
sewer that connects the privately owned portion of a building sewer to a public
sewer.
   (oo)   "Sewer connection permit" means a permit issued by the City which
authorizes the permittee to install, extend, maintain or repair a sewer
connection or a portion.
   (pp)   "Sewer service charge" means the total sewer charge assigned to each
user, which charge consists of a user charge and a capital financing charge.
   (qq)   "Sewer system" means the network of sewers within the City's
corporate boundaries, which are owned by, or are under the jurisdiction of the
City.
   (rr)   "Storm sewer" means a sewer which carries storm, surface or ground
water, including cooling water and unpolluted industrial process water, but
excluding wastewater and industrial waste.
   (ss)   "Storm water" or "Stormwater" means any storm water runoff, snow melt
runoff, and surface runoff and drainage.
   (tt)   "Stormwater Management Plan" means a document that describes the BMPs
and activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify sources of
pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce
pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems, and/or
receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable.
   (uu)   "Street" means the entire width between the boundary lines of every
way dedicated to the public use as a thoroughfare for the purpose of vehicular
and pedestrian travel.
   (vv)   "Surcharge" means a charge added to the sewer service charge to cover
operation and maintenance costs incurred in the treatment of extra- strength
wastes.
   (ww)   "Suspended solids" means suspended matter that floats on the surface
of or is suspended in water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is
removable by laboratory filtering.
   (xx)   "Unpolluted industrial process water" means water used in industrial
or manufacturing processes which is sufficiently free of pollutants to qualify
for an NPDES permit.
   (yy)   "User" means a user of the sewer system.
   (zz)   "User charge" means that portion of the total sewer charge assigned
to each user to defray the user's proportionate share of the cost of operation,
maintenance and replacement of the sewer system.
   (aaa)   "Wastewater" means a combination of water-borne waste from
residences, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions, and
such ground, surface, or storm water as may be present.
(Ord. No. 609-17. Passed 6-4-18, eff. 6-5-18)
§ 541.02 Jurisdiction Over Public Sewer System, Local Storm Sewer System and
Sewer Connections
   (a)   The public sewer system, sanitary sewer system, stormwater system and
all sewer connections within the street shall be under the jurisdiction and
control of the Director with the assistance of the Commissioner of the Division
of Water Pollution Control. As defined in this chapter, the stormwater system
shall include those natural watercourses that are wholly or partially within
the political subdivision of the City of Cleveland. This jurisdiction and
control also includes jurisdiction and control over any and all materials
placed or discharged into the public sewer system and stormwater system and all
sewer connections within the street, and all natural watercourses wholly or
partially within the political subdivision of the City, in order to protect the
public health, safety, property and environment, including by preventing or
mitigating potentially harmful discharges of water pollution into the sewer
system and environment.
   (b)   The Commissioner of Water Pollution Control is hereby authorized and
directed to enforce the provisions of this chapter, to administer and direct
the Division of Water Pollution Control, and to establish policies, procedures,
and standards for its efficient operation, to review plans and specifications,
to issue sewer permits, to conduct inspections, to issue rules and regulations
for the operation of the Division consistent with this chapter, to maintain
records and make reports, and to perform such other duties and activities that
may be necessary to execute the provisions of this chapter.
   (c)   The Commissioner of Water Pollution Control is also hereby authorized
to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter under the City of
Cleveland's Best Management Practices and stormwater management program
required under the City of Cleveland's Ohio EPA NPDES Permit No.: OHQ000003
effective on the date of passage of this section, and also under subsequently
issued permits. This program and accompanying appendices, and any revisions, is
adopted by reference and declared to be part of this chapter. It is on file
with the City of Cleveland Public Administration Library, 601 Lakeside Avenue,
Cleveland, OH 44114. The Commissioner is to be the primary point of contact
under that program as described in its table of organization for how
administration and enforcement of implementation of the program across multiple
positions, agencies, and departments will occur.
(Ord. No. 609-17. Passed 6-4-18, eff. 6-5-18)
§ 541.03 Responsibility for Installation and Maintenance of Sewer Connections
   (a)   That portion of a sewer connection which extends from the public sewer
to approximately one (1) foot beyond the existing or proposed curb line of the
roadway may be installed originally by a licensed sewer builder or by the
Division of Water Pollution Control. In either case, installation shall be at
the expense of the property owner whose premises are drained by the sewer
connection under rules and regulations promulgated by the Commissioner. The
cost of any work performed by the Division of Water Pollution Control shall be
under Section
543.03 of the Codified Ordinances.
   (b)   Once installed, the portion of a sewer connection described in
division (a) of this section shall be maintained by the Division of Water
Pollution Control.
   (c)   That portion of a sewer connection which extends from approximately
one (1) foot beyond the existing or proposed curb line of the roadway toward
the property to be drained by the sewer connection shall be installed and
maintained by a licensed sewer builder at the expense of the property owner
whose premises are drained by the sewer connection, and under rules and
regulations promulgated by the Commissioner. On application by the sewer
builder, the City shall furnish the information as it possesses relative to the
location and depth of the sewer connection at the existing or proposed curb
line of the roadway. The City shall not guarantee the correctness of the
information, and shall not be liable for any error arising from the
information.
   (d)   Once installed, the portion of a sewer connection described in
division (c) of this section shall be maintained by the property owner whose
premises are drained by the sewer connection.
   (e)   For new construction of houses or buildings, that portion of a sewer
connection which extends from the public sewer to approximately one (1) foot
beyond the existing or proposed curb line of the roadway shall be made using a
sewer connection made of new material unless the existing connection is in good
working condition. Connections that are older than fifty (50) years old are
deemed to be in poor working condition unless a person seeking to continue to
use the existing connection demonstrates to the Commissioner that it is in good
working condition, and such determination shall be within the discretion of the
Commissioner.
(Ord. No. 609-17. Passed 6-4-18, eff. 6-5-18)
§ 541.04 Sewer Builder’s License and Bond
   (a)   No person shall install, extend, maintain, or repair any sewer
connection or do any related work without first obtaining a sewer builder's
license from the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses.
   (b)   Before issuing a sewer builder's license, each applicant shall pay a
license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) and shall submit to the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses an application on the form containing:
      (1)   A certificate satisfactory to and signed by the Commissioner of
Water Pollution Control that the applicant agrees to comply with the Codified
Ordinances and any rules and regulations promulgated by the Director or the
Commissioner under this chapter;
      (2)   For each applicant who has never been licensed and bonded as a
sewer builder, and for each sewer builder who has failed to renew his or her
license and bond for a period of one (1) year or more, a certificate signed by
at least two (2) reputable sewer builders to the effect that the applicant is
known to them to be qualified to perform the work of a sewer builder; and
      (3)   A bond in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) with a
surety company authorized to write surety bonds in the State. The bond shall be
acceptable in form and content to the Director of Law, and shall state:
         A.   That the licensee indemnifies and holds harmless the City from
any and all loss, injury, or damage caused by, related to, or resulting from
the want of care, skill, or attention on the part of himself, herself or of
anyone in his or her employ, in the prosecution, protection, or completion of
any work, or by reason of any opening made, caused, or permitted to be made by
him or her or by anyone in his or her employ, or by the placing of any material
in any street;
         B.   That the licensee will employ only experienced pipe layers to lay
any pipe or drain;
         C.   That the licensee will reimburse the City for replacing and
restoring the street pavement and earth over any opening made by him or her;
         D.   That the licensee's operations and work shall conform in all
respects to the Codified Ordinances and any and all rules and regulations which
are now in existence or may from time to time be promulgated by the Division of
Water Pollution Control and the Division of Streets; and
         E.   That if the licensee performs all of his or her obligations under
the license and bond, the surety's obligation shall cease, but if the City is
unable to obtain satisfaction of any of the licensee's obligations under the
license and bond, the City may look to the surety for satisfaction.
   (c)   No sewer builder's license shall be issued until the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses has received the application and payment required by
division (b) of this section, and has approved the applicant's bond.
   (d)   The sewer builder's license shall state the name of the licensee, firm
name if any, address of the licensee's place of business, and date of issue.
The license shall be signed by the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses,
and shall be valid until the thirty-first (31st) day of December in an even-
numbered year after it is issued, unless it is revoked before that date under
division (f) of this section.
   (e)   No licensed sewer builder shall allow his or her name to be used to
obtain any permit for the prosecution of any sewer connection work, or allow
anyone in his or her employ to do the work unless the licensee, or one (1) of
his or her regularly employed foremen is personally at the location of the work
to superintend and direct the work.
   (f)   If the Commissioner determines that a licensee has violated any of the
provisions of this chapter or any rules, regulations or orders of the Division
of Water Pollution Control or the Division of Streets, the Commissioner may
revoke that person's license under Section
541.97.
(Ord. No. 609-17. Passed 6-4-18, eff. 6-5-18)
§ 541.05 Sewer Connection Permits; Fee
   (a)   No person shall make any tap to any sewer, repair or remove any sewer
connection, or make any excavation for that purpose without first obtaining
from the Commissioner a separate sewer connection permit for each such tap or
connection.
   (b)   When a sewer connection or a portion is in place, and the application
for a sewer connection permit contemplates installation, extension or
maintenance of that portion of the sewer connection which extends from one (1)
foot beyond the existing or proposed curb line of the roadway toward the
property to be drained by the sewer connection, the sewer builder may commence
his or her work only after obtaining a sewer builder's license, a sewer
connection permit, and the permit required by the Division of Streets under
Section
3115.18.
   (c)   When the application for a sewer connection permit contemplates the
installation of any portion of the connection which extends from the public
sewer to one (1) foot beyond the existing or proposed curb line of the roadway,
the sewer builder may commence his or her work only after obtaining a sewer
builder's license, a sewer connection permit, and the street openings permit
required by the Office of Capital Projects under Section
503.01.
   (d)   Each applicant for a sewer connection permit shall submit to the
Commissioner the following:
      (1)   An application on the prescribed form containing:
         A.   A complete and intelligible sketch and specifications showing the
existing or proposed sewer, sewer connection or plumbing and the location and
character of the work, all in detail;
         B.   A schedule of all fixtures, taps, and branches for future sewer
connections;
         C.   A statement, signed by the owner for whose benefit the sewer
connection is to be made, that the owner and each succeeding owner shall, in
consideration of the privilege granted, hold harmless the City for any and all
loss, injury or damage that may in any way result from or be caused by the work
contemplated by issuance of the permit; and
         D.   Any other information which the City may require in order to
determine the acceptability of the probable discharge from the proposed sewer
connection.
      (2)   A sewer connection fee in an amount determined by the Director and
approved by the Board of Control.
   (e)   Sewer connection permits shall be issued only to licensed sewer
builders; shall designate the street and number of the house and sublot on
which the sewer connection is to be made; and shall include a description of
the premises on which the sewer connection is to be made sufficient to clearly
define the location. The sewer connection permit shall be valid for a period of
thirty (30) days from the date of issuance, unless revoked prior to that date
under division (j) of this section.
   (f)   All permits required by divisions (a), (b) and (c) of this section
shall be kept at the site of the work at all times while the work is in
progress.
   (g)   No sewer connection permit shall be issued for any sewer connection
which could result in a downstream flow in excess of the capacity of the
downstream facilities.
   (h)   Whenever a property owner proposes installation of a sewer connection
which would drain more than one (1) lot, the sewer connection permit
application shall give the correct dimensions and description of each of the
several lots which are intended to be drained by the sewer connection. In such
a case, no sewer connection permit shall be issued for any lot unless and until
the property owner has paid to the City that proportion of the sewer
improvement assessment which is attributable to all of the several lots.
   (i)   No person who has installed or performed any work on a sewer
connection under division (b) of this section shall relay any sidewalk or
portion of any sidewalk without first obtaining the permit required by the
Office of Capital Projects under Section
505.04.
   (j)   If the Commissioner determines that a permittee has violated any of
the provisions of this chapter or any rules, regulations or orders of the
Division of Water Pollution Control, the Commissioner shall revoke that
person's sewer connection permit under Section
541.97.
(Ord. No. 609-17. Passed 6-4-18, eff. 6-5-18)
§ 541.06 Sewer Construction Requirements
   (a)   All piping used in the installation of sewers or sewer connections
shall be of the best quality socket pipe of a kind acceptable to the
Commissioner. No pipe smaller than six (6) inches in diameter shall be used for
any sewer connection.
   (b)   All sewers and sewer connections shall be designed and installed in
accordance with the City Building Code and the latest edition of "Design and
Construction of Sanitary and Storm Sewers," prepared by the Joint Committee of
the American Society of Civil Engineers and the Water Pollution Control
Federation.
   (c)   Each portion of a sewer connection shall be laid in as direct and
straight a line as ground conditions permit from the public sewer to the
property line of the premises to be drained. All pipes shall be laid by the use
of a spirit level to a grade of not less than one (1) foot per one hundred
(100) feet. The best Portland cement and clean sand shall be placed in and
around each joint so that all joints are watertight.
   (d)   All openings made by a licensed sewer builder within the street for
the purpose of laying sewers or sewer connections shall be done in an open
trench. All paving material, flagging, curb and ballasting shall be carefully
removed and preserved. After the connection is properly laid, the trench shall
be backfilled in accordance with rules and regulations of the Division of
Streets. Paving materials, flagging and curb shall be replaced by the City at
the property owner's expense.
   (e)   All openings and obstructions in any street shall be carefully guarded
and protected at all times, and during the night time shall be defined by
colored lights. Every other precaution necessary to guard against accidents
shall be taken. At all times the work shall be done in a manner that causes the
least inconvenience to property owners and the general public.
   (f)   Whenever Council by resolution orders the paving or repaving of any
street following installation of a sewer, the Director of Finance shall notify
the abutting property owners, in writing, to make such sewer and water
connections as he or she may designate within a time specified in the notice.
If the required connections are not made within the time specified, the
Director shall cause them to be made and shall obtain reimbursement through the
use of a special assessment against abutting property owners. Nothing in this
section shall be construed to require abutting property owners to make any
payment other than the original cost of constructing sewer and water
connections as provided in division (a) of Section
541.03.
   (g)   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent any licensed sewer builder from
installing laterals as part of any contract work approved by and being
performed under the inspection of the City.
(Ord. No. 609-17. Passed 6-4-18, eff. 6-5-18)
§ 541.07 Catch Basins
   No unacceptable discharge or obstruction of any kind shall be placed, thrown
or deposited in any catch basin. No person shall break, remove, or cause to be
broken or removed any portion of any catch basin, manhole, sewer or
appurtenance, or obstruct in any way the inlet or outlet of any public sewer.
(Ord. No. 609-17. Passed 6-4-18, eff. 6-5-18)
§ 541.08 Storm Sewer Connections
   (a)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into any sanitary
sewer any stormwater, surface or ground water, roof runoff, subsurface
drainage, cooling water or unpolluted industrial process water.
   (b)   Stormwater, surface or ground water, roof runoff and subsurface
drainage shall be discharged to storm sewers or combined sewers, or when
approved in writing by the Commissioner, to a natural watercourse, or as
authorized in division (b) of Section
3133.05 of the Codified Ordinances.
   (c)   Any person who has received an NPDES permit and written approval from
the Commissioner may discharge cooling water and/or unpolluted industrial
process water or unpolluted ground water into a storm sewer, a combined sewer
or a natural watercourse provided that the discharger is in full compliance
with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order, and other applicable
laws and regulations.
   (d)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the
stormwater system, including any local natural watercourse, any sanitary sewage
or materials or substances, including but not limited to pollutants or waters
containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable
water quality standards, or are deemed to be unacceptable including, without
limitation, those that have been determined by the Commissioner of Water
Pollution Control to be unacceptable as described in Section
541.11.
(Ord. No. 609-17. Passed 6-4-18, eff. 6-5-18)
§ 541.081 Watercourse Protection
   Every person owning property in the City of Cleveland through which a
watercourse passes, including such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain
that part of the watercourse within their property free of trash, debris,
excessive vegetation, pollution and other obstacles that would pollute,
contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse.
In addition, the owner, including their lessee, shall maintain existing
privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that
structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity
of the watercourse.
(Ord. No. 609-17. Passed 6-4-18, eff. 6-5-18)
§ 541.09 Sewer Inspection
   (a)   A sewer inspector, designated by the Commissioner, shall inspect all
new sewers and sewer connections. The sewer builder shall request such an
inspection at least six (6) hours on a regular business day before the sewer
inspection is desired. The sewer builder shall uncover any work that has been
covered, and shall afford the inspector the opportunity to inspect both the
interior and the exterior of the pipe.
   (b)   The Commissioner shall be the final judge of the quality and
acceptability of all sewer materials, workmanship and work, and shall have the
right to inspect the same at all times.
   (c)   The Commissioner shall have free access to all buildings and fixtures
that are a part of the building's drainage system for the purpose of inspecting
the fixtures and determining compliance with this ordinance, and may conduct
dye tests, camera inspections and take samples of any wastes entering the
building drain. The Commissioner, in his or her sole discretion, may require
users to install control manholes to facilitate the sampling, measurement and
observation of wastes discharged into the sewer system. An owner or occupant of
a property that receives written notice from the Commissioner that such tests
or inspections will be performed under this section shall contact the
Commissioner to schedule such tests or inspections at the property. The
Commissioner may terminate the water service to the premises where the owner
and occupant fails to comply with this section.
   (d)   The actual tapping of a sewer connection to the public sewer shall be
done only in the presence of an authorized Water Pollution Control inspector.
   (e)   The Commissioner shall also have free access to examine and copy any
records that must be kept under the condition of an NPDES permit or stormwater
pollution prevention plan.
   (f)   The Commissioner may require the discharger to install monitoring
equipment as necessary. A facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be
maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the
dischargers at its own expense. All devices used to measure flow and quality
shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
(Ord. No. 609-17. Passed 6-4-18, eff. 6-5-18)
§ 541.10 Guarantee
   (a)   Every permittee who installs, extends, maintains or repairs a sewer
connection shall guarantee that the work performed by him or her will remain in
good condition for a period of one (1) year following the inspection required
by division (a) of Section
541.09.
   (b)   If at any time during the one (1) year guarantee period, the
Commissioner finds defects or omissions in the permittee's work, or finds that
the work is in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or requires
repairs for causes which are attributable to the permittee's work, all as
determined by the Commissioner, the Commissioner shall notify the permittee to
rectify the defects or omissions, or to make the necessary repairs.
   (c)   If the permittee fails to begin the rectification or repair within
five (5) days from the date he or she receives notice under division (b) of
this section, the Commissioner may cause the rectification or repair to be
effected at the permittee's expense.
(Ord. No. 609-17. Passed 6-4-18, eff. 6-5-18)
§ 541.11 Prohibition of Illicit Wastewater or Stormwater Discharges
   (a)   No person shall discharge or cause or allow to be discharged into the
sewer system or stormwater system, including, but not limited to, any natural
watercourse within the City of Cleveland, any pollutants, wastewater,
materials, or substances that are not permitted by an NPDES, or are the
following types of discharges, which are deemed to be unacceptable by the
Commissioner, and thus prohibited, under this chapter:
      (1)   Constitute a hazard to life and limb of personnel engaged in
inspection, maintenance, or operation of the system or to persons who may come
in contact with discharges from the sewer system;
      (2)   Constitutes or creates a substantial potential or actual hazard to
human health, safety, property, or the environment if improperly treated,
stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed;
      (3)   Contain properties which may be detrimental to the functional
integrity or operation of sewers or pumping stations, or which are in any way
deleterious to any part of the sewer system including stormwater system;
      (4)   Produce excessive odors or in any other way constitute or create a
public nuisance;
      (5)   Be in violation of any rule or regulation for sewer use or for the
prevention or control of water pollution adopted by the NEORSD, Cuyahoga County
or any other agency responsible for sewers, the stormwater system, pumping
stations, or other system components into which the wastewater is discharged;
      (6)   Cause the City to incur unreasonable expense in its handling or
treatment;
      (7)   Be of such a volume or be discharged at such a rate as to exceed
the capacity of any part of the sewer system;
      (8)   Directly or indirectly cause water pollution in violation of any
permit conditions or State or Federal regulations;
      (9)   Contain concentrations of any toxic or deleterious material or
substance that are prohibited or are in excess of limits set by other
provisions of this chapter; or
      (10)   Constitutes a discharge of sanitary sewage to a stormwater sewer
or a public right-of-way or on to a neighboring property.
   (b)   No person shall discharge or cause or allow to be discharged into the
sewer system or stormwater system, including, but not limited to any natural
watercourse in the City of Cleveland, the following types of discharges, which
are deemed by the Commissioner to be unacceptable, and thus prohibited, under
this chapter:
      (1)   Liquids, solids, or gases which by reason of their nature or
quantity are, or may be sufficient, either alone or by interaction with other
substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the
sewerage facilities or to the operation of the system. Materials of this nature
include, but are not limited to, hazardous materials or substances, gasoline,
kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones,
aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and
sulfides;
      Discharges of this nature must be monitored to ensure that the Lower
Explosive Limit (L.E.L.) of the explosion hazard meter located at the point of
discharge into the sewer system is never exceeded by five percent (5%) in any
two (2) successive readings or by ten percent (10%) in any single reading;
      (2)   Gaseous, liquid or solid substances which when discharged into the
sewer system or local stormwater system, including, but not limited to any
watercourse in the City of Cleveland, may alone or by interaction with other
substances interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard
to human beings or animals, inhibit aquatic life, create a hazard to recreation
in the receiving waters or the effluent from the wastewater treatment plant or
create a hazard as defined in the Federal Clean Water Act;
      (3)   Construction materials, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings,
metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, asphalt, plastic, wood, paunch manure,
bones, hair, hides or fleshing, grass clippings, wastepaper, or any solid or
viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or of
otherwise interfering with the proper operation of the sewer system;
      (4)   Water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100) mg/l or which contains
substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between one
degree Centigrade (1°C) and sixty-five degrees Centigrade (65°C) at the point
of discharge into the system;
      (5)   Water, waste or steam with a temperature in excess of sixty-five
degrees Centigrade (65°C) (one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F));
      (6)   Water or waste having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 10.0 or
which may cause corrosion or deterioration of the system. Materials of this
nature include, but are not limited to, acids, alkalies, sulfides, concentrated
chloride and fluoride compounds and substances which will react with water to
form acidic products;
      (7)   Water or waste containing total cyanide in excess of five (5) mg/
l or containing "readily releasable cyanide" (cyanide released at a temperature
of sixty-five degrees Centigrade (65°C) (one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit
(150°F)) and pH of 2.5) in excess of two (2) mg/l;
      (8)   Radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration
that they violate regulations or orders issued by the authority having control
over their use and/or may cause damage or hazards to the sewer system, human
beings or animals;
      (9)   Solids, liquids, or gases which, either alone or by interaction
with other substances in the sewer system, are capable of producing
objectionable odors or colors or which may otherwise constitute or create a
public nuisance;
      (10)   Garbage that has not been ground or comminuted to such a degree
that all particles will be carried freely in suspension under flow conditions
normally prevailing in the sewer system with no particle greater than one-half
(1/2) inch in any dimension;
      (11)   Wastewater flow rates which exceed the design capacity of any
component of the sewer system; or
      (12)   Water which increases the hydraulic load on the sewer system,
including but not limited to cooling, storm, surface, subsurface, drainage,
swimming pool or other relatively unpolluted water.
   (c)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent any agreement or
arrangement between the City or the NEORSD and any user of the sewer system in
which the user may deposit unacceptable discharges into the system for special
treatment subject to applicable payments or surcharges over and above any
surcharges for transportation to and treatment in the NEORSD system.
   (e)   No person shall discharge stormwater, surface water, or ground water
to a public right-of-way or on to a neighboring property in violation of
Section
541.08 or in a manner that creates a flooding or safety hazard, or public
nuisance.
(Ord. No. 609-17. Passed 6-4-18, eff. 6-5-18)
§ 541.12 Control of Unacceptable Discharges
   (a)   If pollutants or wastewater containing any of the unacceptable
substances described in Section
541.11 of this chapter are discharged or proposed to be discharged into the
sewer system or stormwater system, including but not limited to any watercourse
in the City of Cleveland, or into any sewer system tributary, in addition to
any other remedies provided in this chapter, including Section
541.97 or Section
541.99, the Commissioner may:
      (1)   Prohibit the continued or proposed discharge of such wastewater;
      (2)   Require the discharger to implement on-site modifications to reduce
or eliminate the discharge of such substances in conformity with this chapter;
      (3)   Require pretreatment or the creation of storage facilities for flow
equalization to render the discharge acceptable;
      (4)   Where applicable, require the installation of grease, oil or sand
interceptors; or
      (5)   Take such other remedial action as the Commissioner deems desirable
or necessary to achieve the purposes of this chapter.
   (b)   Any person whose discharge is determined to be unacceptable within the
meaning of this chapter or of the NEORSD Sewer Use Code may apply to the
Commissioner for permission to render such discharge acceptable by
pretreatment. The Commissioner may approve pretreatment which complies with all
requirements and conditions of this chapter and the NEORSD Sewer Use Code.
   (c)   Where the Commissioner requires pretreatment or equalization of
wastewater flows:
      (1)   Plans, specifications and other pertinent data or information
relating to pretreatment or flow equalization facilities required under
division (a)(3) of this section shall be submitted to the Commissioner for
review and approval prior to their implementation. No subsequent alterations or
additions to such facilities shall be made without prior notice to and approval
of the Commissioner. Notwithstanding any approval by the Commissioner,
discharges from such facilities must comply with applicable codes, ordinances,
rules, regulations or orders of all governmental authorities having
jurisdiction over unacceptable discharges;
      (2)   Pretreatment and flow equalization facilities shall be maintained
in good working order and operated efficiently by the owner at his or her own
expense, and shall comply with the requirements of this chapter and all other
applicable codes, ordinances, laws, rules and regulations. If for any reason, a
facility does not or cannot comply with any provision of this chapter, the
owner or person responsible for the facility shall immediately notify the
Commissioner so that action may be taken to protect persons, property and the
sewer system.
(Ord. No. 609-17. Passed 6-4-18, eff. 6-5-18)
§ 541.13 Sewerage Test Tee Inspection, Installation, and Snaking
   (a)   The Division of Water Pollution Control is authorized to enter upon
private property, with the permission of the owner of the property, for the
purpose of snaking sewer connections to locate blockages within the City's
sewer system. Snaking of sewer connections may be performed by the City from an
existing test tee or by digging an opening one (1) foot beyond the existing or
proposed curb line of the roadway.
   If the blockage is in the main sewer or between the main sewer and a point
one (1) foot beyond the existing or proposed curb line of the roadway, repairs
shall be made by the Division of Water Pollution Control. If the blockage is
between the building and the point one (1) foot beyond the existing or proposed
curb line of the roadway, the Division of Water Pollution Control shall advise
the owner to engage a licensed and bonded sewer builder to make the necessary
repairs.
   (b)   Where there is no existing test tee, the Division of Water Pollution
Control is authorized to install a test tee at the opening one (1) foot beyond
the existing or proposed curb line of the roadway for the purpose of future
inspections.
   (c)   The Director of Public Utilities shall make and enforce the
regulations as he or she may deem necessary for the implementation and
management of the work authorized by this section. The regulations, when
published in the City Record, shall have the same force and effect as
ordinances of the City.
   (d)   The Director of Public Utilities is authorized to make a written
requirement contract under the Charter and the Codified Ordinances of
Cleveland, Ohio, 1976, for the requirements for the necessary items of material
and labor to investigate and camera inspect, snake existing sewer connections,
install test tees where none exist, and clean up sewage or wastewater, to be
purchased by the Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies on a unit basis for the
Division of Water Pollution Control, Department of Public Utilities. Bids shall
be taken in a manner to permit an award to be made for all items as a single
contract, or by separate contract for each or any combination of the items as
the Board of Control shall determine.
   The cost of said contract or contracts shall be charged against the proper
appropriation account and the Director of Finance shall certify thereon the
amount of any purchase under the contract, each of which purchases shall be
made on order of the Commissioner of Purchases and Supplies by a delivery order
issued against the contract or contracts and certified by the Director of
Finance.
   That under Section
108(b) of the Charter, the purchases authorized by this section may be made
through cooperative arrangements with other governmental agencies. The Director
of Public Utilities may sign all documents that are necessary to make the
purchases, and may enter into one or more contracts with the vendors selected
through that cooperative process.
(Ord. No. 609-17. Passed 6-4-18, eff. 6-5-18)
§ 541.93 Strict Liability in Offenses
   The Council enacts this chapter in furtherance of the protection of the
health and safety of the public and environment. The provisions of this chapter
are specifically intended to impose strict liability.
(Ord. No. 609-17. Passed 6-4-18, eff. 6-5-18)
§ 541.97 Abatement Orders; Stop Work Orders; Enforcement Procedures
   (a)   Whenever the Commissioner finds that any person has violated or is
violating any provision of this chapter concerning sewer connections or
discharges, in addition to any other remedy provided under this chapter, the
Commissioner may issue a written order to remedy the violation. The order shall
state the nature of the violation and shall provide that all illegal discharges
shall cease, and under division (e) of this section all work shall cease on the
sewer connection that are the subject of the order until all violations have
been remedied. The Commissioner may order that a remedy must be effected within
twenty-four (24) hours after receipt of the order or sooner to prevent,
minimize, or eliminate harm to human health, property, or the environment. The
Commissioner shall forward notice by certified mail to the owner, agent, or
person in control of the building, structure or portion of the building or
structure. The handing of the notice or order to that owner, agent, or person
in control shall be deemed actual notice and is legal and valid service. No
other form of service is necessary. If a person to whom a notice and order is
addressed is not found after a reasonable and diligent search, then the notice
and order shall be sent by certified mail to his or her tax mailing address, if
available, as indicated on the County tax duplicate, and a copy of the notice
shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises to which it relates. The
mailing and notice shall be deemed legal service of the notice and order.
   (b)   If a violation is not remedied within the time period specified in
division (a) of this section, in addition to any other remedy provided under
this chapter, the Commissioner may order revocation of the sewer builder's
license and the sewer connection permit of the person who is charged with the
violation (the "person charged") and may cause the violation to be remedied at
the expense of the person charged.
   (c)   In the event that a violation is remedied after the time period
specified in division (a) of this section, and the person charged desires to
continue his or her work, he or she must reapply for the license and permits
required by Section
541.04 and Section
541.05.
   (d)   Prohibition. No person shall violate any provision of this chapter, or
fail to comply with any order issued under it, or cause or permit the same to
be done.
   (e)   Stop Work Orders.
      (1)   Upon notice from the Commissioner or any other administrative
officer having jurisdiction that work on any sewer, connection, or activity is
being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter, such work shall be
immediately stopped.
      (2)   Such notice shall be in writing and be given to the owner of the
property, his or her agent, or the person doing the work, and shall state the
conditions under which work may be resumed. However, in instances where
immediate action is deemed necessary to protect human health, property, or the
environment, the Commissioner or administrative officer having jurisdiction may
require the work or activity be stopped upon verbal order pending the issuance
of a written order.
   (f)   In case the owner, agent, or person in control, fails, neglects, or
refuses to comply with a notice or order issued under this chapter, or to
remove or abate any other condition that is defined as a nuisance or illegal
discharge under this chapter, the Commissioner, in addition to any other
remedies under this chapter, may take appropriate action to take repair or
maintenance measures at the expense of the property owner, agent, or person in
control.
   (g)   Civil Actions. Whenever the Commissioner finds that any person has
violated or is violating any provision of this chapter concerning illegal
connections or unacceptable discharges, in addition to any other remedies under
this chapter, may order in writing that the violation cease immediately, and
such person violating or who has violated this chapter shall pay a civil
penalty of no more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day of violation.
   (h)   Action by Director of Law. The Commissioner may advise the Director of
Law of the facts in a matter, who in addition to other legal remedies that may
be available, may institute appropriate action in court to cause correction of
the violations and defects, or abatement or removal of the violation. Such
action includes, but is not limited to, instituting an appropriate action in
law or in equity to restrain the illegal discharge or nuisance, to compel its
abatement, or prevent the use of the sewer system.
   (i)   Procedure on Appeals. Appeals of persons adversely affected by a
notice of violation or an order of the Commissioner issued under this section
shall be heard and decided by the Board of Zoning Appeals under the following
procedures:
      (1)   A written notice of appeal must be filed with the Board of Zoning
Appeals under the rules for filing notices of appeals. Such notice shall be
filed within thirty (30) days after the decision from which the appeal is taken
and specifying the grounds for the appeal. However, in the case of a discharge
or condition that presents potential or actual harm to human health, property
or the environment, the Commissioner, in his or her order, may limit the time
for such appeal to a shorter period;
      (2)   A copy of the notice of appeal and grounds for appeal shall also be
sent to the Commissioner of Water Pollution Control;
      (3)   Filing a notice of appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance
of the action appealed from except an order of the Commissioner terminating
water service under this chapter or in the case of any other notice or order if
the officer or agency from whom the appeal is taken files with the Board, after
notice of appeal has been filed with the officer or agency, a certificate, a
copy of which shall forthwith be mailed to the appellant at the address stated
in the notice of appeal, that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a
stay would in the officer's or agency's opinion cause immediate peril to life,
property or the environment. In either case proceedings shall not be stayed
otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the Board, or by
a court of competent jurisdiction upon application, and upon notice to the
officer or agency from whom the appeal is taken on due cause shown and in
accordance with the Ohio Rules of Civil Procedure;
      (4)   The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of appeals
and give due notice thereof to the parties, and decide the same within a
reasonable time. At the hearing any party may appear in person, or by agent or
attorney;
      (5)   If the Board affirms the order of the Commissioner, the person
charged may reapply for the license and permits required by Section
541.04 and Section
541.05, and if the Commissioner has not caused the remedy of the violation
which was the subject of his or her order, the person charged must remedy the
violation before continuing any work under his or her license and permits;
      (6)   If the Board disaffirms the order of the Commissioner, the sewer
builder's license and sewer connection permit shall be restored to the person
charged; and
      (7)   Except where the Board of Zoning Appeals has disaffirmed the order
of the Commissioner, any person who violates the provisions of this chapter
concerning sewer connections shall pay all expenses incurred and damages
resulting from the violation.
(Ord. No. 609-17. Passed 6-4-18, eff. 6-5-18)
§ 541.98 Administration
   (a)   For the purpose of administration of this chapter, the Commissioner
shall, at all times, have free access to the premises of any user of the sewer
system, and to the premises of any person reasonably believed by the
Commissioner to be a user or potential user of the sewer system. The access may
be for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement and/or testing. The
Commissioner shall reasonably protect and treat as confidential any trade
secrets or proprietary information which it obtains from the entry.
   (b)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to restrict or in any way
limit the jurisdiction of the NEORSD or any other governmental authority having
jurisdiction over sewers, sewer connections or unacceptable discharges.
(Ord. No. 609-17. Passed 6-4-18, eff. 6-5-18)
§ 541.99 Penalty
   (a)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of the following sections shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day of a continuing
violation or noncompliance shall constitute a separate offense.
      Section
541.07 "Catch Basins"
      Section
541.08 "Stormwater Connections"
      Section
541.081 "Watercourse Protection"
      Section
541.11 "Prohibition of Illicit Wastewater or Stormwater Discharges"
      Section
541.12(c) "Control of Unacceptable Discharges"
      Section
541.97(d) or (f) "Abatement Orders; Stop Work Orders; Enforcement Procedures."
   (b)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of the following sections shall
be guilty of a minor misdemeanor on the first offense, a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree on the second offense, and a misdemeanor of the first degree on a
third and any subsequent offense.
      Section
541.04 "Sewer Builder's License and Bond"
      Section
541.05 "Sewer Connection Permits"
      Section
541.06 "Sewer Construction Requirements"
   (c)   In addition to any other method of enforcement provided for in this
chapter, whenever the Commissioner finds that any person has violated or is
violating any provision of this chapter concerning unacceptable discharges, he
or she shall order in writing that the violation cease immediately, shall
terminate water service to the premises where the violation occurred, and shall
take any further enforcement action provided in this chapter that is necessary.
   (d)   Persons and organizations, including but not limited to a corporation,
partnership or limited liability company, may also be liable and convicted of
an offense under this Chapter as provided by Sections
601.10 and
601.11 of the Codified Ordinances and RC 2901.23 and 2901.24.
(Ord. No. 609-17. Passed 6-4-18, eff. 6-5-18)
CHAPTER 543 – SEWER SERVICE CHARGES
543.01   Definitions
543.02   Sewerage Service Rates
543.03   Sewerage Service Fees and Charges
543.04   Alternate Measurement for Sewer Rental Charges
543.05   Payment of Sewer Rental Charge
543.06   Reserved
543.07   Nonpayment of Sewerage Charges
543.08   Sewerage System Rules and Regulations
543.09   Sewer Rental Fund
Cross-reference:
   Provisions and regulations for sewer connections, CO
Ch. 541
Statutory reference:
   Sewer Rental Fund, RC 729.52
   Water pollution, RC 715.08, 743.23
§ 543.01 Definitions
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   “Sewage” means the water or waterborne wastes, and “industrial wastes”
means the liquid wastes resulting from any commercial manufacturing or
industrial operation or process, which waterborne or liquid wastes enter the
system of sewerage or any portion thereof of the City from any premises having
a connection therewith or thereto.
   (b)   “Water pollution” means the placing of any noxious or deleterious
substance in or upon any watercourse, river, stream or lake bounding upon or
within the City which renders the waters harmful or inimical to the public
health, or to animal or aquatic life, or to the use of such waters for domestic
water supply or for recreation.
   (c)   "Sewer rental charges", "sewerage service fees", and "sewerage service
rates" all refer to monthly charges to customers for sewer services provided.
   (d)   All usage for sewer service connections of the City shall be metered
by a water meter.
(Ord. No. 1393-2019. Passed 10-25-21, eff. 10-26-21)
§ 543.02 Sewerage Service Rates
   (a)   Monthly Sewerage Service Rates.
 
Usage Rates (Per 1 MCF) 2024   2025   2026   2027   2028   2029
Regular                 $16.97 $18.41 $20.62 $23.09 $25.86 $28.96
Homestead               $10.06 $10.92 $12.23 $13.70 $15.34 $17.18
 
   Usage charges are not prorated. The charge used will correspond with the
bill period end date.
   (b)   Monthly Fixed Charge Based Upon Meter Size.
Monthly Fixed Charges 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029
Monthly Fixed Charges  2024    2025    2026    2027    2028    2029
5/8 in. to 1 in. Meter $8.90   $9.65   $9.90   $9.90   $9.90   $9.90
1-1/2 to 2 in. Meter   $27.15  $29.45  $30.20  $30.20  $30.20  $30.20
3 in. to 4 in. Meter   $69.25  $75.15  $77.05  $77.05  $77.05  $77.05
6 in. Meter            $128.60 $139.55 $143.05 $143.05 $143.05 $143.05
8 in. to 10 in. Meter  $182.90 $198.45 $203.40 $203.40 $203.40 $203.40
12 in. Meter           $271.90 $295.00 $302.40 $302.40 $302.40 $302.40
Homestead              $5.35   $5.80   $5.95   $5.95   $5.95   $5.95
 
   If a meter size is not listed above, the customer will be charged the rate
for the next meter size up.
   Fixed charges are not prorated. The charge used will correspond with the
bill period end date.
   (c)   Affordability Programs. Special homestead and affordability program
rates for customers will follow the same rules and requirements as set forth in
Section
535.05 for the Division of Water.
   (d)   The rates in this section are effective beginning January 1 of each
year.
(Ord. No. 447-2024. Passed 6-3-24, eff. 7-3-24) (BOC Res. No. 297-24. Adopted
6-26-24)
§ 543.03 Sewerage Service Fees and Charges
   (a)   WPC Ancillary Fees and Charges.
Fee Description 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029
Fee Description                       2024   2025   2026   2027   2028   2029
Lay Permit                            $763   $763   $763   $763   $763   $763
Extend Permit                         $858   $858   $863   $892   $922   $952
Repair Permit                         $406   $578   $597   $617   $638   $659
Bulkhead Permit                       $114   $114   $114   $114   $114   $114
Miscellaneous Sewer Permit            $165   $165   $165   $165   $165   $165
Re-Inspection Fee                     $393   $425   $440   $455   $470   $485
Engineering plan copies ($/copy)      $1.45  $1.51  $1.56  $1.62  $1.67  $1.73
Plan Review
New Main Sewer ($/foot)               $2.10  $2.20  $2.25  $2.35  $2.45  $2.55
Other Reviews ($/hr)                  $126   $138   $142   $147   $152   $157
Residential Parcel ($/parcel)         $66    $66    $68    $70    $73    $75
Commercial Parcel ($/parcel)          $133   $133   $136   $141   $145   $150
Stormwater
Less than 1 acre                      $379   $414   $428   $442   $457   $472
1 - 5 acres                           $570   $621   $642   $664   $686   $709
6 - 10 acres                          $1,140 $1,172 $1,211 $1,252 $1,294 $1,337
More than 10 acres                    $1,147 $1,448 $1,497 $1,548 $1,599 $1,652
New Main Sewer Inspection Fee ($/hr)  $143   $155   $160   $166   $171   $177
Locate sewer connection by video (per $711   $745   $770   $796   $823   $850
request)
Temporary Sanitary Discharge Permit   –    $858   $863   $892   $922   $952
Temporary Storm Discharge Permit      –    $414   $428   $442   $457   $472
 
   (b)   The fees and charges in this section are effective beginning January 1
of each year.
(Ord. No. 447-2024. Passed 6-3-24, eff. 7-3-24) (BOC Res. No. 297-24. Adopted
6-26-24)
§ 543.04 Alternate Measurement for Sewer Rental Charges
   If the whole or any part of the water on which a sewer rental charge is
based is shown by an approved measuring device not to have passed into the
system of sewerage of the City, then the charge shall be based upon the actual
amount of water passing into the City system of sewerage.
(Ord. No. 57-C-45. Passed 5-7-45)
§ 543.05 Payment of Sewer Rental Charge
   The sewer rental charge shall be payable at the same time and place as water
bills for the district in which the premises served are located and at the
election of the Director of Public Utilities, may be shown as a separate item
upon such water bill.
(Ord. No. 57-C-45. Passed 5-7-45)
§ 543.06 Reserved
§ 543.07 Nonpayment of Sewerage Charges
   Failure to pay the sewer rental charge by the due date on the delinquent
notice sent on unpaid water bills, to which bills were added the sewer rental
charges, shall result in shutting off the water service, without regard to
change of ownership or occupancy of such premises. Water shall not again be
turned on until all sewer rental charges due and payable have been paid.
(Ord. No. 57-C-45. Passed 5-7-45)
§ 543.08 Sewerage System Rules and Regulations
   The Director of Public Utilities shall make and enforce such by-laws and
regulations as he or she may deem necessary for the collection of sewer rental
charges and for the safe, economical and efficient management and protection of
the sewerage system and sewage pumping treatment and disposal works. Such by-
laws and regulations, when published in the City Record as required for
ordinances after passage, shall have the same force and effect as ordinances of
the City when not repugnant thereto, or to the Constitution or laws of the
State.
(Ord. No. 57-C-45. Passed 5-7-45)
§ 543.09 Sewer Rental Fund
   Moneys received from the collection of the sewer rental charge authorized by
this chapter shall be deposited daily with the City Treasurer who shall keep a
separate and distinct fund and account to be known as the Sewer Rental Fund.
When appropriated by Council such Fund shall be available for the payment of
the cost of the management, maintenance, operation and repair of the sewage
treatment and disposal works, and any surplus in such fund may be used for the
enlargement or replacement of the same and for the payment of interest on any
debt incurred for the construction of such sewage treatment and disposal works,
and for the creation of a sinking fund for the payment of such debt.
(Ord. No. 216-48. Passed 2-9-48)
TITLE IX: MUNICIPAL SERVICES
   Chapter
551   Waste Collection and Disposal
   Chapter
553   Markets
   Chapter
555   Weights and Measures
   Chapter
557   Cemeteries
   Chapter
559   Parks
   Chapter
561   Landfills – Repealed
CHAPTER 551 – WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
551.01   Definitions
551.02   Approved Waste Containers
551.021   Waste Containers Used for Commercial Solid Waste
551.022   Solid Waste Collection Fee Fixed Rate
551.03   Unacceptable Containers
551.04   Setting Out Containers
551.041   Infractions Related to Automated Waste Collection and Curbside
Recycling
551.05   Special Waste
551.051   Minimum Collection Intervals
551.06   Responsibility to Provide Containers and Location of Containers
551.07   Wrapping and Storage of Garbage
551.08   Scattering Solid Waste
551.081   Scavenging of Recyclable Materials Prohibited
551.082   Scavenging of Solid Waste
551.09   Public Solid Waste Containers
551.10   Commercial Waste Disposal
551.11   Commercial Waste Disposal Charges
551.111   Setting out an Excessively Large Quantity of Waste for Collection
Prohibited; Applicability; Penalty
551.112   Dumpster and Compactor Rentals
551.113   Agreements for the Use of the Ridge Road Transfer Station
551.12   Certificates of Commercial Waste Collection Contract
551.13   Unauthorized Removal of Solid Waste
551.14   Deposit of Dead Animals and Offensive Substances
551.15   Removal of Dead Animals
551.16   Prohibited Material for Filling and Grading
551.17   Manure and Fertilizer
551.18   Vehicles Containing Solid Wastes
551.19   Licensing of Private Vehicles for Hauling Waste
551.191   Waste Hauling Fee
551.20   Denial, Revocation and Suspension of License
551.21   Appeal from License Denial, Revocation or Suspension
551.22   Hours of Collection and Transportation
551.23   Cleaning Vehicles
551.24   Vehicles and Boats with Offensive Lading
551.25   Parking Vehicles
551.26   Dumping Prohibited
551.262   Reward for Information Regarding Illegal Dumping
551.263   Cancellation of City Demolition Contracts for Dumping
551.27   Vehicle Log
551.28   Persons Prohibited from City Waste Facilities
551.29   Use of City Transfer Site
551.291   Transfer Station Service Charge
551.30   Use of Tire Shredder
551.301   Tire Shredding Service Charge
551.31   Waste Disposal Facility License Required
551.32   License Application; Investigation; Fee
551.33   Renewal of License
551.34   Denial, Revocation and Suspension of License
551.35   Appeal from License Denial, Revocation or Suspension
551.351   Property Used for Transfer of Solid Waste
551.36   Impounding of Vehicles
551.37   Enforcement
551.38   Disposal of Used Tires; Reporting
551.39   Issuance of Tickets by Employees of the Department of Public Service
551.99   Penalty
551.991   Civil Infractions
Cross-reference:
   Depositing rubbish under viaducts, CO
577.14
   Parking waste collection vehicles, CO
203.08
   Prohibitions against littering, CO
Ch. 613
   Residential occupancy garbage and rubbish disposal, CO
369.08
   Rubbish and garbage disposal in rental dwellings, CO
371.07
Statutory reference:
   Collection and disposal of garbage, RC 715.43, 717.01
   Vehicle loads dropping or leaking, RC 4513.31
§ 551.01 Definitions
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   “Garbage” means all putrescible wastes, including, but not limited to,
vegetable matter, animal offal, carcasses of dead animals and the like,
excluding recognized industrial by-products.
   (b)   “Industrial waste” includes rubbish and processing wastes associated
with mechanical or chemical transformation of inorganic or organic substances
into new products or from assembling component parts.
   (c)   “Solid waste” means such unwanted residual solid or semisolid material
as results from industrial, commercial, agricultural, household, community and
private operations, excluding earth material from construction, mining,
demolition operations, and slag. Such material shall be deemed to include, but
not be limited to, garbage, rubbish (both combustible and noncombustible),
street dirt, debris, ashes, any discarded matter to be removed from public and
private properties and other like substances which may be harmful or inimical
to public health, as well as other items determined to be solid waste by the
Director of Public Service.
(Ord. No. 773-A-80. Passed 12-14-81, eff. 12-16-81)
§ 551.02 Approved Waste Containers
   Waste containers approved for residential collection by the City shall be
substantially constructed of plastic, nonrusting metal or other nonleakable,
nonabsorbent material. Such containers shall be capable of being tightly closed
by lid or tie, so as to prevent insect breeding, spillage of refuse and other
health and safety problems. Containers shall not exceed seventy (70) pounds in
weight when filled. Rigid containers of metal, plastic or other nonleakable
nonabsorbent material shall be equipped with handles to facilitate handling.
Plastic bags shall be of sufficient gauge to prevent easy tearing. The
container shall be of such a size, shape and weight that, when filled, it may
be easily handled by one (1) person.
(Ord. No. 773-A-80. Passed 12-14-81, eff. 12-16-81)
§ 551.021 Waste Containers Used for Commercial Solid Waste
   All waste containers and dumpsters used or maintained for the collection,
storage or disposal of commercial solid waste shall be tightly closed with a
lid or cover at all times, except during the act of loading or unloading, so as
to prevent insect breeding, spillage of refuse and other health and safety
problems.
(Ord. No. 2892-87. Passed 2-8-88, eff. 2-11-88)
§ 551.022 Solid Waste Collection Fee Fixed Rate
   (a)   All residential properties shall be charged a monthly rate of $8.75
per unit for the collection and disposal of solid waste. The per unit fee shall
be discounted by fifty percent (50%) for a residential property owner that
receives a reduction in their water rate under the homestead provisions of
Chapter 535.
   (b)   The fee shall be included on the property owner's water bill and shall
be due when the water charges are due.
   (c)   Exemptions.
      (1)   A residential property owner that resides in a multiple unit
dwelling where the other units of the dwelling are vacant and not used for
rental purposes, may request an exemption from the per-unit charge for the
unoccupied units.
      (2)   If a residential property owner resides in their own property and
that property has been unoccupied for a consecutive period of sixty (60) or
more days, the owner may request a fifty percent (50%) discount from the per-
unit charge during that time.
   (d)   The Director of Public Works shall create rules and regulations
establishing guidelines for vacant properties.
   (e)   As used in this section:
      (1)   "Residential property" means real property that is improved by a
building or other structure that has one (1) to four (4) dwelling units.
      (2)   "Dwelling unit" means a room or group of rooms located within a
dwelling structure and forming a single habitable unit with living, sleeping,
cooking, eating and sanitary facilities used or intended to be used by one (1)
family.
      (3)   "Dwelling structure" means a building or structure used or designed
or intended to be used, all or in part, for residential purposes.
(Ord. No. 513-13. Passed 4-8-13, eff. 4-10-13)
§ 551.03 Unacceptable Containers
   The Director of Public Service or his or her authorized agent shall seize
and destroy a waste container which is in poor repair or which has rough or
sharp edges or other defects which render it dangerous to handle; which is so
dilapidated that it is not suitable for holding waste materials; or which may
create a health or safety hazard; provided that written notice by the Director
or his or her authorized agent is given to the owner or person having control
of such container. The written notice shall state that such container is
dangerous or unsuitable for use and that if it is not replaced or
satisfactorily repaired prior to the next collection of garbage or other solid
waste material following such written notice, such container shall be
confiscated.
(Ord. No. 773-A-80. Passed 12-14-81, eff. 12-16-81)
§ 551.04 Setting Out Containers
   (a)   No person shall set out solid waste for collection in a waste
container that fails to meet the requirements of Section
551.02.
   (b)   No person shall set out for collection solid waste that cannot be
contained in a waste container except in the manner prescribed by Section
551.05.
   (c)   No person shall set out solid waste for collection at any place other
than the tree lawn in front of the property or at another designated place for
waste collection as defined in division (g) of this section.
   (d)   No person shall set out any solid waste or any waste container for
collection earlier than 12:00 noon on the day preceding a regular collection
day.
   (e)   No person who has set out a waste container for collection shall fail
to remove it from the tree lawn or other designated place for waste collection
no later than 12:00 noon on the day following the date of collection.
   (f)   No owner of any property in the City shall fail to maintain the tree
lawn of the property or other designated place for waste collection free from
any solid waste or solid waste containers, except that it shall not be a
violation of this division if:
      (1)   The solid waste or solid waste containers are found on the tree
lawn or other designated place for waste collection not earlier than noon the
day before a regular collection day; and
      (2)   The solid waste is in a container or containers that meet the
requirements of Section
551.02, or without a container if the requirements of Section
551.05 are met; and
      (3)   All solid waste and solid waste containers are removed from the
tree lawn or other designated place for collection within twelve (12) hours
after the collection occurs.
   (g)   The Director of Public Service may issue rules not inconsistent with
the requirements of this chapter to establish designated places for waste
collection. Any such rule of the Director shall be effective ten (10) days
after its publication in the City Record.
   (h)   As used in this section:
      (1)   The phrase “tree lawn” means the area between the curb and the
sidewalk or the area between the curb and property line if there is no
sidewalk.
      (2)   The phrase “another designated place for waste collection” or
“other designated place for waste collection” means an alleyway adjacent to the
property if waste collection occurs there, and also means any other place
designated for waste collection pursuant to rule of the Director of Public
Service issued under division (g) of this section.
(Ord. No. 2461-03. Passed 6-14-04, eff. 6-21-04)
§ 551.041 Infractions Related to Automated Waste Collection and Curbside
Recycling
   Findings.
   It is essential to the success of the automated waste collection and
curbside recycling program described in division (b) that waste set out for
collection is placed in the correct container for the type of waste involved.
   If the correct container is not used, it increases both the labor and
disposal costs for the waste. If recyclable materials become contaminated by
regular household waste, then they must be disposed of as regular solid waste,
which is more costly than treating them as recyclables. If the regular
household waste container is used for the disposal of recyclable materials,
then the economic and environmental benefits of recycling are not realized.
   To achieve the goals of the program it is necessary that all citizens use
the container intended for disposal of the type of waste involved and avoid all
mixing of recyclable materials and regular household waste.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following at any parcel included in the
automated waste collection and curbside recycling program described in division
(b):
      (1)   Set out for collection the container designated for recyclable
materials if its contents exceed two percent (2%) regular household waste by
volume.
      (2)   Set out for collection the container designated for regular
household waste if its contents exceed ten percent (10%) recyclable materials
by volume.
      (3)   Set out for collection any regular household waste in any container
or bag other than the container designated for regular household waste for use
in the automated waste collection program.
   It is not a violation of this division to set out for collection at any
parcel included in the program described in division (b) special waste set out
in accordance with Section
551.05.
   Nothing in this section shall be construed as abrogating or limiting any
other section of these Codified Ordinances including without limitation the
prohibition on setting out an excessively large quantity of waste for
collection as proscribed by Section
551.111.
   (b)   The offenses established in division (a) pertain to any parcel that is
included in the automated waste collection and curbside recycling program in
which the waste is collected by means of a truck equipped with mechanical arms.
The City will distribute two (2) containers to each household in the program,
one (1) designated for regular household waste, and the other designated for
recyclable materials.
   (c)   As use in this section:
      (1)   "Recyclable materials" means glass, metal cans, plastic bottles,
mixed paper, and cardboard that are prepared for collection in accordance with
this chapter and the rules and regulations issued under it.
      (2)   "Regular household waste" means waste generated in ordinary
residential uses excluding recyclable materials, hazardous waste and any waste
excluded from being placed out for curbside collection by law, rule or
regulation.
(Ord. No. 974-13. Passed 12-1-14, eff. 12-31-14)
§ 551.05 Special Waste
   (a)   No furniture, tires, yard waste, bundle of brush, tree trunk or other
such special waste shall be routinely collected by the regular waste
collectors. Any solid waste, other than furniture, appliances or other such
bulk items, that is so large that it cannot be contained in approved
containers, shall be securely tied in compact bundles not to exceed one hundred
(100) pounds in weight and shall be placed in a location convenient for
collection.
   (b)   Special waste generally includes, but is not limited to, large bulk
items such as refrigerators, furniture, mattresses, couches, shelving, fencing,
house doors, storm windows, televisions, and bicycles.
(Ord. No. 974-13. Passed 12-1-14, eff. 12-31-14)
§ 551.051 Minimum Collection Intervals
   The Director of Public Service, within the limitation of funds appropriated
and available for such purposes, shall make provision for the collection of
garbage and solid wastes at regular intervals so that garbage will be collected
at least once each week and so that solid wastes will be collected at least
once each month. If the collection of garbage cannot take place at least once
each week or if the collection of solid wastes cannot take place at least once
each month, the Director shall report the same to Council without delay.
(Ord. No. 773-A-80. Passed 12-14-81, eff. 12-16-81)
§ 551.06 Responsibility to Provide Containers and Location of Containers
   Sufficient solid waste containers, as set forth in Section
551.02, shall be in conformity with applicable State statutes and local
regulations or rules adopted by the Director of Public Works. They shall be
provided, kept clean and located as follows:
   (a)   Single or Two (2) Family Dwellings. Where there are not more than two
(2) dwelling units on a single premises where wastes accumulate, each unit
occupant shall provide and properly maintain solid waste containers sufficient
to house the solid waste for his or her respective unit.
   (b)   Multiple Dwellings. Where there are more than two (2) dwelling units
on a single premises where wastes accumulate, the owner of the premises, the
lessor or the managing agent shall provide and properly maintain solid waste
containers of sufficient capacity to contain the solid waste materials of each
dwelling unit.
   (c)   Food Service and Food Handling Operations. Food service and food
handling operations which store solid waste shall do so only in dumpsters,
compactors and other containers that are kept and maintained fully closed and
airtight at all times, except in the act of loading or unloading, and shall
store such waste in accordance with the Ohio Food Service law, local ordinances
and rules and regulations adopted by the Director of Public Service. When the
Director of Health determines that small containers are used by a food service
or food handling operator in such a way as to constitute a public nuisance, he
or she shall have the authority to order the use of dumpsters or compactors. In
case of such an order, the food service or food handling operator may appeal
such order as provided by the City Charter.
   (d)   Underground Containers. After December 16, 1981, no underground solid
waste container shall be permitted in the City.
   (e)   Location of Containers. All solid waste containers, including waste
containers used for automated waste collection and curbside recycling, shall be
located on private property and not on a street, alley, sidewalk, or other
public place and stored under the requirements of the Zoning Code. No person
shall store a solid waste container in the front of a residential property
including on any porch or in the area between the street and the front of a
residential structure. All solid waste containers shall be stored in the rear
of a residential property, hidden from public view where possible.
(Ord. No. 545-2022. Passed 6-6-22, eff. 6-13-22)
§ 551.07 Wrapping and Storage of Garbage
   (a)   Before being deposited in waste containers, parcels of household
garbage shall be drained of moisture and wrapped in paper or other combustible
material. All containers used for garbage shall be kept clean and disinfected.
   (b)   No garbage shall be allowed to remain exposed in a building or on a
premises longer than is reasonably necessary to remove and deposit the same in
proper waste containers.
(Ord. No. 773-A-80. Passed 12-14-81, eff. 12-16-81)
§ 551.08 Scattering Solid Waste
   (a)   Items of solid waste which are susceptible to being blown about by the
wind or otherwise scattered, or which might create a health and safety hazard,
shall not be unloaded, placed, stored or transferred along public streets or
sidewalks, except in bags, boxes, bales or other suitable containers.
   (b)   No person shall throw or scatter any trash, refuse or other waste, or
cause the same to be thrown or scattered, in a street or other public place.
The Commissioner of Waste Collection shall authorize Service Department
employees to pick up such items for disposal.
(Ord. No. 773-A-80. Passed 12-14-81, eff. 12-16-81)
§ 551.081 Scavenging of Recyclable Materials Prohibited
   (a)   When a person has set recyclable materials out on a public street or
alley for collection by the City or its contractor pursuant to the City’s
curbside recycling program, no person except an employee, contractor, or agent
of the City who is engaged in implementing the City’s curbside recycling
program shall remove any of such materials.
   (b)   For purposes of this section, “recyclable materials” means glass
bottles and jars, plastic soda bottles and milk, juice, and water jugs,
aluminum and tin food and beverage cans, newspapers, corrugated cardboard, and
brown paper grocery bags.
(Ord. No. 935-91. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 6-26-91)
§ 551.082 Scavenging of Solid Waste
   (a)   No person shall remove or cause the removal of, pick-up, collect, sort
or handle solid waste set out on a public street or alley for collection by the
City or its contractor between the hours of 8:00 p.m. or sunset, whichever is
later, sunset and 7:00 a.m.
   (b)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to an employee,
contractor, or agent of the City who is engaged in the City’s waste collection
and disposal services or to the owner of, or the person who originally
discarded, the solid waste material.
(Ord. No. 1199-2000. Passed 10-30-00, eff. 11-7-00)
§ 551.09 Public Solid Waste Containers
   (a)   Solid waste receptacles placed on sidewalks and streets by the Service
Department shall be used only for such solid waste materials as a pedestrian
may have for disposal, and shall be picked up by the truck serving that area on
each garbage collection day. Such receptacles shall in no case be used for the
disposal of solid wastes accumulated in residences or places of business.
   (b)   No person shall turn over or upset the contents of a solid waste
container, public or private, on a street, sidewalk or other public place.
(Ord. No. 773-A-80. Passed 12-14-81, eff. 12-16-81)
§ 551.10 Commercial Waste Disposal
   (a)   All commercial solid wastes shall be hauled to transfer facilities or
private disposal facilities licensed by the Department of Public Health and
Welfare or licensed by the State at the expense of the person producing such
wastes.
   (b)   The Director of Public Service is authorized to establish policies and
procedures for the collection and removal of commercial wastes to licensed
solid waste disposal sites.
(Ord. No. 773-A-80. Passed 12-14-81, eff. 12-16-81)
§ 551.11 Commercial Waste Disposal Charges
   The Director of Public Service may:
   (a)   Enter into contracts for the removal, by the City, of commercial
wastes to licensed solid waste disposal sites; and
   (b)   Establish service charges, with the approval of Council, for the
removal, by the City, of commercial wastes to licensed solid waste disposal
sites.
(Ord. No. 773-A-80. Passed 12-14-81, eff. 12-16-81)
§ 551.111 Setting out an Excessively Large Quantity of Waste for Collection
Prohibited; Applicability; Penalty
   (a)   No person shall set out for collection on a parcel's tree lawn or
other designated place for collection, in a manual collection zone, a quantity
of solid waste, exceeding five (5) approved waste containers, twenty (20) bags
of yard waste, twenty (20) bundles of brush or tree trunks, four (4) tires, or
three (3) special waste items as described in division (b) of Section
551.05.
   (b)   No person shall set out for collection on a parcel's tree lawn or
other designated place for collection, in an automated collection zone, a
quantity of solid waste exceeding twenty (20) bags of yard waste, twenty (20)
bundles of brush or tree trunks, four (4) tires, or three (3) special waste
items as described in division (b) of Section
551.05.
   (c)   Applicability. The offenses established in this section are applicable
without regard to whether the offender:
      (1)   Sets the waste out due to an eviction, a house or garage cleanout,
or for any other reason;
      (2)   Uses or intends to use a public or private vendor or entity for its
disposal;
      (3)   Sets out the waste for the purpose of staging it for eventual
disposal.
   (d)   Penalty. Any person who violates this section is liable for the civil
infraction established under Section
551.991 and is guilty of a special misdemeanor for which the maximum penalty
shall be three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00).
(Ord. No. 974-13. Passed 12-1-14, eff. 12-31-14)
§ 551.112 Dumpster and Compactor Rentals
   The Director of Public Works shall charge the following fees for the rental
of dumpsters and compactors from the inventory of the Department of Public
Works:
2 yard dumpster             $22.87
2 yard dumpster (recycling) $26.99
4 yard dumpster             $31.10
4 yard dumpster (recycling) $55.00
6 yard dumpster             $35.23
8 yard dumpster             $45.00
10 yard dumpster            $416.06
20 yard dumpster            $435.02
30 yard dumpster            $544.82
40 yard dumpster            $654.62
30 yard compactor           $653.32
36 yard compactor           $709.52
40 yard compactor           $764.43
64 gallon cart              $70.00 per cart
96 gallon cart              $75.00 per cart
 
   However, the Director of Public Works shall reduce the fees by five percent
(5%) when a dumpster or compactor is rented by a City of Cleveland resident for
non-commercial purposes.
(Ord. No. 607-2025. Passed 6-2-25, eff. 6-10-25)
§ 551.113 Agreements for the Use of the Ridge Road Transfer Station
   (a)   The Director of Public Service is authorized to enter into agreements
with other governmental entities and with private concerns for the use of the
City’s Ridge Road Transfer Station for the disposal of solid waste. The
Director shall establish the tipping fee for each user of the transfer station
in an amount not less than the cost to the City of disposing of the waste,
including the unit price paid by the City for its disposal and an additional
amount for operational and administrative costs.
   (b)   The Director of Public Service is authorized to enter into agreements
with other governmental entities and with private concerns for the collection
of recyclable materials at the City’s Ridge Road Transfer Station. The Director
is authorized to sell the recyclable materials under Section
181.18 and issue payments to the governmental entities and private concerns for
any amounts received from the sale of the recyclable materials in excess of the
City’s operational and administrative costs.
   (c)   Any agreement made under this section shall contain provisions that
are necessary in the opinion of the Director of Law to protect the interests of
the City of Cleveland.
(Ord. No. 1260-10. Passed 10-4-10, eff. 10-7-10)
§ 551.12 Certificates of Commercial Waste Collection Contract
   (a)   No owner of a commercial or industrial establishment shall fail to
apply for, secure, and post a Certificate of Commercial Waste Collection
Contract which accurately reflects the party currently collecting and disposing
of solid waste from the premises.
   (b)   An application for a Certificate of Commercial Waste Collection
Contract shall be made by the owner or his or her authorized representative on
forms obtained from the Director of Public Service. The Director may charge a
fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) to cover the cost of issuing the Certificate.
   (c)   The application and Certificate shall state the name and business
address of the applicant, the name and address of the party with whom the
applicant has contracted for solid waste collection and disposal, and the
duration of the contract. In addition, the application and Certificate shall
both contain other information as the Director of Public Service may require.
   (d)   The Certificate of Commercial Waste Collection shall be securely
affixed in a conspicuous place on the premises where designated by the Director
of Public Service.
(Ord. No. 2393-02. Passed 2-3-03, eff. 2-3-03)
§ 551.13 Unauthorized Removal of Solid Waste
   The Director of Public Service shall cause to be maintained and available
for inspection a daily record of the employees involved in waste removal and
the area in which each such employee is employed.
(Ord. No. 773-A-80. Passed 12-14-81, eff. 12-16-81)
§ 551.14 Deposit of Dead Animals and Offensive Substances
   (a)   No person shall throw or deposit, or cause to be thrown or deposited,
in or on any court, thoroughfare, harbor, river, canal, pond, creek or other
public water, yard, lot or area, or on a building, any dead animal, garbage or
filth or any substance that is foul, putrid, offensive or dangerous, or that is
detrimental to the public health.
   (b)   The person having the possession, charge or control of the building or
premises on which a dead animal, garbage or filth or any other substance that
is foul, putrid, offensive or dangerous, or that is detrimental to the public
health, has been thrown or deposited shall immediately cause the same to be
removed when ordered to do so by the Director of Public Service.
(Ord. No. 773-A-80. Passed 12-14-81, eff. 12-16-81)
§ 551.15 Removal of Dead Animals
   (a)   The owner or custodian of a dead horse or other large dead animal
shall notify the Service Department of such death within six (6) hours thereof,
for the purpose of securing the removal of the carcass.
   (b)   The Director of Public Service may enter into one (1) or more
contracts for the removal and disposal of carcasses of such large dead animals.
   (c)   A small animal may be buried in a hole of not less than two (2) feet
in depth, provided that the earth so removed is replaced and provided, further,
that the same is not done repeatedly on the same lot or land.
   (d)   No person shall deposit a carcass of a dead animal with solid waste.
(Ord. No. 773-A-80. Passed 12-14-81, eff. 12-16-81)
§ 551.16 Prohibited Material for Filling and Grading
   (a)   No person shall use or cause to be used a dead animal, part of an
animal, garbage, filth or any substance that is or by its decomposition might
become foul, putrid, offensive or detrimental to public health, for the purpose
of filling or grading a lot, ground, gully, ravine, watercourse, dock, wharf or
pier, except for an approved sanitary landfill.
   (b)   The person owning or having the possession, charge or control of any
lot, grounds, gully, ravine, watercourse, dock, wharf or pier, on or in which
there has been deposited any of the wastes listed in subsection (a) hereof,
shall cause the same to be removed when ordered to do so by the Director of
Public Service.
   (c)   The disposal of radioactive materials or hazardous substances in the
City is prohibited.
(Ord. No. 773-A-80. Passed 12-14-81, eff. 12-16-81)
§ 551.17 Manure and Fertilizer
   Manure and other odorous materials shall not be stacked or piled for
fertilizing purposes unless such materials are:
   (a)   Stacked or piled in such a manner so as not to cause objectionable
odors at a distance not less than one hundred (100) feet from a building used
in whole or part as a place for human habitation or as a place where food or
drink for human consumption is made, kept or sold, or stored or treated in such
a manner so as not to cause objectionable odors; and
   (b)   Situated so as not to cause a nuisance from insect breeding.
(Ord. No. 773-A-80. Passed 12-14-81, eff. 12-16-81)
§ 551.18 Vehicles Containing Solid Wastes
   (a)   In order to prevent the spilling of waste, no person shall use or
offer or permit to be used, a vehicle to convey manure or other solid waste,
unless such vehicle is equipped with a canvass cover that is securely fastened
to such vehicle so as to completely cover all of the material contained therein
at all times, except when the contents are being loaded or unloaded.
   (b)   No person shall load or drive, or suffer or permit to be loaded or
driven, any such vehicle on a thoroughfare so as to suffer or permit a part of
the contents of such vehicle to fall, spill or leak therefrom.
(Ord. No. 773-A-80. Passed 12-14-81, eff. 12-16-81)
§ 551.19 Licensing of Private Vehicles for Hauling Waste
   (a)   No person shall engage in the business of collecting, transporting,
carrying or hauling solid waste in the City unless such vehicle so engaged is
licensed and displays the appropriate sign plate issued by the City. Such a
license shall be obtained from the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses, be
valid for a period not to exceed one (1) year and expire on April 30 of every
year. The Director of Public Service shall determine the annual fee therefor,
with the approval of Council.
   (b)   The application for such license shall be on a form bearing the name
and address of the licensee, the make and model of the vehicle and such other
information as the Commissioner may require. In addition, the applicant shall
present satisfactory evidence that he or she has an authorized and approved
disposal site for the final disposal of waste.
   (c)   Upon completion of the application, the Commissioner shall transmit
the application to the Director for approval or disapproval.
   (d)   If the Director determines, after investigation, that the applicant
complies with all applicable laws relating to licensing and that the vehicle in
question is properly registered and licensed, he or she shall, within five (5)
days, report the name to the Commissioner who shall thereupon issue such
license and a sign plate. The sign plate shall be of metal or plastic
composition not less than six (6) inches wide and eight (8) inches long, on
which shall be inscribed “Private Waste Hauler Permit, Cleveland, Ohio, No.
_______,” indicating in the blank space the number of the permit and the year
in effect.
   (e)   Such license and sign plate shall not be transferable between persons
or between vehicles. Such license shall be carried in or on the vehicle for
which it was issued at all times. The sign plate shall be prominently displayed
on the vehicle at all times.
   (f)   A vehicle used to collect, transport, carry or haul solid waste in the
City shall have imprinted on both sides the name, address and telephone number
of the person owning the vehicle. The name shall be printed in letters three
(3) inches high and not less than three-eighths (3/8) of an inch wide.
Lettering shall be done in a color which will contrast sharply with the
background upon which it is painted and shall be placed in such a position as
to be easily seen by anyone wishing to identify the vehicle. Markings shall be
kept clear and distinct at all times.
(Ord. No. 773-A-80. Passed 12-14-81, eff. 12-16-81)
§ 551.191 Waste Hauling Fee
   The Director of Public Service is authorized to assess an annual fee of
seventy-five dollars ($75.00) to be charged for the licensing of any private
vehicle engaged in the business of collecting, transporting, carrying or
hauling any solid waste.
(Ord. No. 2393-02. Passed 2-3-03, eff. 2-3-03)
§ 551.20 Denial, Revocation and Suspension of License
   (a)   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses shall suspend for thirty
(30) days, or refuse to renew or initially issue, a private vehicle waste
hauling license, as authorized by Section
551.19, for a first failure to comply with the standards prescribed by statute
or ordinance, and shall revoke such license for each subsequent violation. If
such license is revoked, or if the Commissioner fails to renew such license
under this section, the applicant shall be barred from filing an application
for such a license for one (1) year from the date of such revocation or refusal
to renew.
   (b)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (a) of this section, the
Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses shall revoke a private vehicle waste
hauling license issued in accordance with Section
551.19 to any person convicted of a violation of Section
551.26. No person whose license is revoked pursuant to this division shall
again be licensed to engage in the business of collecting, transporting,
carrying or hauling solid waste in the City.
(Ord. No. 1829-90. Passed 2-4-91, eff. 2-11-91)
§ 551.21 Appeal from License Denial, Revocation or Suspension
   In case of a refusal to issue or renew a private vehicle waste hauling
license or a revocation or suspension of such license by the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses, the applicant or licensee may appeal such a ruling,
as provided by the City Charter.
(Ord. No. 773-A-80. Passed 12-14-81, eff. 12-16-81)
§ 551.22 Hours of Collection and Transportation
   No person owning or driving a vehicle hauling solid waste shall cause the
collection, transportation or transfer of such waste other than between the
hours of 6:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., except that in areas within two hundred fifty
(250) feet of a residential dwelling unit such collection, transportation or
transfer shall begin no earlier than 7:00 a.m. No collection, transportation or
transfer shall occur on Saturdays after 6:00 p.m. or on Sundays. Application
for exceptions to this provision may be made to the Director of Public Works,
on a form provided by the Director. Such exceptions shall be granted only where
the applicant is able to demonstrate circumstances of great practical
difficulty in the collection and transportation of solid waste in areas where
there is heavy daytime vehicular and pedestrian traffic and a concentration of
commercial activity.
(Ord. No. 899-2019. Passed 7-24-19, eff. 7-26-19)
§ 551.23 Cleaning Vehicles
   The person in possession or control of a vehicle licensed pursuant to
Section
551.19 shall cause it to be cleaned at least once a week while in use and to be
kept clean when not in use.
(Ord. No. 773-A-80. Passed 12-14-81, eff. 12-16-81)
§ 551.24 Vehicles and Boats with Offensive Lading
   No person owning or having the possession, charge or control of a car,
vehicle, boat or vessel, having in or upon it a substance that is foul, putrid,
offensive, dangerous or detrimental to public health, shall allow such car,
vehicle, boat or vessel to remain in the City longer than the time necessary
for the completion of its loading.
(Ord. No. 773-A-80. Passed 12-14-81, eff. 12-16-81)
§ 551.25 Parking Vehicles
   No person shall park a truck or other commercially licensed vehicle, whether
loaded or unloaded, which is used for the collection and transportation of
solid waste, garbage or the contents of private sewage tanks, on a public
street, alley or other public place or on private property in a residential
district, as provided for in Chapter
337, except for loading purposes or emergency repairs.
(Ord. No. 773-A-80. Passed 12-14-81, eff. 12-16-81)
§ 551.26 Dumping Prohibited
   (a)   As used in this section, “Commercial Car,” “Trailer,” “Truck” and
“Vehicle” shall have the meaning ascribed to them in Chapter
401 of the Codified Ordinances.
   (b)   No person shall dump or otherwise dispose of solid waste or industrial
waste by commercial car, trailer, semitrailer, pole trailer or truck on any
public or private property not licensed as a solid waste disposal facility
pursuant to this chapter, except as provided in Section
551.29. Any owner of a commercial car, trailer, semitrailer, pole trailer or
truck who permits or employs another person to use the vehicle and who knows or
should have known through due diligence that the vehicle will be used for the
purpose described in this division is guilty of a violation of this division.
   (c)   No person shall dump or otherwise dispose of solid waste or industrial
waste by any vehicle other than a commercial car, trailer, semitrailer, pole
trailer or truck on any public or private property or place not licensed as a
solid waste disposal facility pursuant to this chapter, except as provided in
Section
551.29. Any owner of a vehicle who permits or employs another person to use the
vehicle and who knows or should have known through due diligence that the
vehicle will be used for the purpose described in this division is guilty of a
violation of this division.
   (d)   This Council determines that solid waste and industrial waste dumped
or otherwise deposited on public or private property not licensed as a solid
waste disposal facility pursuant to this chapter, except as provided in Section
551.29, constitutes a public nuisance which must be abated, for this reason,
any expense or costs incurred in removing waste dumped or deposited in
violation of this section shall be paid by the violator. The Director of Public
Service is hereby authorized to send written notice to violators of division
(b) and (c) of this section to remove waste dumped or deposited in violation of
this section within five (5) days of receipt of the notice. If the violator
fails to remove the waste within the time provided in the notice, the Director
of Public Service may remove the waste and the Director of Law may take any
action necessary to collect the cost of the removal from the violator.
(Ord. No. 893-91. Passed 4-15-91, eff. 4-22-91)
§ 551.262 Reward for Information Regarding Illegal Dumping
   The Director of Public Service is hereby authorized to pay a reward to any
person who provides the City with information leading to the identification and
conviction of any person for a violation of divisions (b) or (c) of Section
551.26. Such reward shall be in an amount equal to one-half (1/2) of the fine
which is actually imposed by a court in accordance with divisions (g) and (h)
of Section
551.99 and collected by the City. A person entitled to a reward as provided in
this section must file a claim with the Director of Public Service to collect
the reward.
(Ord. No. 1829-90. Passed 2-4-91, eff. 2-11-91)
§ 551.263 Cancellation of City Demolition Contracts for Dumping
   (a)   Directors of departments that contract for demolition work shall
include in all such contracts a provision providing that it is a material
breach and cause to cancel the contract for the contractor to dump solid waste
from the demolition on any public or private property or place not licensed as
a solid waste disposal facility pursuant to this chapter, except as provided in
Section
551.29.
   (b)   In the event that a demolition contract is cancelled pursuant to
division (a) of this section, the contractor shall be barred from obtaining
another contract with the City of Cleveland for demolition services for a
period of one (1) year from the date of cancellation.
(Ord. No. 2167-A-87. Passed 5-22-89, eff. 5-30-89. Renumbered by Ord. No. 1947-
89. Passed 9-11-89, eff. 9-15-89)
§ 551.27 Vehicle Log
   A log shall be maintained and made available for inspection in every vehicle
used for hauling solid waste. Such log shall be in a form specified by the
Director of Public Service, containing information regarding the source, times,
destination and disposition of the solid waste being carried by the hauler.
(Ord. No. 773-A-80. Passed 12-14-81, eff. 12-16-81)
§ 551.28 Persons Prohibited from City Waste Facilities
   No person, except one having permission to deposit solid wastes or so
authorized by the City, shall deposit at, or remove solid waste materials from,
any City-owned dump, incinerator, landfill, transfer station or similar
installation.
(Ord. No. 773-A-80. Passed 12-14-81, eff. 12-16-81)
§ 551.29 Use of City Transfer Site
   (a)   The Director of Public Service shall issue permits for transfer site
usage only for the disposal of waste accumulated in the City. Permits may be
revoked for cause.
   (b)   Any person who is a resident of the City may, a maximum of four (4)
times a year, haul non- commercial solid waste accumulated in the City to a
City transfer site without obtaining a permit for transfer site usage or paying
any service charge.
   Concrete, brick, dirt, rocks, mortar, toxic and hazardous materials and all
other materials prohibited under state law shall not be accepted.
   Proof of City residency shall be evidenced by presentation of a valid
driver’s license and a recent utility bill.
   City transfer sites shall remain open on Saturdays between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
(Ord. No. 2393-02. Passed 2-3-03, eff. 2-3-03)
§ 551.291 Transfer Station Service Charge
   The Director of Public Service is hereby authorized to assess and collect a
service charge per ton for any load of privately hauled solid waste received at
a City transfer site equal to the actual charge per ton to the City for the
disposal of the solid waste at a landfill plus an amount for operational and
administrative costs.
(Ord. No. 2393-02. Passed 2-3-03, eff. 2-3-03)
§ 551.30 Use of Tire Shredder
   The Director of Public Service is hereby authorized to determine, with the
approval of Council, and collect, a charge for shredder service for any load or
privately hauled tires.
(Ord. No. 773-A-80. Passed 12-14-81, eff. 12-16-81)
§ 551.301 Tire Shredding Service Charge
   The Director of Public Works is hereby authorized to assess and collect a
charge of five dollars ($5.00) per tire for shredder service for privately
hauled tires.
(Ord. No. 305-2025. Passed 3-24-25, eff. 3-27-25)
§ 551.31 Waste Disposal Facility License Required
   No person shall operate, own, lease or manage a solid waste disposal
facility in the City without first obtaining a license, with Council approval,
to do so as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. No. 773-A-80. Passed 12-14-81, eff. 12-16-81)
§ 551.32 License Application; Investigation; Fee
   An application for the license required in Section
551.31 shall be made to the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses on forms
prescribed by him or her and shall set forth the name, residence and business
address of the applicant; the proposed location of the facility; the owner of
record; the lease or contract authorizing the applicant to use such location as
a solid waste disposal facility; the previous experience of the applicant; the
equipment owned or to be acquired or leased by the applicant for use thereon;
and such other information as the Commissioner may require.
   The application shall be transmitted to the Director of Public Health and
Welfare and the Director of Public Service for investigation, to the
Commissioner of Building for a determination of compliance with the Building
Code and the Zoning Code and to the Chief of Fire Prevention for a
determination of compliance with the Fire Prevention Code. After investigation,
such authorities shall return the application to the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses with a recommendation for approval or disapproval.
   If such application is approved, the Commissioner of Assessments and
Licenses shall issue a license upon payment of a fee of five hundred dollars
($500.00).
(Ord. No. 773-A-80. Passed 12-14-81, eff. 12-16-81)
§ 551.33 Renewal of License
   The license required in Section
551.31 is renewable annually upon the payment of a fee of five hundred dollars
($500.00), which fee may be paid during the thirty (30) day period immediately
preceding the expiration of the license. However, such license may be renewed
within ninety (90) days after the expiration date upon the payment of the
renewal fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) and a penalty of one hundred
dollars ($100.00). No expired license may be renewed after a period of ninety
(90) days following its expiration.
(Ord. No. 773-A-80. Passed 12-14-81, eff. 12-16-81)
§ 551.34 Denial, Revocation and Suspension of License
   Upon the recommendation of the Director of Public Health and Welfare, the
Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses may revoke, suspend or refuse to renew
or initially issue the license required in Section
551.31 for the failure to comply with the standards prescribed by statute or
ordinance. If such license is revoked, or if the Commissioner fails to renew
such license under this section, the applicant shall be barred from filing an
application for such a license for one (1) year from the date of such
revocation or refusal to renew.
(Ord. No. 773-A-80. Passed 12-14-81, eff. 12-16-81)
§ 551.35 Appeal from License Denial, Revocation or Suspension
   In case of a refusal to issue or renew a waste disposal facility license, or
a revocation or suspension of such a license, by the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses, the applicant or licensee may appeal such ruling, as
provided by the City Charter.
(Ord. No. 773-A-80. Passed 12-14-81, eff. 12-16-81)
§ 551.351 Property Used for Transfer of Solid Waste
   (a)   No person shall use or permit the use of any property as a solid waste
transfer or collection site, wherein solid waste is transported onto the
property to be collected in or transferred to another vehicle container or
trailer.
   (b)   This section does not apply to the City in its solid waste collection
and disposal operation, which, by consent of Council, may construct, operate
and maintain such transfer facilities at 3727 Ridge Road and 3222 East 79th
Street.
(Ord. No. 910-82. Passed 6-21-82, eff. 6-23-82)
§ 551.36 Impounding of Vehicles
   (a)   In the event of a violation of Sections
551.19,
551.22,
551.25 or
551.26, a police officer shall provide for the immediate removal and impounding
of the vehicle involved in the violation. Chapter
405 is applicable to such impounding.
   (b)   A vehicle shall be impounded until the Director of Public Service
certifies to the Director of Public Safety that fees or fines determined to be
owed in connection with such vehicle have been paid and any solid waste
illegally dumped has been removed.
(Ord. No. 833-86. Passed 1-26-87, eff. 1-29-87)
§ 551.37 Enforcement
   Any employee of the Department of Public Health and Welfare designated by
the Director of such department has the same powers to enforce this chapter as
a police officer of the City.
(Ord. No. 773-A-80. Passed 12-14-81, eff. 12-16-81)
§ 551.38 Disposal of Used Tires; Reporting
   (a)   Registration. No person, firm, or corporation shall accept for
disposal more than five (5) automobile, truck, motorcycle, or bicycle tires in
any one (1) calendar month in any one (1) year unless and until the person,
firm, or corporation has registered with the Commissioner of Assessments and
Licenses as a source of waste tires. The Commissioner of Assessments and
Licenses shall furnish a registration form for the purposes of the
registration, and, upon the payment of a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00),
shall issue a certificate of registration, which may apply to all locations at
which the registrant does business. Registrations shall be renewed annually.
The form for registration shall contain the name and address of the registrant,
and if a partnership, the names and addresses of all partners, and if a
corporation, the name of the corporation and the names and addresses of the
officers and the statutory agent and shall contain additional information as
deemed necessary by the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses. Copies of all
certificates of registration issued by the Commissioner of Assessments and
Licenses shall be provided to the Commissioner of Environment. The Commissioner
of Assessments and Licenses shall also provide a copy of any certificate of
registration to the Council member in whose ward the registrant's premises is
located on a quarterly basis.
   (b)   Reporting. Except as provided in this section, all persons, firms, or
corporations registered under division (a) of this section shall report tire
disposal activity to the Commissioner of Environment by submitting a monthly
tire disposal report to the Commissioner of Environment on a form promulgated
by the Commissioner for that purpose. The monthly tire disposal report form
shall contain the date and time that tires were hauled off the registrant's
premises during the previous month. The form shall also require disclosure of
the identity of each waste hauler transporting tires off the registrant's
premises, and the license tag number of each truck used to transport tires off
the registrant's premises. The monthly tire disposal report form shall cover a
calendar month and be submitted to the Commissioner of Environment no later
than ten (10) days after the last date of the calendar month in question. The
Commissioner of the Environment shall provide a copy of every tire disposal
report submitted by the registrant to the Council member in whose ward the
registrant's premises is located on a quarterly basis.
   (c)   If a person, firm or corporation operating a repair garage as defined
in Section
325.30 disposes of its tires exclusively by contract with a tire disposal
entity registered under division (a) above, and a copy of the contract is filed
with the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses with the registration
required under division (a) above, then the person, firm, or corporation is not
required to report as required in division (b) above.
   (d)   No person, firm, or corporation who disposes of tires shall fail to
register as a source of waste tires as provided in division (a) of this
section, or fail to submit monthly tire disposal report forms to the
Commissioner of Environment as provided in division (b) of this section, or
fail to provide complete information required by the forms.
   (e)   No person, firm, or corporation shall engage another for the purpose
of hauling waste tires unless the waste hauler is licensed under Section
551.19 et seq. of this chapter.
   (f)   Whoever violates any provision of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(Ord. No. 1076-13. Passed 9-23-13, eff. 9-27-13)
§ 551.39 Issuance of Tickets by Employees of the Department of Public Service
   In addition to any other means of enforcement provided for in these Codified
Ordinances, the Director of Public Service and his or her designees, when
commissioned by the Director of Public Safety as special police, may enforce
the minor misdemeanor offenses contained in this chapter through the issuance
of citations in accordance with Rule 4.1 of the Rules of Criminal Procedure.
(Ord. No. 617-97. Passed 6-9-97, eff. 6-18-97)
   Note: Section
551.39 was renumbered from 551.38 by Ord. No. 1483-97, passed 8-13-97, eff. 8-
20-97.
§ 551.99 Penalty
   (a)   Whoever violates any provision of the following sections is guilty of
a minor misdemeanor:
551.021                      Waste Containers Used for Commercial Solid Waste
551.07                       Wrapping and Storage of Garbage
551.08                       Scattering Solid Waste
551.09                       Public Solid Waste Containers
551.10, div. (a)             Commercial Waste Disposal
551.14                       Deposit of Dead Animals and Offensive Substances
551.15, div. (a)             Removal of Dead Animals
551.17                       Manure and Fertilizer
551.23                       Cleaning Vehicles
551.28                       Persons Prohibited from City Waste Facilities
551.04, divs. (a)through (f) Setting Out Containers
551.081                      Scavenging of Recyclable Materials Prohibited
551.082, div. (a)            Scavenging of Solid Waste
551.18                       Vehicles Containing Solid Wastes
551.24                       Vehicles and Boats with Offensive Lading
551.25                       Parking Vehicles
 
   (b)   Whoever violates any provision of Section
551.19 or division (a) of Section
551.351 shall be fined one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
   (c)   Whoever violates any provision of division (c) of Section
551.16, Sections
551.22 or
551.31 shall be fined two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or imprisoned for up
to thirty (30) days, or both, for the first offense, and five hundred dollars
($500.00) or imprisoned for up to sixty (60) days, or both, for each subsequent
offense.
   (d)   Whoever violates any provision of Sections
551.12 or
551.27 shall be fined one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense and
two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or imprisoned for up to thirty (30) days,
or both, for each subsequent offense.
   (e)   Whoever violates any provision of division (b) of Section
551.26 shall be fined one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and shall be imprisoned
for not less than sixty (60) days and not more than six (6) months.
   (f)   Whoever violates any provision of division (c) of Section
551.26 shall be fined not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and not more
than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisoned for not more than six (6)
months, or both.
   (g)   Notwithstanding any other provision of these Codified Ordinances, no
part of a penalty imposed under this section shall in any case be suspended or
otherwise reduced.
(Ord. No. 545-2022. Passed 6-6-22, eff. 6-13-22)
§ 551.991 Civil Infractions
   (a)   Civil Enforcement System Established. The City of Cleveland hereby
adopts a civil enforcement system for the infractions established by this
section. This civil enforcement system imposes monetary liability on the
responsible parties as defined in division (m).
   In addition to any other means of enforcement provided for in these Codified
Ordinances, each of the following sections may be enforced through the issuance
of a ticket to the responsible parties as defined in division (m):
      (1)   Section
551.04, division (d), relating to the early set out of waste.
      (2)   Section
551.04, division (e), relating to failing to remove a waste container after
collection.
      (3)   Section
551.111, division (a) and division (b), relating to excessively large quantity
of waste for collection.
      (4)   Section
551.041, division (a), relating to automated waste collection and recycling
infractions.
      (5)   Section
551.06, relating to responsibility to provide containers and location of
containers.
   Any person who violates any of the foregoing prohibitions has committed an
infraction for which liability is imposed by division (b) upon the responsible
parties as defined in division (m).
   (b)   Liability Imposed. Each owner of a parcel at which an infraction has
occurred is liable to the City of Cleveland in the amounts established in
divisions (f) and (g).
   (c)   Noncriminal Offense; No Conviction. The infractions established by
this section are noncriminal. The imposition of liability upon the responsible
parties under this section shall not be deemed a conviction for any purpose.
   (d)   Other Costs and Penalties Not Abrogated. Nothing in this section shall
be construed as altering or limiting the effects of any other section of these
Codified Ordinances, the criminal penalties imposed by any such other section,
or the ability of a law enforcement officer to enforce those sections.
   (e)   Tickets – Service; Contents. If a violation of division (a) is
observed by an employee of the Division of Waste Collection and Disposal or any
other City employee whose duties include the enforcement of this section, then
the Director of Public Works shall cause the responsible parties to be issued a
ticket. The ticket shall be served by sending it via regular U.S. mail, postage
prepaid, to the parcel owner(s) at the tax mailing address shown in the records
of the County Recorder.
   The date of mailing of the ticket shall be deemed to be the date of issuance
of the ticket. If the mailing is unreturned, then it shall establish that the
respondents were given actual or constructive notice of the imposition of
liability under this section.
   The ticket shall identify the parcel owner(s) as respondents. The ticket
shall state that the respondents are responsible parties for the commission of
a civil infraction under this section.
   The ticket shall inform the respondents of the procedure to file an appeal
and the time frame for filing it. The ticket shall state that failure to appeal
the ticket or pay the costs imposed not later than twenty (20) days from the
date of issuance of the ticket shall constitute a waiver of the right to
contest the ticket and shall be considered an admission. The ticket shall
further state that if the ticket is not appealed or paid in that time frame,
then a default finding of civil liability shall be imposed upon respondents for
the costs established in divisions (f) and (g).
   The ticket may be in any format that includes all of the elements required
by this section.
   (f)   Penalties Established. The costs imposed by this section upon the
responsible parties for the commission of an infraction contrary to division
(a) shall be assessed in accordance with the following schedule:
 
Section               Civil Penalty
                      $100.00. However, if the quantity of solid waste exceeds
                      ten (10) approved waste containers, forty (40) bags of
551.111, division (a) yard waste, forty (40) bundles or brush or tree trunks,
                      eight (8) tires, or six (6) special waste items, the
                      civil penalty shall be $350.00.
                      $100.00. However, if the quantity of solid waste exceeds
                      ten (10) approved waste containers, forty (40) bags of
551.111, division (b) yard waste, forty (40) bundles of brush or tree trunks,
                      or six (6) special waste items, the civil penalty shall
                      be $350.00
551.04, division (d)  $100.00
551.04, division (e)  $100.00
551.041, division (a) $100.00
551.06                $100.00
 
   The costs established by this section are imposed upon the responsible
parties both as civil penalties and to reimburse the City for a portion of the
costs incurred by it in the enforcement of infractions, and for some
infractions, the increased costs of solid waste disposal.
   (g)   Late Penalties. Late penalties shall be assessed in accordance with
the following schedule:
      (1)   If the costs established in division (f) remain unpaid twenty (20)
days after the ticket is issued or twenty (20) days after the conclusion of all
appeals, an additional twenty dollars ($20.00) shall be assessed; and
      (2)   If the costs established in division (f) remain unpaid forty (40)
days after the ticket is issued or forty (40) days after the conclusion of all
appeals, an additional forty dollars ($40.00) shall be added to the twenty
dollars ($20.00) assessed under division (g)(1) for a total additional penalty
of sixty dollars ($60.00) in such a case.
   (h)   Appeals – Timing. Any respondent or other person who is potentially
liable for the costs imposed by this section may appeal the imposition of
liability to the Director of Public Works or his or her designee, which may
include the Clerk of the Cleveland Municipal Court in his or her capacity as
Parking Violations Bureau Administrator or otherwise, in the manner described
in the ticket. As used in divisions (h), (i) and (j) of this section,
“Director” means the Director of Public Works or his or her designee.
   The appeal shall be taken not later than twenty (20) days from the date of
issuance of the ticket. Failure to appeal the ticket or pay the costs imposed
within this time period shall constitute a waiver of the right to contest the
ticket and shall be considered an admission.
   (i)   Appeal – Process. The Director shall establish an administrative
appeal process for persons to appeal tickets issued under this section. The
administrative appeal process shall allow the appellant the right to present
appellant’s case in person and may allow for evidence to be presented ex-parte.
The strict rules of evidence applicable to courts of law shall not apply in any
administrative hearing or ex-parte review. The ticket charging the offense
shall constitute prima facie evidence that the offense identified in the ticket
occurred and that the parcel owner(s) to whom the ticket was mailed are the
responsible parties as defined in division (m) and are liable to the City of
Cleveland for the costs imposed by this section.
   If the Director finds by a preponderance of evidence that an appellant is
liable under this section for the costs assessed, then the Director shall
dismiss the appeal and order the appellant to pay the costs identified in the
ticket.
   If the Director finds by a preponderance of evidence that an appellant is
liable under this section for the costs assessed but that there are reasons for
the commission of the infraction that mitigate the offense, then the Director
shall dismiss the appeal and order the appellant to pay the costs identified in
the ticket, but may in the interest of equity reduce the costs assessed.
   If the Director finds by a preponderance of evidence that the appellant is
not liable under this section for the costs assessed, then the Director shall
dismiss the ticket and grant the appeal.
   (j)   Appeal of the Director’s Decision. Any person subject to an adverse
decision of the Director may appeal that decision to the Board of Zoning
Appeals. The notice of appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the
Board of Zoning Appeals within ten (10) days of the decision of the Director.
The Board shall approve, modify or annul the finding from which the appeal is
taken.
   (k)   Collection. The costs imposed by this section may be enforced and
collected by means of a civil action or any other means provided for in these
Codified Ordinances or the Ohio Revised Code.
   (l)   Rules and Regulations. The Director of Public Works may issue rules
and regulations to carry out the provisions of these sections, which shall be
effective thirty (30) days after their publication in the City Record.
   (m)   Definitions. As used in this section:
      (1)   “Director” means the Director of Public Works and in the case of
appeals, the Director of Public Works or his or her designee.
      (2)   “Owner” or “parcel owner” mean the person(s) shown in the records
of the County Recorder as having legal title to the parcel on which someone has
failed to adhere to division (a).
      (3)   “Person” includes an individual, corporation, business trust,
estate, trust, partnership, and association.
      (4)   “Responsible party” and “responsible parties” has the same meaning
as “owner” or “parcel owner”.
(Ord. No. 545-2022. Passed 6-6-22, eff. 6-13-22)
CHAPTER 553 – MARKETS
553.01   West 25th Street Market Grounds – Repealed
553.02   Use of Market Grounds – Repealed
553.03   Priority on Space – Repealed
553.04   Short Weights or Measures – Repealed
553.05   Resisting Commissioner’s Order – Repealed
553.06   Shelves and Lines – Repealed
553.07   Intoxicating Liquors – Repealed
553.08   Regulations for Sanitation and Conduct – Repealed
553.09   Seizure and Destruction of Unfit Foods – Repealed
553.10   Sale of Provisions before Market Hours – Repealed
553.11   Clearing Market upon Closing – Repealed
553.12   Uniform Stall Signs – Repealed
553.99   Penalty – Repealed
§ 553.01 West 25th Street Market Grounds – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1093-2023. Passed 11-13-23, eff. 11-14-23)
§ 553.02 Use of Market Grounds – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1093-2023. Passed 11-13-23, eff. 11-14-23)
§ 553.03 Priority on Space – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1093-2023. Passed 11-13-23, eff. 11-14-23)
§ 553.04 Short Weights or Measures – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1093-2023. Passed 11-13-23, eff. 11-14-23)
§ 553.05 Resisting Commissioner’s Order – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1093-2023. Passed 11-13-23, eff. 11-14-23)
§ 553.06 Shelves and Lines – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1093-2023. Passed 11-13-23, eff. 11-14-23)
§ 553.07 Intoxicating Liquors – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1093-2023. Passed 11-13-23, eff. 11-14-23)
§ 553.08 Regulations for Sanitation and Conduct – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1093-2023. Passed 11-13-23, eff. 11-14-23)
§ 553.09 Seizure and Destruction of Unfit Foods – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1093-2023. Passed 11-13-23, eff. 11-14-23)
§ 553.10 Sale of Provisions before Market Hours – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1093-2023. Passed 11-13-23, eff. 11-14-23)
§ 553.11 Clearing Market upon Closing – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1093-2023. Passed 11-13-23, eff. 11-14-23)
§ 553.12 Uniform Stall Signs – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1093-2023. Passed 11-13-23, eff. 11-14-23)
§ 553.99 Penalty – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1093-2023. Passed 11-13-23, eff. 11-14-23)
CHAPTER 555 – WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
555.01   Definitions
555.02   Bureau of Weights and Measures
555.03   Appointment and Duties
555.04   Right to Examine
555.05   Duty of Testing and Sealing
555.06   Record of Tests
555.07   Accessibility for Testing Purposes
555.08   Fees
555.09   Deposits
555.10   Systems of Weights and Measures
555.11   Requirements for the Method of Sale of Commodities
555.12   Technical Requirements for Weights and Measures
555.13   Suitability of Equipment
555.14   Maintenance of Equipment
555.15   Method of Operation
555.16   Position of Equipment
555.17   Information Required on Packages
555.18   Advertising Packages for Sale
555.19   Prohibitions
555.20   Presumptive Evidence
555.21   Reserved
555.22   Reserved
555.99   Penalty for Code Violations
Statutory reference:
   Power to regulate weights and measures, RC 715.45
§ 555.01 Definitions
   (a)   “Commissioner” shall mean the Commissioner of the Division of
Assessments and Licenses or any of said Commissioner’s assistants duly
authorized to perform the duties of such officer.
   (b)   “Correct” shall mean conformance to all applicable requirements of
this code.
   (c)   “Package” shall mean any commodity put up or packaged in any manner in
advance of sale in units suitable, for either wholesale or retail sale.
   (d)   “Person” shall mean any individual, partnerships, corporations,
companies, societies, and associations, or their legal representatives, agents,
assigns, employees or successors.
   (e)   “Sale from bulk” shall mean the sale of commodities when the quantity
is determined at the time of the sale.
   (f)   “Seal” shall mean the official stamp of the City of Cleveland,
indicating a device has been found to be correct. Such stamp shall include the
date and year of the most recent inspection.
   (g)   “Short-weight packages” shall mean any “standard pack” or “pre-pack
commodity” whose net contents is not equal to or exceed the labeled or
advertised quantity at the retail outlet.
   (h)   “Standards” shall mean the standards adopted by the State of Ohio and
shall be the test by which all weights and measures shall be compared and
determined in the City of Cleveland.
   (i)   “Weight” as used in connection with any commodity shall mean net
weight, except where the label declares that the produce is sold by drained
weight, the term means net drained weight.
   (j)   “Weight(s)” and/or “Measure(s)” shall mean any and all weights and
measures of every kind, including any instruments and devices for weighing and
measuring and any appliance and accessories associated with any or all such
instruments and devices.
(Ord. No. 1668-91. Passed 10-21-91, eff. 10-28-91)
§ 555.02 Bureau of Weights and Measures
   There shall be a Bureau of Weights and Measures located for administrative
purposes within the Division of Assessments and Licenses. The bureau is charged
with, but not limited to, performing the following functions on behalf of the
citizens of the City of Cleveland:
   (a)   Assuring that weights and measures in commercial service within the
City of Cleveland are suitable for their intended use, properly installed, and
accurate as to their measurement, and are so maintained by their owner or user;
   (b)   Preventing unfair or deceptive dealing by weight measure or count in
any commodity or service advertised, packaged, sold, or purchased within the
City of Cleveland;
   (c)   Promoting uniformity, to the extent practicable and desirable, between
weights and measures requirements of the City of Cleveland and the State of
Ohio.
(Ord. No. 1668-91. Passed 10-21-91, eff. 10-28-91)
§ 555.03 Appointment and Duties
   The Commissioner shall have the power and shall:
   (a)   Conduct investigations to ensure compliance with this chapter;
   (b)   Delegate to the appropriate personnel any of the necessary
responsibilities for the proper administration of the Bureau of Weights and
Measures;
   (c)   Test at least annually the standards of weight and measure used by any
and all commercial businesses within the City of Cleveland and approve the same
when found to be correct;
   (d)   Inspect and test weights and measures kept, offered, or exposed for
sale, including equipment failing by reason of special design or otherwise, to
fall clearly within one (1) of the particular equipment categories;
   (e)   Inspect and test, to ascertain if they are correct, weights and
measures commercially used:
      (1)   In determining the weight, measure, or count of commodities or
things sold, or offered or exposed for sale, on the basis of weight, measure or
count; or
      (2)   In computing the basic charge or payment for services rendered on
the basis of weight, measure, or count.
   (f)   Hold hearings, subpoena witnesses and relevant information/material,
and enter into Assurance Agreements as the Commissioner deems necessary to
effectuate this chapter.
(Ord. No. 1668-91. Passed 10-21-91, eff. 10-28-91)
§ 555.04 Right to Examine
   The Commissioner may examine and in the process of examination may:
   (a)   Approve for use, and may seal, such weights and measures as are found
to be correct and shall reject and mark as rejected such weights and measures
as are found to be incorrect. Weights and measures that have been rejected may
be seized if not corrected within the time specified or if used or disposed of
in a manner not specifically authorized. The Commissioner shall condemn and may
seize the weights and measures found to be incorrect that are incapable of
being made correct;
   (b)   Inspect weights, measures, or packaged commodities which are kept,
offered, or exposed for sale, sold, or in the process of delivery, in order to
determine whether they contain the amounts represented and whether they are
kept, offered, or exposed for sale in accordance with this chapter. In carrying
out the provisions of this section, the Commissioner shall employ recognized
sampling procedures, such as are designated in National Bureau of Standards
Handbook 67, “Checking Prepackaged Commodities,” or in National Bureau of
Standards Handbook 133, “Checking the Net Contents of Packaged Goods;”
   (c)   Enforce the appropriate term or unit of weight or measure to be used,
whenever the Commissioner determines in the case of a specific commodity that
an existing practice of declaring the quantity by weight, measure, numerical
count, or combination thereof, does not facilitate value comparisons by
consumers, or offers an opportunity for consumer confusion;
   (d)   Inspect and seal timing devices and scanners for accuracy in
accordance with the requirements of National Bureau of Standards Handbook 44,
“Specifications, Tolerances and Other Technical Requirements for Weighing of
Measuring Devices,” and RC 1327.54 “Misrepresentation of Pricing.”
(Ord. No. 1668-91. Passed 10-21-91, eff. 10-28-91)
§ 555.05 Duty of Testing and Sealing
   (a)   When necessary for the enforcement of the weights and measures codes,
the Commissioner shall and is hereby:
      (1)   Authorized to enter any commercial premises during normal business
hours, except that in the event such premises are not open to the public.
      (2)   Empowered to issue violations, and condemned from use orders with
respect to any weights and measures commercially used, and issue violations and
off sale orders with respect to any packaged commodities or bulk commodities
kept, offered, or exposed for sale.
      (3)   Empowered to seize, for use as evidence, without formal warrant,
any incorrect or unapproved weight, measure, package, or commodity found to be
used, retained, offered, or exposed for sale or sold in violation of the
provisions of this chapter.
   (b)   It shall be the duty of the Commissioner, and said Commissioner is
authorized and required, to test all weights and measures in the fee schedule
used commercially in the City of Cleveland at least once each calendar year, or
as often as deemed desirable by said Commissioner. If said Commissioner shall
have found the same to be correct, according to the standards established by
the Department of Agriculture of the State of Ohio, he or she shall seal and
mark the same with a seal which includes the date of the inspection.
   (c)   The Commissioner has the authority to initiate legal action for the
purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. All legal actions
initiated by the Commissioner to enforce the provisions of this chapter shall
be brought by the Director of Law upon request of the Commissioner. In addition
to filing criminal charges, as provided for in this chapter, actions may be
brought for injunctive relief in any court of competent jurisdiction
restraining any person from violating any provision of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 1668-91. Passed 10-21-91, eff. 10-28-91)
§ 555.06 Record of Tests
   The Commissioner shall retain in the Bureau of Weights and Measures a
permanent record of all tests made. The Commissioner shall keep a daily record
of all weights and measures used commercially which have been inspected and
tested as provided for in this chapter, along with the location, name of the
business and the user/merchandise of said weights and measures.
(Ord. No. 1668-91. Passed 10-21-91, eff. 10-28-91)
§ 555.07 Accessibility for Testing Purposes
   A weighing or measuring device shall be so located, or such facilities for
normal access thereto shall be provided, that the testing equipment of the
weights and measures official, in the amount and size deemed necessary by such
official for the proper conduct of the test, may readily be brought to the
device by customary means. Otherwise, it shall be the responsibility of the
device owner or operator to supply such special facilities, including necessary
labor as may be needed to transport the testing equipment to and from the
device, as required by the weights and measures official.
(Ord. No. 1241-91. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 6-26-91)
§ 555.08 Fees
   (a)   For all inspections required in this section, the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses shall collect a fee for testing and/or sealing weights
and measures. All charges shall conform to the following schedule:
For the sealing of computer scales        $35.00 each
For the sealing of counter scales         $20.00 each
For the sealing of pre-package scales     $50.00 each
For the sealing of spring scales          $20.00 each
For the sealing of druggist prescription  $20.00 each
scales
For the sealing of overhead beams         $35.00 each
For the sealing of dormant scales
   (0 - 2,000 pounds)                  $50.00 each
   (2,001 - 5,000 pounds)              $55.00 each
   (over 5,001 pounds)                 $65.00 each
For the sealing of platform scales
   (0 - 100 pounds)                    $30.00 each
   (101 - 400 pounds)                  $40.00 each
   (over 401 pounds)                   $55.00 each
For the sealing of timing devices         $40.00 per site
For the sealing of dryer timing devices
   (1-15 dryers)                       $40.00
   (16-30 dryers)                      $50.00
   (over 30 dryers)                    $65.00
For the sealing of car washes, air hoses, $10.00 each
vacuums
For the sealing of parking time clocks    $30.00 each
and recorders
For the sealing of retail motor fuel      $30.00 each
dispenser
For the sealing of retail kerosene        $30.00 each
dispenser
For the sealing of vehicle tank meters
   (0-6,500 gallons)                   $80.00 each
   (6,501 gallons and up)              $105.00 each
For the sealing of linear measures,       $20.00 each
mechanical
For the sealing of jewelry scales         $30.00 each
For the sealing of heavy scales (truck,   $125.00 each
hopper, crane)
For the sealing of scanners
   (0-3 scanners)                      $50.00 per location
   (4 or more)                         $110.00 per location
Prepackage Check Weighing Fee             $35.00 per lot
For the sealing of bulk fuel rack meters  $80.00 each
Charge for the time used in work of       $50.00 per hour (or any portion of an
sealers in special service                hour) per sealer
 
   (b)   If an inspection fee prescribed by this section is not received by the
Bureau of Weights and Measures within forty-five (45) days from the date it is
due, a penalty of fifty percent (50%) of any fee shall be imposed in addition
to the original fee.
   (c)   No weight and/or measure of any kind shall be tested and/or sealed by
the Commissioner unless full payment has been received for any previous testing
and/or sealing of the weight and/or measure.
(Ord. No. 684-14. Passed 6-2-14, eff. 6-4-14)
§ 555.09 Deposits
   All monies collected shall be deposited with the City Treasurer and shall be
credited to the General Fund.
(Ord. No. 1241-91. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 6-26-91)
§ 555.10 Systems of Weights and Measures
   The definitions of basic units of weight and measure, the tables of Weights
and Measures, and weights and measures equivalents as published by the National
Bureau of Standards are recognized and adopted by the Bureau of Weights and
Measures and shall govern weighing and measuring equipment and transactions in
the City of Cleveland.
(Ord. No. 1241-91. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 6-26-91)
§ 555.11 Requirements for the Method of Sale of Commodities
   The Uniform Regulation for the Method of Sale of Commodities as adopted by
the National Conference on Weights and Measures and published in National
Standards Handbook 130, “Uniform Laws and Regulations”, and supplements thereto
or revisions thereof, shall apply to the method of sale of commodities in the
City of Cleveland.
(Ord. No. 1241-91. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 6-26-91)
§ 555.12 Technical Requirements for Weights and Measures
   The specifications, tolerances, and other technical requirements for
commercial and other weighing and measuring devices, law enforcement, and data
gathering, as adopted by the National Conference on Weights and Measures and
published in National Bureau of Standards Handbook 44, “Specifications,
Tolerances, and Other Technical Requirements for Weighing and Measuring
Devices”, and supplements thereto or revisions thereof, shall apply to weights
and measures in the City of Cleveland except insofar as modified or rejected by
the Ohio Revised Code or the Ohio Administrative Code.
(Ord. No. 1241-91. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 6-26-91)
§ 555.13 Suitability of Equipment
   Commercial equipment shall be suitable for the service in which it is used
with respect to elements of its design, including but not limited to its
weighing capacity (for weighing devices), its computing capability (for
computing devices), the character, number size, and location of its indicating
or recording elements, and the value of its smallest unit and unit prices.
(Ord. No. 1241-91. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 6-26-91)
§ 555.14 Maintenance of Equipment
   All weights or measures in service and all mechanisms and devices attached
thereto or used in connection therewith shall continuously be maintained in
proper operating condition throughout the period of such service. Weights or
measures in service at a single place of business found to be in error
predominately in a direction favorable to the device user and near the
tolerance limits shall not be considered “maintained in a proper operating
condition.”
(Ord. No. 1241-91. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 6-26-91)
§ 555.15 Method of Operation
   Equipment shall be operated only in the manner that is obviously indicated
by its construction or that is indicated by instructions on the weight or
measure.
(Ord. No. 1241-91. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 6-26-91)
§ 555.16 Position of Equipment
   A weight or measure equipped with a primary indicating element and used in
direct sales, except a prescription scale, shall be so positioned that its
indications may be accurately read and the weighing or measuring operations may
be observed from some reasonable “customer” position. The permissible distance
between the equipment and a reasonable customer position shall be determined in
each case upon the basis of the individual circumstances, particularly the size
and character of the indicating element.
(Ord. No. 1241-91. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 6-26-91)
§ 555.17 Information Required on Packages
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or by regulations promulgated
pursuant hereto, any package kept for the purpose of sale or offered or exposed
for sale shall conform to the standards of the Uniform Packaging and Labeling
Regulation as adopted by the National Conference on Weights and Measures and
published in the National Bureau of Standards Handbook 130, “Uniform Laws and
Regulations”, and RC 1327.57, “Information Required on Packages and
Advertising.”
(Ord. No. 1241-91. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 6-26-91)
§ 555.18 Advertising Packages for Sale
   Whenever a packaged commodity is advertised in any manner with the retail
price stated, there shall be closely and conspicuously associated with the
retail price a declaration of quantity as is required by law or regulation to
appear on the package. Where a declaration is required, only the declaration
that sets forth the quantity in terms of the smaller unit of weight or measure
need appear in the advertisement.
(Ord. No. 1241-91. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 6-26-91)
§ 555.19 Prohibitions
   No person shall:
   (a)   Use or have in possession for use in commerce any incorrect weight or
measure;
   (b)   Remove any tag, seal, or mark from any weight or measure without
specific written authorization from the proper authority;
   (c)   Hinder or obstruct any weights and measures official in the
performance of his or her duties;
   (d)   Obstruct the Commissioner in the performance of any of the duties
imposed upon said Commissioner by the provisions of this chapter;
   (e)   Sell, offer or expose, use or keep to be used, any weight or measure
for weighing or measuring any article bought or sold or offered or exposed for
sale, which is liable to indicate false or inaccurate weight or measure, or
which does not conform to the standard established by law;
   (f)   Sell, offer or expose any weight or measure for weighing and/or
measuring of products for sale without said weight or measure having been
tested, marked and sealed by the Commissioner;
   (g)   Sell, offer or expose with intent to use the same for weighing and/or
measuring products for sale, alter a weight or measure, after said weight or
measure has been tested, marked and sealed by the Commissioner, if said
alteration shall cause the device to fail to conform to the standards of this
chapter;
   (h)   Sell, offer or expose for sale any product of any kind, the packaging
and sale of which are under the person’s control, in quantities of less weight,
measure, or count than the weight, measure or count represented to be contained
on said package;
   (i)   Sell, offer or expose for sale less than the quantity he or she
represents, nor take any more than the quantity he or she represents when, as
buyer, he or she furnishes the weight or measure by means of which the quantity
is determined;
   (j)   Misrepresent the price of any commodity or service sold, offered,
exposed, or advertised for sale by weight, measure, or count, nor represent the
price in any manner calculated or tending to mislead or in any way deceive a
person.
(Ord. No. 1668-91. Passed 10-21-91, eff. 10-28-91)
§ 555.20 Presumptive Evidence
   Whenever there shall exist a weight or measure in or about any building,
enclosure, stand or vehicle in which or from which buying or selling is
commonly carried on, there shall be a rebuttable presumption that such weight
or measure is regularly used for the business purposes of that place.
(Ord. No. 1241-91. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 6-26-91)
§ 555.21 Reserved
§ 555.22 Reserved
§ 555.99 Penalty for Code Violations
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or regulations
promulgated pursuant thereto, for which specific penalty has not been
prescribed, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon a first conviction
thereof shall be punished by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment for not more than
three (3) months or both. Upon a subsequent conviction thereof, he or she shall
be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more
than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for up to six (6)
months or both.
(Ord. No. 1241-91. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 6-26-91)
CHAPTER 557 – CEMETERIES
557.01   Definitions
557.02   Certificates and Agreements for Purchase
557.03   Designation of Burial Areas
557.04   Hours
557.05   Speed Limit
557.06   Plat Required; Contents; Approval
557.07   Lot Prices
557.08   Items Determining Lot Prices
557.09   Lot Prices on Cemeteries Hereafter Acquired
557.10   Last Cost Determined and Apportioned
557.11   Endowment Cost
557.12   Sale of Lots or Burial Sites
557.13   Purchase of Lots on Deferred Payments
557.14   Certificate of Purchase Issued after Payment in Full
557.15   Transfer or Assignment of Lots
557.16   Rights Conveyed in Certificate of Purchase
557.17   Right of Cancellation
557.18   Cleveland City Cemetery Endowment Fund
557.19   Contributions to Fund by Owners of Lots Previously Sold
557.20   Annual Payments from Trust Funds
557.21   Trust Funds Deposited in City Cemetery Endowment Fund
557.22   Funds for Additional Care of Beautification
557.23   Cemetery Operating Fund
557.24   Appropriations from General Fund to Cemetery Operating Fund
557.25   Plan of Mausoleums
557.26   Vaults or Crypts for Temporary Use
557.27   Schedule of Mausoleum Prices
557.28   Determination of Crypt or Niche Price
557.29   Provisions for Mausoleum Sales
557.30   Disposition of Mausoleum Endowment Cost
557.31   Plats, Plans and Records
557.32   Distribution of Payments on Lots and Crypts
557.33   Charges for Services
557.34   Rules and Regulations
557.35   Determining Costs of Mausoleums
557.36   Power to Decrease Prices
557.37   Earnings from Mausoleums, etc. to Operating Fund
557.38   Repurchase of Graves
557.39   Reserved
557.40   Special Services
557.99   Penalty – Repealed
   Note: The legislative history of this chapter, except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 63410-A, passed
September 22, 1924.
   Note: Pursuant to Sections 9 and 10 of Ord. No. 521-2024, any references to
the Division of Park Maintenance and Properties and Commissioner of Park
Maintenance and Properties have been amended to read Division of Park
Maintenance and Commissioner of Park Maintenance.
Cross-reference:
   Location of cemeteries restricted, CO
347.04
Statutory reference:
   Burial permits, RC 3705.24 et seq.
   Cemetery Endowment Fund, RC 759.12, 759.15
   General provisions and regulations, RC Ch. 759
   Management and control, RC 759.09
§ 557.01 Definitions
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   “Sell” and “purchase” and derivatives thereof do not mean any
alienation of conveyance or any acquisition of title to property of any
description, but only mean the granting by the City to the purchaser and his or
her heirs or successors in interest of the right of sepulture, the right of
access at reasonable times, the right to erect, maintain and care for monuments
or other structures, and the right to beautify lots or graves, all subject to
the provisions of laws, ordinances, rules and regulations applicable in the
premises, as the same shall be in effect at the time of the consummation of
such sale and purchase, or as thereafter amended or changed.
   (b)   “Cemetery lot,” “lot,” “burial lot,” “burial site,” “section” or other
similar descriptive terms mean any lot, section or other appropriate
description of space in a cemetery, shown on the plat thereof as being
designated for the burial of human remains.
   (c)   “Mausoleum” includes “columbarium”.
   (d)   “Crypt” includes “niche”.
(Ord. No. 81865. Passed 4-2-28)
§ 557.02 Certificates and Agreements for Purchase
   Certificates of purchase and agreements for purchase of cemetery lots,
crypts and niches as provided for in this chapter shall be in the form
prescribed by the Director of Law, and shall not be valid until approved by him
or her in each case. Such form shall be sufficient to incorporate therein by
reference or otherwise the provisions of all laws, ordinances and rules and
regulations applicable in the premises, as the same shall be in effect at the
time of the issuance of such certificate or agreement, or as thereafter amended
or changed.
(Ord. No. 81865. Passed 4-2-28)
§ 557.03 Designation of Burial Areas
   The Commissioner of Park Maintenance shall have power to designate areas
within which headstones, monuments and other structures may be erected, and
shall have power to control and regulate the erection in or on cemetery lots.
No headstone, monument or other structure shall be so erected unless approved
by the Commissioner.
(Ord. No. 957-11. Passed 10-24-11, eff. 10-26-11)
§ 557.04 Hours
   The Commissioner of Park Maintenance shall by general rule determine at what
hours and for what purposes the cemeteries shall be open to pedestrians and to
vehicles.
(Ord. No. 1659-09. Passed 11-30-09, eff. 12-3-09)
§ 557.05 Speed Limit
   No motor vehicle shall be driven faster than fifteen (15) miles per hour
within any cemetery owned by the City.
(Ord. No. 957-11. Passed 10-24-11, eff. 10-26-11)
§ 557.06 Plat Required; Contents; Approval
   The Commissioner of Park Maintenance shall prepare a plat of every cemetery
owned or established by the City. The plat shall show all drives, walks or
other thoroughfares; all sewers, drains or watercourses; all lots reserved for
buildings necessary in the administration of the cemetery; all areas reserved
as parks or open spaces; all burial lots; all areas reserved for future
platting. The Commissioner may, with the approval of the directors of the
departments concerned, requisition the services of any office or division which
may be needed in the preparation of the plat. In every case the value of
services shall be paid from the Cemetery Operating Fund to the General Fund.
The plat shall be subject to the approval of the Platting Commissioner as to
all drains and sewers shown on the plat, and subject to the approval of the
Director of Parks and Recreation in all respects. When approved it shall be
filed as public record in the office of the Commissioner, subject to
alterations, amendment, supplement or supersession only by a plat similarly
prepared and approved which shall specifically state the plat or particular
items of a particular plat intended to be altered, amended, supplemented or
superseded. No interment shall be permitted except in a burial lot or site
shown as such upon the plat herein required.
(Ord. No. 957-11. Passed 10-24-11, eff. 10-26-11)
§ 557.07 Lot Prices
   Prices at which cemetery lots, or parts thereof, may be sold shall be fixed
by the Commissioner of Park Maintenance, at the time of platting any cemetery
or part of any cemetery hereinafter acquired by the City, or not previously
platted. The prices so fixed for all the lots shown on any plat shall be
included in a single schedule, which shall clearly identify each lot shown on
the plat, and the price. No schedule or amendment thereto shall be valid until
the approval of the Director of Parks and Recreation and the Director of
Finance are endorsed thereon, and until it is filed as a public record in the
office of the Commissioner. Whenever any prices so fixed are to be changed, it
shall be done only by amending the schedule, or by adopting a new schedule,
which shall supersede all prior schedules applicable to the plat.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 557.08 Items Determining Lot Prices
   The price of each lot shall be the sum of three (3) items determined as
provided in Sections
557.09 to
557.11:
   (a)   The land cost, in which term is included the cost to the City of the
land and general improvements represented by such lot or site;
   (b)   The endowment cost, being the contribution from the sale price made to
the Cleveland City Cemetery Endowment Fund; and
   (c)   The operation cost, being the amount required for the care and upkeep
of the lot, as shall be determined by the Commissioner of Park Maintenance, and
which sum shall be the balance remaining after deductions of divisions (a) and
(b) of this section from the selling price of each lot. The Commissioner of
Park Maintenance may amend this cost as the Commissioner deems necessary. Each
item and the total price shall be shown on the schedule required by Section
557.07.
(Ord. No. 957-11. Passed 10-24-11, eff. 10-26-11)
§ 557.09 Lot Prices on Cemeteries Hereafter Acquired
   In the case of cemeteries hereafter acquired, the Commissioner of Park
Maintenance shall determine an amount which shall be the sum of the amounts
paid for the entire tract acquired for cemetery purposes, plus an amount
determined to be required for general improvements of whatever character, plus
any amounts to be paid as interest on bonds or other obligations of the City
issued to pay for the acquisition or improvement of such cemetery. The sum so
determined shall be divided into as many portions as there are lots laid out on
such plat, and each portion shall be determined to be the land cost of some
particular lot; provided, that when such tract is not all platted at once, only
a proper proportion of the sum determined as provided shall be apportioned to
the lots platted at any one time. In determining the portion of land cost to be
fixed upon any one (1) lot, consideration shall be taken of area, location and
any other factors affecting the relative value of the several lots.
(Ord. No. 1659-09. Passed 11-30-09, eff. 12-3-09)
§ 557.10 Last Cost Determined and Apportioned
   In the case of lots in cemeteries hereafter laid out, and in the case of the
platting hereafter of land heretofore acquired for cemetery purposes, the last
cost shall be determined and apportioned to the several lots as nearly as may
be in conformity with the principles indicated in Section
557.09.
(Ord. No. 81865. Passed 4-2-28)
§ 557.11 Endowment Cost
   The Director of Finance shall declare the amount of the endowment cost,
which amount shall be a contribution to the Cleveland City Cemetery Endowment
Fund from the receipts of the sale price. The Director may change this amount
as deemed necessary by the Director.
(Ord. No. 957-11. Passed 10-24-11, eff. 10-26-11)
§ 557.12 Sale of Lots or Burial Sites
   When the plat and schedule provided for in Sections
557.06 and
557.07 have been approved and filed, the Commissioner of Park Maintenance shall
have power on behalf of the City to sell lots, parts of lots or burial sites,
at the respective prices shown in such schedule. No burial lot or site shall be
sold unless it is platted, nor at any price not shown on such schedule.
(Ord. No. 1659-09. Passed 11-30-09, eff. 12-3-09)
§ 557.13 Purchase of Lots on Deferred Payments
   The Commissioner of Park Maintenance may at his or her discretion accept an
initial payment on the price of the lot in an amount not less than half the
total price, nor in any case less than the land cost apportioned to the lot.
Payment of the remainder of the price shall be secured by agreement as the
Commissioner, with the approval of the Director ofParks and Recreation, deems
reasonable. The agreement shall be in form prescribed and approved by the
Director of Law, and shall require the payment to the City for the benefit of
the Cemetery Operating Fund of interest at the rate of six percent (6%) per
annum on the deferred portion of the price, and for the reduction from time to
time of the deferred portion by payments not less frequent than semi-annually,
nor shall the payment of any portion be deferred longer than five (5) years.
The entire amount unpaid shall become due and payable before any interment is
permitted in the lot, but the payment may be waived, and the agreement
continued upon terms approved by the Directors named in this section.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 557.14 Certificate of Purchase Issued after Payment in Full
   No certificate of purchase for any cemetery lot shall be issued until the
price therefor is paid in full. Whenever any deferred payment on such price is
in default for more than thirty (30) days, the entire amount unpaid shall at
once become due, and unless the same is paid forthwith, the Commissioner of
Park Maintenance shall cancel the agreement and tender to the purchaser a
certificate of purchase for so many burial sites therein as the Commissioner
shall determine to have been paid for in full.
(Ord. No. 1659-09. Passed 11-30-09, eff. 12-3-09)
§ 557.15 Transfer or Assignment of Lots
   The person to whom a certificate of purchase as an agreement to purchase has
been issued or the successor in interest of such person, may transfer or assign
such certificate or agreement, as to the whole or any portion of the lot
described therein, subject in every case to the approval and consent of the
Commissioner of Park Maintenance, which shall be recited in and endorsed upon
the instrument evidencing such transfer, in form prescribed by the Director of
Law, and no such transfer or assignment shall be valid unless so endorsed and
unless approved by the Director.
(Ord. No. 1659-09. Passed 11-30-09, eff. 12-3-09)
§ 557.16 Rights Conveyed in Certificate of Purchase
   A certificate of purchase shall not convey to the purchaser any title to the
land described therein, but shall secure to him or her the right of sepulture
for the purchaser and for members of the purchaser’s family, the right of
access at all reasonable times, and the right to erect, maintain and care for
monuments or other structures, and to beautify lots or graves, all subject to
the provisions of laws, ordinances and rules or regulations applicable in the
premises.
(Ord. No. 957-11. Passed 10-24-11, eff. 10-26-11)
§ 557.17 Right of Cancellation
   The City shall reserve the right in the case of the opening of a
thoroughfare or highway on a course through any cemetery to cancel the
certificate of purchase. Upon any cancellation the City shall be obligated to
issue a certificate of purchase in lieu of the one (1) cancelled, describing
another lot of equal price, in the same or another City cemetery, and to pay
the cost of removing and re-interring bodies and of removing or replacing
monuments, structures or improvements placed on the original lot by the holder
of such certificate or at the certificate holder’s option, to issue to the
holder a certificate stating the amount paid for or upon the cancelled
certificate, which amount so certified shall thereafter be credited as paid
upon any lot or crypt purchased by the holder thereof or his or her successors
in interest. No refund shall ever be made of moneys received by reason of the
sale or agreement to sell any lot or crypt.
(Ord. No. 957-11. Passed 10-24-11, eff. 10-26-11)
§ 557.18 Cleveland City Cemetery Endowment Fund
   That portion of receipts from the sale of any cemetery lot which is
designated as the endowment cost shall be paid into the account of a fund of
the cemetery established and designated as the Cleveland City Cemetery
Endowment Fund, the principal and interest of which shall be used for the
purpose of the enlarging, improving, embellishing, operating, maintaining or
caring for the cemeteries of the City. The balance shall be invested by the
Director of Finance, or by the Director’s successor designated for the purpose
by ordinance, in securities in which sinking funds or municipal trust funds are
authorized by statute or ordinance to be invested. Any unencumbered portions at
any time uninvested shall be kept on deposit, at interest, in regular City
depositaries. The principal and earnings from the Cleveland City Cemetery
Endowment Fund shall be used to defray the cost of maintaining and caring for
the cemeteries, including any common structures, any structures erected on lots
or burial sites, the drives, walks, and general improvements to the cemeteries.
(Ord. No. 957-11. Passed 10-24-11, eff. 10-26-11)
§ 557.19 Contributions to Fund by Owners of Lots Previously Sold
   The City will at all times accept contributions to the Cleveland City
Cemetery Endowment Fund in respect of any lot previously sold.
(Ord. No. 1659-09. Passed 11-30-09, eff. 12-3-09)
§ 557.20 Annual Payments from Trust Funds
   In addition to the endowment funds, the City is authorized to receive from
trustees, executors or other custodians of trust funds under wills or
agreements providing for the upkeep of lots and monuments and headstones in
cemeteries belonging to or under the control of the City, such annual payments
as such custodians of the trust fund are able and willing to make. The funds so
received shall be expended by the Commissioner of Park Maintenance in the
maintenance and beautification of the particular lot and the maintenance and
repair of any headstone and monument standing thereon for which such
contribution is made. The Commissioner is authorized to issue receipts for such
funds stipulating that the same shall be expended solely for the improvements
of the lots, headstones and monuments designated by such custodian of the trust
fund.
(Ord. No. 1659-09. Passed 11-30-09, eff. 12-3-09)
§ 557.21 Trust Funds Deposited in City Cemetery Endowment Fund
   TTrust funds previously established for the perpetual care of cemetery lots
already sold may be turned in whole or in part into the Cleveland City Cemetery
Endowment Fund with the concurrence of the Commissioner of Park Maintenance and
of the purchaser of any such lot or his or her representative or successor in
interest having power to assent thereto. Any such funds shall be treated as a
permanent part of the Cleveland City Cemetery Endowment Fund under Section
557.22. In case trust funds are not so turned into such fund, the original
trust agreement shall continue in force unchanged.
(Ord. No. 957-11. Passed 10-24-11, eff. 10-26-11)
§ 557.22 Funds for Additional Care of Beautification
   Purchasers of cemetery lots may create and the City may accept the custody
and administration of permanent funds for the purpose of providing the
perpetual care or beautification of designated lots in addition to the care
provided from the Cemetery Operating Fund. All permanent funds so accepted
shall be evidenced by an agreement in form prescribed and approved by the
Director of Law, executed by the purchaser in his or her own behalf and by the
Commissioner of Park Maintenance and the Director of Finance on behalf of the
City. For the purpose of custody and investment, but not otherwise, the
principal amount of the trust funds, whether created prior to the enactment of
this section or under its terms, shall be treated as a permanent part of the
Cleveland City Cemetery Endowment Fund. The earnings of the permanent funds
shall be applied exclusively to the perpetual care and beautification of the
designated lot for which the funds were accepted. The expenditure may be made
each year as the earnings accrue, or a reserve may be accumulated of the
earnings in such amount as the Commissioner may deem necessary to meet
emergencies and unanticipated requirements.
(Ord. No. 957-11. Passed 10-24-11, eff. 10-26-11)
§ 557.23 Cemetery Operating Fund
   (a)   Except as described in Sections
557.21 and
557.22, the principal and income from the Cleveland City Cemetery Endowment
Fund and from deferred payments due thereto, and all earnings attributable to
the cemeteries, including those described in division (c) of Section
557.08, may be paid into the Cemetery Operating Fund established. Moneys in the
Cemetery Operating Fund shall be available each year for appropriation for the
purpose of the enlarging, improving, embellishing, operating, maintaining or
caring for the cemeteries of the City, or parts thereof.
   (b)   No moneys in the Cemetery Operating Fund derived from the Cleveland
City Cemetery Endowment Fund or from trust funds or from earnings attributable
to the cemeteries shall ever be transferred or diverted to any other fund, or
expended for any other purpose than those specified in this section.
   (c)   The salaries of the employees necessary for the cemeteries and other
expenses necessary for the cemeteries, shall be payable from the Cemetery
Operating Fund.
(Ord. No. 957-11. Passed 10-24-11, eff. 10-26-11)
§ 557.24 Appropriations from General Fund to Cemetery Operating Fund
   Council shall each year appropriate from the General Fund to the Cemetery
Operating Fund an amount sufficient with balances in and revenues of such
Cemetery Operating Fund to defray the expenses payable from such Cemetery
Operating Fund for the ensuing year. All unencumbered appropriations from the
Cemetery Operating Fund shall lapse at the end of the year for which such
appropriations were made. Any unencumbered balance remaining in such Cemetery
Operating Fund at the end of any year, not exceeding the amount appropriated
thereto from the General Fund in addition to the cost of pauper burials for
such year, shall revert to the General Fund.
(Ord. No. 81865. Passed 4-2-28)
§ 557.25 Plan of Mausoleums
   The Commissioner of Park Maintenance shall at all times keep in his or her
office as a public record a plan of every City mausoleum, which plan shall show
and clearly identify every crypt and niche intended for use as a repository of
human remains. The plan shall not be of any force or effect for the purposes of
this chapter until and unless it is approved by the Director of Parks and
Recreation. The plan may be altered, amended, supplemented or superseded by
only a like plan similarly approved, which shall specifically state the plan or
particular items of the plan intended to be altered, amended, supplemented or
superseded.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 557.26 Vaults or Crypts for Temporary Use
   The Commissioner of Park Maintenance may designate upon the plan provided
for in Section
557.25 a sufficient number of vaults or crypts for the purpose of the temporary
receipt and keeping of human remains, pending their permanent burial or
placement in a private crypt. No human remains not intended for immediate
burial or placement in a private crypt shall be placed or kept in any other
place in any City cemetery or mausoleum than in the vaults or crypts designated
as provided in this section. The Commissioner shall have power in each case to
fix the rental for the use of such temporary vault or crypt, and to require the
permanent burial or placement in a private crypt or other disposal of such
remains after a period deemed by such Commissioner to be reasonable in each
case.
(Ord. No. 1659-09. Passed 11-30-09, eff. 12-3-09)
§ 557.27 Schedule of Mausoleum Prices
   Prices at which crypts and niches of City mausoleums shall be sold shall be
fixed by the Commissioner of Park Maintenance not later than the first offering
of any crypt or niche for sale, in the case of mausoleums hereafter erected.
The prices so fixed for all of the crypts and niches shown on any plan shall be
included in a single schedule, which shall clearly identify each crypt or niche
and the price. No schedule or amendment thereto shall be valid until the
approval of the Director of Parks and Recreation and the Director of Finance
are endorsed thereon, and until it is filed as a public record in the office of
the Commissioner. Whenever any prices so fixed are to be changed, it shall be
done only by amending the schedule, or by adopting a new schedule which shall
supersede all prior schedules applicable to the plan.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 557.28 Determination of Crypt or Niche Price
   The price of each crypt or niche shall be the sum of two (2) items, namely:
   (a)   The land and capital cost, which shall be determined upon a basis
corresponding in principal to the basis established in Sections
557.09 and
557.10 for the determination of land cost in the case of cemetery lots; and
   (b)   The endowment cost, being the contribution required to be made to the
Cleveland City Cemetery Endowment Fund, which shall be determined as
established in Section
557.11. Each such item, and the total price, shall be shown on the schedule
hereinbefore required.
(Ord. No. 1659-09. Passed 11-30-09, eff. 12-3-09)
§ 557.29 Provisions for Mausoleum Sales
   The provisions of Sections
557.01 and
557.12 to
557.17, in so far as they can be applied to the sale and care of mausoleum
crypts and niches, shall be so applied in the same manner as they are
applicable to the sale and care of cemetery lots.
(Ord. No. 81865. Passed 4-2-28)
§ 557.30 Disposition of Mausoleum Endowment Cost
   That portion of the price of any mausoleum crypt or niche which is
designated as the endowment cost shall upon its receipt be paid forthwith into
the Cleveland City Cemetery Endowment Fund.
(Ord. No. 98793. Passed 4-20-33)
§ 557.31 Plats, Plans and Records
   The Commissioner of Park Maintenance shall prepare and maintain correct
plats, plans or other records sufficient to show the purchasers or holders of
certificates of purchase, or of other instruments equivalent thereto, of all
lots, crypts and niches.
(Ord. No. 1659-09. Passed 11-30-09, eff. 12-3-09)
§ 557.32 Distribution of Payments on Lots and Crypts
   Upon the payment of the price of a cemetery lot, or a mausoleum crypt, or of
an initial payment thereon, so much thereof as represents land cost, or land
and capital cost, shall be paid into the sinking fund or into bond interest and
retirement funds respectively, and applied to the payment of cemetery or
mausoleum bonds and interest thereon; provided that if at any time there shall
be no cemetery or mausoleum bonds outstanding or if there is accumulated in
such funds an amount which, with earnings thereon, will pay the interest on and
discharge such bonds when due, such land cost, or land and capital cost shall
be paid into the Cemetery Operating Fund.
(Ord. No. 98793. Passed 4-20-33)
§ 557.33 Charges for Services
   The Commissioner of Park Maintenance shall have power to fix and determine
charges to be made for the use of City crematories, or for other services
rendered for the cemeteries.
(Ord. No. 1659-09. Passed 11-30-09, eff. 12-3-09)
§ 557.34 Rules and Regulations
   The Commissioner of Park Maintenance shall have power to make and prescribe
rules and regulations not inconsistent with any provisions of this chapter, for
the management and conduct of the cemeteries and of any matters relating to the
administration thereof.
(Ord. No. 1659-09. Passed 11-30-09, eff. 12-3-09)
§ 557.35 Determining Costs of Mausoleums
   Wherever a City mausoleum is combined in the same building with a chapel, a
crematory or other facilities not solely required for the mausoleum, the
Commissioner of Park Maintenance shall have power in determining the land and
capital cost of such mausoleum to exclude such portion of the total cost of
such entire building as may represent the cost of such crematory, chapel and
other facilities not solely required for such mausoleum.
(Ord. No. 1659-09. Passed 11-30-09, eff. 12-3-09)
§ 557.36 Power to Decrease Prices
   Wherever the Commissioner of Park Maintenance determines that cemetery lots,
mausoleum crypts or niches cannot be sold at prices determined as provided in
the foregoing sections of this chapter, he or she shall have power, with the
approval of the Director of Parks and Recreation, to fix such less price as
shall represent the highest price reasonably obtainable, not less than the
endowment cost fixed as determined in this chapter, and to diminish the land
cost or the land and capital cost in proportion as may be required. No sale
shall be made for less than the determined endowment cost, and the full amount
of the endowment cost shall in every case be paid into the respective endowment
funds as in cases where the price is the full sum required by this chapter.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 557.37 Earnings from Mausoleums, etc. to Operating Fund
   All earnings derived from the use of mausoleum buildings, including the use
of crematories, chapels and other facilities therein, shall be paid into the
Cleveland City Cemetery Operating Fund.
(Ord. No. 98793. Passed 4-20-33)
§ 557.38 Repurchase of Graves
   (a)   As used in this section, “grave” shall mean a space within a City-
owned cemetery which is designated for the burial of one (1) dead body; “grave-
site” shall mean a space within a City-owned cemetery which contains one (1) or
more graves; “receipt” shall mean the document which evidences the City’s
original conveyance of rights in a grave to a member or members of the public;
and “certificate of purchase” shall mean the document which evidences the
City’s original conveyance of rights in a grave site to a member or members of
the public.
   (b)   When so requested by the owner of a receipt or a certificate of
purchase, his or her successor(s) or assign(s), and upon receiving said receipt
or certificate, the Commissioner of Park Maintenance may repurchase a grave
which is the subject of the receipt or certificate.
   (c)   When the Commissioner agrees to repurchase a grave, he or she shall do
so for the price at which the grave was originally sold by the City less ten
percent (10%) of that price to cover administrative costs incurred in the
repurchase process. In the case of a grave which has been vacated through
disinterment, the Commissioner may credit the repurchase price against the cost
of disinterment. The portion of the repurchase price which exceeds the cost of
disinterment, if any, shall be paid to the seller of the grave.
   (d)   When a grave has been repurchased by the Commissioner, the cemetery
records shall reflect the availability of that grave for purchase.
(Ord. No. 2044-92. Passed 12-7-92, eff. 12-14-92)
§ 557.39 Reserved
§ 557.40 Special Services
   The Commissioner of Park Maintenance shall prepare a schedule of special
cemetery services not in conflict with the foregoing Codified Ordinances.
Charges for such services shall be determined by said Commissioner and shall be
effective upon approval by the Board of Control.
(Ord. No. 2044-92. Passed 12-7-92, eff. 12-14-92)
§ 557.99 Penalty – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1659-09. Passed 11-30-09, eff. 12-3-09)
CHAPTER 559 – PARKS
559.01   Use of Parks
559.02   Designation of Cleveland Cultural Gardens
559.03   Polish Garden
559.04   Slovenian Garden
559.05   Czech Garden
559.06   Rusin Garden
559.07   Slovak Garden
559.08   Italian Garden
559.09   Grecian Garden
559.10   Lithuanian Garden
559.11   German Garden
559.111   Centennial Peace Plaza
559.12   Hungarian Garden
559.13   Shakespeare Garden and Bruot Gate and Walk
559.14   Croatian Cultural Garden
559.15   Hebrew Cultural Garden
559.16   Syrian Garden
559.17   American Garden
559.18   Irish Garden
559.19   Peace Garden of the Nations
559.20   Ukranian Garden
559.21   Finnish Garden
559.22   Estonian Garden
559.23   Romanian Garden
559.231   African-American Garden
559.232   India Garden
559.233   Chinese Garden
559.234   Lebanese Garden
559.235   Latvian Garden
559.236   Azerbaijan Garden
559.237   Serbian Garden
559.238   Albanian Garden
559.239   Korean Garden
559.240   Vietnamese Garden
559.241   Armenian Garden
559.242   Turkish Garden
559.243   Native American Garden
559.244   Future Garden at 1445 Martin Luther King, Jr. Boulevard
559.245   French American Garden
559.246   Russian Garden
559.247   Pakistani Garden
559.248   Colombian Cultural Garden
559.24   Helen E. Simpson-Ludlow Park
559.25   Definitions
559.26   Traffic Limitations
559.27   Speed Limit
559.28   Standing upon Drives
559.29   Obstructions and Trash Placed in Parks; Distributing Circulars
559.30   Posting Signs or Advertising; Permit
559.31   Bringing Plant Material into Parks
559.32   Use of Baseball Equipment
559.33   Control of Dogs or Other Animals
559.34   Vacating Areas in Emergencies
559.35   Climbing Trees
559.36   Picnicking
559.37   Use of Playgrounds
559.38   Games of Chance
559.39   Solicitors, Showmen Prohibited
559.40   Use of Firearms
559.41   Disturbing Animals or Wildlife
559.42   Boats, etc., in Watercourses
559.43   Boat Service; Skating
559.44   Going onto Ice
559.45   Behavior in Parks
559.46   Use or Sale of Intoxicating Liquor
559.47   Entering “No Admittance” Areas
559.48   Swings and Hammocks
559.49   Fishing, Wading or Swimming
559.50   Sounding Whistles
559.51   Defacing Notices of Rules
559.52   Hours; Posting of Signs
559.53   Trespass on City Facilities
559.54   Prohibited Hours in the Mall Area
559.541   Prohibited Hours in Public Square
559.55   Resisting Police
559.56   Exhibiting Permits for Inspection
559.57   Limitations on Permits; Liability of Holders
559.58   Regulations Governing Bicycles and Tricycles
559.59   Motor Vehicles
559.60   Restrictions on Driving and Parking
559.61   Jim Mahon Park
559.99   Penalty
   Note: The legislative history of this chapter, except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 63410-A, passed
September 22, 1924.
Cross-reference:
   Destruction of shrubs, trees and crops, CO
623.06
   Littering in parks, CO
613.08
   Tree injury and destruction prohibited, CO
509.01 et seq.
Statutory reference:
   Assessments for tree planting or maintenance, RC 727.011
   Establishment and extension, RC 755.08
   Land appropriation for parks, RC 715.21, 719.01
   Municipal parks, RC 715.21, 755.01 et seq.
   Power to regulate shade trees and shrubbery, RC 715.20
   Power to regulate vehicle speed, RC 4511.07
   Supervision and maintenance of recreational facilities, RC 755.13
§ 559.01 Use of Parks
   The parks are constructed and maintained for the use of the public at large,
and shall be opened daily to all citizens on absolutely equal terms and none
shall be given special privileges therein, or be permitted to make use of them
for any purpose not practically common to all and not in consonance with the
proper use of the park.
   To that end no person shall have or give any musical, theatrical or other
entertainment nor shall any military society or other parade, procession,
public gathering or meeting of any kind, take place in any of the parks. No
person shall in any of the parks or in any refectory, restaurant, building or
place on the same, solicit fares, or beg or publicly solicit subscriptions or
make any oration, harangue, demonstration or address; nor shall the speakers’
stand be used, except upon the written permission of the Director of Public
Properties.
§ 559.02 Designation of Cleveland Cultural Gardens
   In view of the improvements installed and now existing in Rockefeller
Parkway, and with the view to perpetuating the sentimental and historical
association established;
   Situated in the City of Cleveland, County of Cuyahoga and State of Ohio and
known as being part of Original 100 Acre Lot Nos. 376, 375, 367, 377, 384 and
385 of East Cleveland Township, and bounded and described as follows:
   All that portion of Rockefeller Park lying between Wade Park, N. E., on the
south, the New York Central Lines, LLC, on the north, except that portion of
St. Clair Ave. N. E. and Superior Avenue, N.E. lying within these bounds, shall
be designated Cleveland Cultural Gardens. Be the same more or less subject to
all legal highways and easements of record.
   Cleveland Cultural Gardens shall be subdivided into units, bounded and
described in the following sections.
(Ord. No. 1327-12. Passed 12-3-12, eff. 12-6-12)
§ 559.03 Polish Garden
   Beginning at a point in the westerly line of the upper drive at its point of
intersection with the westerly prolongation of the center line of Maury Ave.;
thence northerly along the westerly line of the upper drive about 149.00 feet
to an iron pipe in the northeasterly corner of the Jugoslav Garden which is the
principal place of beginning; thence westerly along the northerly line of the
Jugoslav Garden 419.07 feet to an iron pipe in the easterly line of the lower
drive; thence northerly along the easterly line of lower drive 176.90 feet to
the southerly line of St. Clair Ave.; thence easterly along the southerly line
of St Clair Ave. 395.80 feet, to the westerly line of the upper drive; thence
southerly along the westerly line of the upper drive 278.60 feet to the
principal place of beginning.
(Ord. No. 109-56. Passed 2-11-57, eff. 2-13-57)
§ 559.04 Slovenian Garden
   Beginning at a point in the westerly line of the upper drive at its point of
intersection with the westerly prolongation of the center line of Maury Ave.;
thence southerly along the westerly line of the upper drive 108.22 feet to an
iron pipe which is also the northeasterly corner of the Czech Garden; thence
westerly along the northerly line of the Czech Garden 393.15 feet, to an iron
pipe in the easterly line of the lower drive; thence northerly along the
easterly line of the lower drive 120.35 feet to an iron pipe in the
southwesterly corner of the Polish Garden; thence easterly along the southerly
line of the Polish Garden 419.07 feet to an iron pipe in the westerly line of
the upper drive; thence southerly along the westerly line of the upper drive
about 149.00 feet to the place of beginning.
(Ord. No. 811-95. Passed 6-19-95, eff. 6-28-95)
   Note: Pursuant to Ord. No. 811-95, passed 6-19-95, effective 6-28-95, the
“Jugoslav Garden” was renamed the “Slovenian Garden.”
§ 559.05 Czech Garden
   Beginning at an iron pipe in the westerly line of the upper drive, which is
also the southeasterly corner of the Jugoslav Garden; thence southerly along
the westerly line of the upper drive 272.00 feet to an iron pipe in the
northeasterly corner of the Rusin Garden; thence westerly along the northerly
line of the Rusin Garden 346.20 feet to an iron pipe in the easterly line of
the lower drive; thence northerly along the easterly line of the lower drive
471.90 feet to an iron pipe in the southwesterly corner of the Jugoslav Garden;
thence westerly along the southerly line of the Jugoslav Garden 393.15 feet to
the place of beginning.
(Ord. No. 109-56. Passed 2-11-57, eff. 2-13-57)
§ 559.06 Rusin Garden
   Beginning at an iron pipe in the westerly line of the upper drive which is
also the southeasterly corner of the Czech Garden; thence southerly along the
westerly line of the upper drive 341.00 feet to an iron pipe in the
northeasterly corner of the Slovak Garden; thence westerly along the northerly
line of the Slovak Garden 389.53 feet to an iron pipe in the easterly line of
the lower drive; thence northerly along the easterly line of the lower drive
349.10 feet to an iron pipe in the southwesterly corner of the Czech Garden;
thence easterly along the southerly line of the Czech Garden 346.20 feet to the
place of beginning.
(Ord. No. 109-56. Passed 2-11-57, eff. 2-13-57)
§ 559.07 Slovak Garden
   Beginning at an iron pipe in the westerly line of the upper drive which is
also the southeasterly corner of the Rusin Garden; thence southerly along the
westerly line of the upper drive 552.40 feet to an iron pipe in the northerly
line of the park drive (known as Pollock Hill) connecting the upper and lower
drives; thence westerly along the northerly line of the so-called connecting
drive to an iron pipe in the easterly line of the lower drive; thence northerly
along the easterly line of the lower drive 417.10 feet to an iron pipe in the
southwesterly corner of the Rusin Garden; thence easterly along the southerly
line of the Rusin Garden 389.53 feet to the place of beginning.
(Ord. No. 109-56. Passed 2-11-57, eff. 2-13-57)
§ 559.08 Italian Garden
   Beginning at a stone monument in the easterly line of the upper drive in
Rockefeller Park at its intersection with the center line of Parkgate Ave.,
N.E.; thence westerly along the prolongation of the center line of Parkgate
Ave., N.E., 40.85 feet to a point; thence on a line deflecting to the left 92
degrees 26 minutes 40 seconds 87.83 feet to an iron pipe in the westerly line
of the upper drive which is the principal place of beginning; thence southerly
along the arc of a circle whose chord deflects to the left 1 degree 16 minutes
00 seconds 50.00 feet to an iron pipe, said arc having a radius of 786.03 feet,
and a chord which measures 50 feet; thence on a line deflecting to the right
from the chord of said arc produced 82 degrees 25 minutes 00 seconds 307.35
feet, to an iron pipe in the easterly line of the lower drive in said park;
thence northerly along the easterly line of the lower drive 95.90 feet to an
iron pipe in the southerly line of a 20 foot drive connecting the upper and
lower drives in said park (said drive being opposite the westerly end of
Parkgate Ave., N.E., and being commonly known as Pollock Hill); thence
continuing along the southerly side of said 20 foot drive to an iron pipe in
the westerly line of the upper drive; thence southerly along said westerly line
53.08 feet to the principal place of beginning.
(Ord. No. 109-56. Passed 2-11-57, eff. 2-13-57)
§ 559.09 Grecian Garden
   Beginning at an iron pipe in the westerly line of the upper drive which
point is also the southeasterly corner of the Italian Garden; thence southerly
along the westerly line of the upper drive 165.90 feet to an iron pipe in the
northeasterly corner of the Lithuanian Garden; thence westerly along the
northerly line of the Lithuanian Garden 223.55 feet to an iron pipe in the
easterly line of the lower drive; thence northerly along the easterly line of
the lower drive 262.30 feet to an iron pipe in the southwesterly corner of the
Italian Garden; thence easterly along the southerly line of the Italian Garden
307.35 feet to the place of beginning.
(Ord. No. 109-56. Passed 2-11-57, eff. 2-13-57)
§ 559.10 Lithuanian Garden
   Beginning at an iron pipe in the westerly line of the upper drive, which is
also the southeasterly corner of the Grecian Garden; thence southerly along the
westerly line of the upper drive 218.00 feet to an iron pipe in the
northeasterly corner of the German Garden; thence westerly along the northerly
line of the German Garden 225.26 feet to an iron pipe in the easterly line of
the lower drive; thence northerly along the easterly line of the lower drive
201.90 feet to an iron pipe in the southwesterly corner of the Grecian Garden;
thence easterly along the southerly line of the Grecian Garden 223.55 feet to
the place of beginning.
(Ord. No. 109-56. Passed 2-11-57, eff. 2-13-57)
§ 559.11 German Garden
   Commencing at a 3/4" Iron Pipe Found on the Northeast Line of Martin Luther
King Jr. Boulevard at the Southwest Corner of the Lithuanian Cultural Garden,
also being the Northwest Corner of the German Cultural Garden, said point being
the point of beginning;
   Thence N 61°52'46" E, along the southerly line of said Lithuanian Cultural
Garden a distance of 224.39 feet, to a point on the Southwest line of East
Boulevard (80 feet wide), also being the Southeast Corner of the said
Lithuanian Cultural Garden and the Northeast Corner of said German Cultural
Garden;
   Thence Southeasterly along said Southwest line of East Boulevard, 261.51
feet on a curve deflecting to the left, having a radius of 786.03 feet, a
central angle of 19°03'45", and a chord bearing S 44°02'24" E 260.31 feet to
the point of reverse curvature;
   Thence continuing Southeasterly along said Southwest line of East Boulevard,
241.29 feet, along said reverse curve deflecting to the right having a radius
of 848.60 feet, a central angle of 16°17'29" and a chord bearing S 45°25'32" E,
240.48 feet to the Northeast Corner of the Hungarian Cultural Garden also being
Southeast Corner of said German Cultural Garden;
   Thence S 61°51'55" W, along the Northeast line of said Hungarian Cultural
Garden, also being the Southwest line of said German Cultural Garden, a
distance of 211.49 feet to the Southeast Corner of Centennial Plaza;
   Thence along the Northeasterly and Northwesterly lines of said Centennial
Plaza the following 7 courses;
   Thence N 28°08'05" W, a distance of 117.05 feet to the point of curvature of
a non-tangent curve;
   Thence Northwesterly 22.12 feet, along said non-tangent curve deflecting to
the right, having a radius of 72.50 feet, a central angle of 17°28'43" and a
chord bearing N 69°44'21" W, 22.03 feet to a point;
   Thence N 61°00'00" W, a distance of 22.50 feet to the point of curvature of
a tangent curve;
   Thence 56.01 feet along said curve deflecting to the left, having a radius
of 55.00 feet, a central angle of 58°21'00" and a chord bearing S 89°49'30" W,
53.62 feet to a point of tangency;
   Thence S 60°39'00" W, a distance of 18.50 feet to the point of curvature of
a tangent curve;
   Thence 35.87 feet along said curve deflecting to the right, having a radius
of 35.50 feet, a central angle of 57°53'41" and a chord bearing S 89°35'51"W,
34.36 feet to a point;
   Thence S 61°51'55" W, a distance of 39.00 feet to a point on said Northeast
Line of Martin Luther King Jr. Boulevard;
   Thence Northwesterly along said Northeast Line of Martin Luther King Jr.
Boulevard 287.07 feet, along a non-tangent curve deflecting to the right,
having a radius of 2530.00 feet, a central angle of 06°30'04" and a chord
bearing N 26°51'19" W, 286.92 feet to the point of beginning, said described
tract containing 2.6553 Acres (115,663 Square Feet).
(Ord. No. 859-2019. Passed 7-24-19, eff. 7-26-19)
§ 559.111 Centennial Peace Plaza
   Commencing at a 3/4" Iron Pipe Found on the Northeast Line of Martin Luther
King Jr. Boulevard at the Southwest Corner of the Lithuanian Cultural Garden,
also being the Northwest Corner of the German Cultural Garden, thence
Southeasterly along said Northeast line of Martin Luther King Jr. Boulevard,
287.07 feet, along a curve deflecting to the left, having a radius 2530.00
feet, a central angle of 06°30'04" and a chord bearing N 26°51'19" W, 286.92
feet, to the place of beginning;
   Thence N 61°51'55" E, a distance of 39.00 feet to a point;
   Thence Northeasterly 35.87 feet, along a curve deflecting to the left,
having a radius of 35.50 feet, a central angle of 57°53'41" and a chord bearing
N 89°35'51" E, 34.36 feet to a point of tangency;
   Thence N 60°39'00" E, a distance of 18.50 feet to a point of curvature;
   Thence Northeasterly 56.01 feet, along a curve deflecting to the right,
having a radius of 55.00 feet, a central angle of 58°21'00" and a chord bearing
N 89°49'30" E, 53.62 feet to a point of tangency;
   Thence S 61°00'00" E, a distance of 22.50 feet to a point of curvature;
   Thence Southeasterly 22.12 feet, along a curve deflecting to the left,
having a radius of 72.50 feet, a central angle of 17°28'43" and a chord bearing
S 69°44'21" E, 22.03 feet;
   Thence S 28°08'05" E, a distance of 117.05 feet, to a point on the Northwest
Line of the Hungarian Cultural Garden;
   Thence S 61°51'55" W, along said Northwest Line of the Hungarian Cultural
Garden, a distance of 148.05 feet, to a point on the aforesaid Northeast Line
of Martin Luther King Jr. Boulevard;
   Thence Northwesterly along said Northeast Line of Martin Luther King Jr.
Boulevard, 193.72 feet, along a curve deflecting to the right, having a radius
of 2530.00 feet, a central angle of 04°23'14" and a chord bearing N 32°17'58"
W, 193.67 feet, to the point of beginning; said described tract containing
26,858 Square Feet, 0.6166 Acres.
(Ord. No. 859-2019. Passed 7-24-19, eff. 7-26-19)
§ 559.12 Hungarian Garden
   Beginning at an iron pipe in the westerly line of the upper drive, which is
also the southeasterly corner of the German Garden; thence southerly along the
easterly line of the upper drive 245.85 feet to an iron pipe in the
northeasterly corner of the Shakespeare Garden Theater; thence westerly along
the northerly line of the Shakespeare Garden Theater 326.30 feet to an iron
pipe in the easterly line of the lower drive; thence northerly along the
easterly line of the lower drive 248.20 feet to an iron pipe in the
southwesterly corner of the German Garden, thence easterly along the southerly
line of the German Garden 359.70 feet to the place of beginning.
(Ord. No. 109-56. Passed 2-11-57, eff. 2-13-57)
§ 559.13 Shakespeare Garden and Bruot Gate and Walk
   (a)   Shakespeare Garden. That portion of Rockefeller Parkway lying east of
the upper drive, between North Blvd. and East 98th Street shall be designated
the Shakespeare Garden.
   (b)   Bruot Gate and Walk. Beginning at a point in the westerly line of the
upper drive at its point of intersection with the westerly prolongation of the
main axis of the Shakespeare Garden; thence southerly along the westerly line
of the upper drive 35 feet to a point; thence westerly by a line which is
parallel with said westerly prolongation of the main axis of the Shakespeare
Garden and 35.00 feet southerly by rectangular measurement therefrom, about 325
feet to the easterly line of the lower drive; thence northerly along the
easterly line of the lower drive about 60 feet to the southwesterly corner of
the Hungarian Garden; thence easterly along the southerly line of the
Hungarian, (which southerly line is 25 feet northerly by rectangular
measurement and parallel to the westerly prolongation of the main axis of the
Shakespeare Garden) 326.30 feet to an iron pipe in the westerly line of the
upper drive; thence southerly along the westerly line of the upper drive 25.00
feet to the place of beginning.
(Ord. No. 1715-09. Passed 5-10-10, eff. 5-20-10)
§ 559.14 Croatian Cultural Garden
   Beginning in the westerly line of the upper drive also known as East Blvd.,
at a point located 35.00 feet southerly by rectangular measurement from its
point of intersection with the westerly prolongation of the main axis of the
Shakespeare Garden; thence southerly along the westerly line of said upper
drive (East Blvd.) about 121.8 feet to a point; thence westerly 70.00 feet to a
point being 65.00 feet perpendicular by rectangular measurement from the
northerly line of the Hebrew Garden; thence southerly along said perpendicular
line to the northerly line of Hebrew Garden 65.00 feet to a point on said
northerly line of the Hebrew Garden; thence westerly along the said northerly
line of the Hebrew Garden about 200.39 feet to an iron pipe in the easterly
line of the lower drive also known as Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive; thence
northerly along said easterly line of the lower drive (Martin Luther King, Jr.
Drive) 283.3 feet to point located 60.00 feet southerly by rectangular
measurement from the southerly line of the Hungarian Garden; thence easterly
along said line parallel and distant 60.00 feet southerly with the southerly
line of said Hungarian Garden (also 35.00 feet southerly by rectangular
measurement and parallel to the westerly prolongation of said main axis of the
Shakespeare Garden) about 326.00 feet to said upper drive (East Blvd.) and the
principal place of beginning.
(Ord. No. 1533-12. Passed 12-3-12, eff. 12-6-12)
§ 559.15 Hebrew Cultural Garden
   Beginning at a stone monument at the point of intersection of the center
line of East 102nd St. with the center line of Olivet Ave.; thence westerly
along the center line of said Olivet Ave. 839.62 feet to a stone monument in
the center line of East 99th St.; thence northerly along the center line of
said East 99th St. 18.00 feet to a point; thence westerly at right angles to
the center line of East 99th St. 332.11 feet to a point; thence northwesterly
on a line deflecting to the right 59 degrees 08 minutes 30 seconds, 351.08 feet
to an iron pipe in the westerly line of the upper drive (East Blvd.), which
point is the principal place of beginning and is also the northeasterly corner
of the Syrian Garden; thence westerly along the northerly line of the Syrian
Garden 276.50 feet to an iron pipe in the easterly line of the lower drive
(Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive); thence northerly along the easterly line of
the lower drive (Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive) 358.00 feet to an iron pipe in
the southwesterly corner of the Croatian Garden; thence easterly along the
southerly line of the Croatian Garden 200.39 feet to a point; thence northerly
perpendicular to the southerly line of the Croatian Garden 65 feet to a point;
thence easterly along a line parallel to the southerly line of the Croatian
Garden about 70 feet to the westerly line of the upper drive (East Blvd.);
thence southerly along the westerly line of the upper drive (East Blvd.) about
398.20 feet to the principal place of beginning.
(Ord. No. 1533-12. Passed 12-3-12, eff. 12-6-12)
§ 559.16 Syrian Garden
   Beginning at an iron pipe in the westerly line of the upper drive which is
also the southeasterly corner of the Hebrew Garden; thence southerly along the
westerly line of the upper drive on the arc of a circle deflecting to the right
130.5 feet to an iron pipe in the northeasterly corner of the American Colonial
Garden; said arc is subtended by a chord of 129.63 feet; thence on a line
deflecting to the right 126 degrees 30 minutes 00 seconds from a chord of said
arc produced 104.00 feet to an angle point; thence on a line deflecting to the
left 71 degrees 48 minutes 00 seconds, 225.80 feet to an iron pipe in the
easterly line of the lower drive; thence northerly along the easterly line of
the lower drive 216.56 feet to an iron pipe in the southwesterly corner of the
Hebrew Garden, thence easterly along the southerly line of the Hebrew Garden
276.50 feet to the place of beginning.
(Ord. No. 109-56. Passed 2-11-57, eff. 2-13-57)
§ 559.17 American Garden
   Beginning at an iron pipe in the westerly line of the upper drive which is
also the southeasterly corner of the Syrian Garden; thence southerly along the
westerly line of the upper drive about 763.00 feet to a point in the
northeasterly line of the park drive connecting the upper and lower drives;
thence northwesterly along the northeasterly line of the so- called connecting
park drive about 425.00 feet to a point in the easterly line of the lower
drive; thence northerly along the easterly line of the lower drive about 208.00
feet to a point in the southwesterly corner of the Syrian Garden; thence
northeasterly along the southeasterly line of the Syrian Garden 225.80 feet to
an angle point; thence southeasterly along the southwesterly line of the Syrian
Garden 104.00 feet to the place of beginning.
(Ord. No. 410-11. Passed 6-6-11, eff. 6-13-11)
§ 559.18 Irish Garden
   Beginning at a point in the easterly line of the lower drive at its point of
intersection with the northerly line of Superior Ave.; thence northerly along
the easterly line of the lower drive about 665.00 feet to a point in the
southwesterly line of the park drive connecting the lower and upper drives;
thence southeasterly along the southwesterly line of the so- called connecting
park drive about 425.00 feet to a point in the westerly line of the upper
drive; thence southerly along the westerly line of the upper drive and East
99th St. about 350.00 feet to the northerly line of Superior Ave.; thence
westerly along the northerly line of Superior Ave. about 75.00 feet to the
place of beginning.
(Ord. No. 109-56. Passed 2-11-57, eff. 2-13-57)
§ 559.19 Peace Garden of the Nations
   All of that portion of Rockefeller Park between East 99th St. and the upper
boulevard and extending northerly to the extension westerly of the northerly
line of Tanner Ave., and all that portion of Rockefeller Parkway that lies
north of Superior Ave. between East 99th and East 102nd St.
(Ord. No. 706-16. Passed 7-13-16, eff. 7-17-16)
§ 559.20 Ukranian Garden
   Beginning at an iron pipe in the easterly line of the lower drive which is
the northwesterly corner of the Lithuanian Garden; thence westerly along the
westerly prolongation of the northerly line of said Lithuanian Garden 42.00
feet to an iron pipe in the westerly line of said lower drive which is the
principal place of beginning; thence northerly along the westerly line of the
lower drive on the arc of a circle deflecting to the left 202.00 feet to an
iron pipe; said arc of a circle is subtended by a chord measuring 201.26 feet;
thence westerly on a line deflecting to the left 86 degrees 03 minutes 00
seconds with the chord of said last described course, produced 86.12 feet to an
iron pipe at the top of the east bank of Doan Creek; thence southerly along the
top of the east bank of said Doan Creek about 365.00 feet to an iron pipe in
the northerly line of a park drive; thence easterly along the northerly line of
said park drive and the westerly line of the lower drive about 180.00 feet to
the principal place of beginning.
(Ord. No. 109-56. Passed 2-11-57, eff. 2-13-57)
§ 559.21 Finnish Garden
   Beginning at an iron pipe in the easterly line of the lower drive which is
the northwesterly corner of the Syrian Garden; thence westerly by rectangular
measurement with the chord of the westerly curved line of said Syrian Garden,
42.75 feet to an iron pipe on the westerly side of said lower drive; thence
northerly along a line deflecting to the right 88 degrees 35 minutes 00 seconds
with the westerly prolongation of said last described course, 122.00 feet to an
iron pipe, which point is the principal place of beginning, said iron pipe
being 0.80 feet westerly from a drill hole set in the westerly curb of said
lower drive; thence westerly by rectangular measurement 82.00 feet to an iron
pipe at the top of the bank; thence northerly by rectangular measurement 50.00
feet to an iron pipe at the top of the bank; thence continuing northerly making
an inside angle of 177 degrees 38 minutes 00 seconds with said last described
course 50.15 feet to an iron pipe at the top of the bank; thence easterly
making an inside angle of 92 degrees 22 minutes 00 seconds with said last
described course 82.00 feet to an iron pipe; that is 1.30 feet westerly from a
drill hole set in the westerly curb of the aforesaid lower drive; thence
southerly making an inside angle of 87 degrees 38 minutes 00 seconds with said
last described course 50.00 feet to an iron pipe, that is 1.00 feet westerly
from a drill hole set in the westerly curb of the aforesaid lower drive; thence
continuing southerly making an inside angle of 182 degrees 22 minutes 00
seconds with said last described course 50.00 feet to the principal place of
beginning.
(Ord. No. 109-56. Passed 2-11-57, eff. 2-13-57)
§ 559.22 Estonian Garden
   Beginning at an iron pin in the westerly line of Liberty Blvd. which is at
the northeasterly corner of the Finnish Garden, said pin being 1.30 feet
westerly from a drill hole set in the westerly concrete curb of said Liberty
Blvd.; thence northerly making an inside angle of 94 degrees, 12 minutes, 00
seconds with the northerly line of said Finnish Garden, 115.00 feet to an iron
pin that is 1.30 feet westerly from a drill hole set in the aforesaid westerly
concrete curb line; thence continuing northerly making an inside angle with
said last described course 182 degrees, 00 minutes, 00 seconds, 115.00 feet to
an iron pin that is 2.00 feet westerly from a drill hole set in said westerly
concrete curb; thence westerly making an inside angle of 110 degrees, 00
minutes, 00 seconds with said last described course 57.00 feet to an iron pin
that is about 10.00 feet easterly from the easterly retaining wall of Doan
Creek; thence southerly and being parallel with said retaining wall about
275.00 feet to an iron pin in the direct westerly prolongation of the aforesaid
northerly line of the Finnish Garden; thence easterly along said prolongation
and the northerly line of the Finnish Garden 133.00 feet to the place of
beginning.
(Ord. No. 2342-59. Passed 11-23-59, eff. 11-24-59)
§ 559.23 Romanian Garden
   Bounded northwesterly by the southeasterly line of St. Clair Ave., N.E.;
bounded easterly by the westerly line of Liberty Blvd. and bounded
southwesterly by the northeasterly line of the Park Ramp leading from Liberty
Blvd. to St. Clair Ave., N.E.
(Ord. No. 1130-64. Passed 6-22-64, eff. 6-24-64)
§ 559.231 African-American Garden
   Situated in Cleveland, and being parts of Original 100 Acre Lot Nos. 367 and
375 and together bounded and described as follows:
   Bounded on the north by the southerly line of the ramp leading to St. Clair
Avenue N.E. from Liberty Boulevard; bounded on the west by the easterly line of
Wheelock Road N.E.; bounded on the south by a line parallel with and being
south 1,000 feet equidistant from the southerly line of St. Clair Avenue N.E.
and bounded on the east by the westerly curb line of Liberty Boulevard and
containing approximately 4 acres of land.
(Ord. No. 1548-A-76. Passed 8-1-77, eff. 8-2-77)
§ 559.232 India Garden
   Bounded northerly by the southerly line of the Finnish Garden; bounded
easterly by the westerly line of Liberty Boulevard; bounded southerly by a line
that is parallel and 200.00 feet southerly measured at right angles from said
southerly line of the Finnish Garden and bounded westerly by a line that is
10.00 feet easterly and parallel with the easterly stone wall of Doan Creek.
(Ord. No. 2148-80. Passed 12-15-80, eff. 12-17-80)
§ 559.233 Chinese Garden
   Situated in the City of Cleveland, County of Cuyahoga and State of Ohio and
known as being a part of Original 100 Acre Lot No. 402 and bounded and
described as follows:
   Beginning at a stone monument marking the intersection of the centerline of
East 105th Street, 60 feet wide, with the centerline of Park Lane N.E., 30 feet
wide; thence due north 280.00 feet along said centerline of East 105th Street
to a point; thence due east 250.00 feet to a point for the principal place of
beginning of the premises herein intended to be described; thence continuing
due east about 57.70 feet to the intersection with the southwesterly edge of a
bituminous concrete sidewalk; thence southeasterly about 184.00 feet following
said southwesterly edge of the bituminous sidewalk to its intersection with a
line parallel to and distant southerly 125.00 feet, at right angles, from the
3rd course above; thence due west about 192.00 feet; thence due north 125.00
feet to the principal place of beginning, be the same more or less, but subject
to all legal highways.
   The bearings used in the above description are to an assumed meridian and
are used to indicate directions.
(Ord. No. 311-85. Passed 4-1-85, eff. 4-2-85)
§ 559.234 Lebanese Garden
   Beginning in the westerly line of Martin Luther King Jr. Dr. (formerly
Liberty Boulevard), at the south-easterly corner of the India Garden (Section
559.232), and the principle place of beginning;
   Thence southwesterly, along the southeasterly line of said India Garden, and
its prolongation approximately 129.50 feet to the easterly line of Doan Brook;
   Thence southeasterly, along said easterly line of Doan Brook, approximately
276.36 feet to a point;
   Thence northeasterly, along a line parallel to the aforementioned
southeasterly line of the India Garden, approximately 141.55 feet to a point in
the aforementioned westerly line of Martin Luther King Jr. Dr.;
   Thence northwesterly, along said westerly line of Martin Luther King Jr.
Dr., approximately 272.68 feet, to the aforementioned southeasterly line of the
India Garden and the principle place of beginning, containing 36,758 sq. ft.,
0.8438 acres, be the same more or less but subject to all legal highways.
(Ord. No. 407-15. Passed 6-1-15, eff. 6-2-15)
§ 559.235 Latvian Garden
   0.6036 Acres
   Situated in the City of Cleveland, County of Cuyahoga and State of Ohio and
known as being part of Original 100 Acre Lot No. 367 of East Cleveland
Township, and also contained within Section “A”. Brookway Division of
Rockefeller Park, and bounded and described as follows:
   Beginning at the intersection of St. Clair Street, N.E., 80 feet wide, with
the East line of said Original 100 Acre Lot No. 367, a 5/8" iron pin monument
box found and used;
   Thence South 58° 43' 50" West, along the centerline of said St. Clair
Street, N.E. a distance of 744.20 feet to the centerline intersection of Dr.
Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive, a private road within said Rockefeller Park,
which point of intersection is in the centerline of a bridge over passing said
Martin Luther King Drive;
   Thence South 32° 14' 33" East, along the centerline of said Dr. Martin
Luther King. Jr. Drive, a distance of 90.09 feet to a point of curvature;
   Thence along the centerline of said Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive, along
a curve deflecting to the right, having a radius of 1350.00 feet, a central
angle of 27° 35' 12", an arc of 650.00 feet, a chord of 643.74 feet, which
bears South 18° 26' 56" East to a point of tangency;
   Thence South 4° 39' 20" East, along the centerline of said Dr. Martin Luther
King, Jr. Drive, a distance of 180.00 feet to a point of curvature;
   Thence along the centerline of said Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive, along
a curve deflecting to the left, having a radius of 1200.00 feet, a central
angle of 33° 25' 21", an arc of 700.00 feet, a chord of 690.12 feet, which
bears South 21° 22' 01" East to a point of tangency;
   Thence South 38° 04' 41" East, along the centerline of said Dr. Martin
Luther King, Jr. Drive, a distance of 200.00 feet to a point of curvature;
   Thence along the centerline of said Dr. Martin Luther King. Jr. Drive, along
a curve deflecting to the right, having a radius of 1150.00 feet, a central
angle of 15° 56' 35", an arc of 320.00 feet, a chord of 318.97 feet, which
bears South 30° 06' 24" East to a point of reverse curvature;
   Thence along the centerline of said Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive, along
a curve deflecting to the left, having a radius of 2800.00 feet, a central
angle of 3° 12' 17", an arc of 156.61 feet, a chord of 156.59 feet, which bears
South 23° 44' 15" East;
   Thence radial from said centerline South 64° 39' 37" West a distance of
35.00 feet to the principal place of beginning of the land herein intended to
be described, a capped 5/8" iron pin set;
   Thence along a curve deflecting to the left, parallel to and 35.00 feet West
of the centerline of said Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive, having a radius of
2835.00 feet, a central angle of 1° 49' 04", an arc of 89.94 feet, a chord of
89.94 feet, which bears South 26° 14' 55" East to a capped 5/8" iron pin set;
   Thence South 24° 21' 48" East a distance of 130.06 feet to a capped 5/8"
iron pin set;
   Thence South 60° 13' 29" West a distance of 84.00 feet to the East bank of
Doan Creek a capped 5/8" iron pin set;
   Thence along the East bank of Doan Creek the following four (4) courses and
distances, each to a capped 5/8" iron pin set;
   Along a curve deflecting to the left, having a radius of 1500.00 feet, a
central angle of 3° 52' 13", an arc of 101.32 feet, a chord of 101.31 feet,
which bears North 64° 36' 42" West;
   North 41° 00' 55" West a distance of 29.87 feet;
   North 7° 34' 37" East a distance of 41.75 feet;
   Along a curve deflecting to the left, having a radius of 675.00 feet, a
central angle of 9° 38' 39", an arc of 113.62 feet, a chord of 113.48 feet,
which bears North 16° 44' 15" East;
   Thence North 64° 39' 37" East a distance of 58.00 feet to the principal
place of beginning and containing 0.6036 acres of land, according to the survey
of March 2006 by Braun-Prenosil Associates, Inc., by Gregory J. Chatham
Professional Surveyor No. 7882 be the same more or less but subject to all
legal highways and easements of record.
   Bearings are based on the centerline of St. Clair Street, N.E. (South 58°
43' 50" West) as recorded in deed Vol. 660, Pg. 288 of Cuyahoga County Records
and are used to denote angles only.
   All pins set are 30-inch long by 5/8-inch diameter rebar with caps imprinted
“Braun-Prenosil Assoc.”
(Ord. No. 1062-06, § 3. Passed 12-11-06, eff. 12-15-06)
§ 559.236 Azerbaijan Garden
   0.4992 Acres
   Situated in the City of Cleveland, County of Cuyahoga and State of Ohio and
known as being part of Original 100 Acre Lot No. 367 of East Cleveland
Township, and also contained within Section “A”, Brookway Division of
Rockefeller Park, and bounded and described as follows:
   Beginning at the intersection of St. Clair Street, N.E., 80 feet wide, with
the East line of said Original 100 Acre Lot No. 367, a 5/8" iron pin monument
box found and used;
   Thence South 58° 43' 50" West, along the centerline of said St. Clair
Street, N.E. a distance of 744.20 feet to the centerline intersection of Dr.
Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive, a private road within said Rockefeller Park,
which point of intersection is in the centerline of a bridge over passing said
Martin Luther King Drive;
   Thence North 32° 14' 33" West, along the centerline of said Dr. Martin
Luther King, Jr. Drive, a distance of 34.91 feet to a point of curvature;
   Thence along the centerline of said Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive, along
a curve deflecting to the right, having a radius of 790.00 feet, a central
angle of 50° 02' 35", an arc of 690.00 feet, a chord of 668.28 feet, which
bears North 7° 13' 15" West to a point of tangency;
   Thence North 17° 48' 03" East, along the centerline of said Dr. Martin
Luther King, Jr. Drive, a distance of 170.84 feet;
   Thence at right angles from said centerline South 72° 11' 57" East a
distance of 35.00 feet to the principal place of beginning of the land herein
intended to be described, a capped 5/8" iron pin set;
   Thence North 17° 48' 03" East, parallel to and 35.00 feet East of the
centerline of said Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive, a distance of 26.77 feet
to a capped 5/8" iron pin set;
   Thence North 37° 52' 45" East a distance of 45.76 feet to a capped 5/8" iron
pin set;
   Thence parallel to and approximately 14.5' West of the edge of pavement of
an existing private drive the following two (2) courses and distances, each to
a capped 5/8" iron pin set;
   Along a curve deflecting to the right, having a radius of 207.00 feet, a
central angle of 19° 33' 48" an arc of 70.68 feet, a chord of 70.34 feet, which
bears South 29° 44' 21" East;
   South 16° 52' 50" East a distance of 42.22 feet;
   Thence South 31° 47' 43" East a distance of 18.18 feet to a capped 5/8" iron
pin set;
   Thence parallel to and approximately 9' West of the edge of pavement of an
existing private drive South 9° 21' 35" East a distance of 157.86 feet to a
capped 5/8" iron pin set;
   Thence South 77° 34' 33" West a distance of 88.86 feet to the East bank of
Doan Creek, a capped 5/8" iron pin set;
   Thence along the East bank of Doan Creek, along a curve deflecting to the
right, having a radius of 825.00 feet, a central angle of 9° 28' 14", an arc of
136.37 feet, a chord of 136.21 feet, which bears North 8° 44' 07" West to a
capped 5/8" iron pin set;
   Thence North 6° 41' 29" West a distance of 96.22 feet to the principal place
of beginning and containing 0.4992 acres of land, according to the survey of
March 2006 by Braun-Prenosil Associates, Inc., by Gregory J. Chatham
Professional Surveyor No. 7882 be the same more or less but subject to all
legal highways and easements of record.
   Bearings are based on the centerline of St. Clair Street, N.E. (South 58°
43' 50" West) as recorded in deed Vol. 660, Pg. 288 of Cuyahoga County Records
and are used to denote angles only.
   All pins set are 30-inch long by 5/8-inch diameter rebar with caps imprinted
“Braun-Prenosil Assoc.”
(Ord. No. 1062-06, § 3. Passed 12-11-06, eff. 12-15-06)
§ 559.237 Serbian Garden
   1.4314 Acres
   Situated in the City of Cleveland, County of Cuyahoga and State of Ohio and
known as being part of Original 100 Acre Lot No. 367 of East Cleveland
Township, and also contained within Section “A”, Brookway Division of
Rockefeller Park, and bounded and described as follows:
   Beginning at the intersection of St. Clair Street, N.E., 80 feet wide, with
the East line of said Original 100 Acre Lot No. 367, a 5/8" iron pin monument
box found and used;
   Thence South 58° 43' 50" West, along the centerline of said St. Clair
Street, N.E. a distance of 744.20 feet to the centerline intersection of Dr.
Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive, a private road within said Rockefeller Park,
which point of intersection is in the centerline of a bridge over passing said
Martin Luther King Drive;
   Thence North 32° 14' 33" West, along the centerline of said Dr. Martin
Luther King, Jr. Drive a distance of 34.91 feet to a point of curvature;
   Thence along the centerline of said Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive, along
a curve deflecting to the right, having a radius of 790.00 feet, a central
angle of 20° 46' 13", an arc of 286.38 feet, a chord of 284.82 feet, which
bears North 21° 51' 26" West;
   Thence radial from said centerline South 78° 31' 40" West a distance of
35.00 feet to the principal place of beginning of the land herein intended to
be described, a capped 5/8" iron pin set;
   Thence the following five (5) courses and distances, each to a capped 5/8"
iron pin set;
   South 78° 00' 47" West a distance of 100.00 feet;
   North 11° 59' 13" West a distance of 50.00 feet;
   North 0° 32' 02" East a distance of 480.00 feet;
   North 24° 50' 26" East a distance of 80.00 feet;
   South 65° 09' 34" East a distance of 140.00 feet to a point that is 35.00
feet at right angles from the centerline of said Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.
Drive;
   Thence South 17° 48' 0" East, parallel to and 35.00 feet East of the
centerline of said Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive, a distance of 110.92 to a
capped 5/8" iron pin set;
   Thence along a curve deflecting to the left, parallel to and 35.00 feet West
of the centerline of said Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive, having a radius of
825.00 feet, a central angle of 29° 16' 23", an arc of 421.50 feet, a chord of
416.93 feet, which bears South 3° 09' 51" West to the principal place of
beginning and containing 1.4314 acres of land, according to the survey of March
2006 by Braun-Prenosil Associates, Inc., by Gregory J. Chatham Professional
Surveyor No. 7882 be the same more or less but subject to all legal highways
and easements of record.
   Bearings are based on the centerline of St. Clair Street, N.E. (South 58°
43' 50" West) as recorded in deed Vol. 660, Pg. 288 of Cuyahoga County Records
and are used to denote angles only.
   All pins set are 30-inch long by 5/8-inch diameter rebar with caps imprinted
“Braun-Prenosil Assoc.”
(Ord. No. 1062-06, § 3. Passed 12-11-06, eff. 12-15-06)
§ 559.238 Albanian Garden
   1.1765 Acres
   Situated in the City of Cleveland, County of Cuyahoga and State of Ohio and
known as being part of Original 100 Acre Lot No. 367 of East Cleveland
Township, and also contained within Section “A”, Brookway Division of
Rockefeller Park, and bounded and described as follows:
   Beginning at the intersection of St. Clair Street, N.E., 80 feet wide, with
the East line of said Original 100 Acre Lot No. 367, a 5/8" iron pin monument
box found and used;
   Thence South 58° 43' 50" West. along the centerline of said St. Clair
Street, N.E. a distance of 744.20 feet to the centerline intersection of Dr.
Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive, a private road within said Rockefeller Park,
which point of intersection is in the centerline of a bridge over passing said
Martin Luther King Drive;
   Thence North 32° 14' 33" West, along the centerline of said Dr. Martin
Luther King, Jr. Drive, a distance of 34.91 feet to a point of curvature;
   Thence along the centerline of said Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive, along
a curve deflecting to the right, having a radius of 790.00 feet, a central
angle of 50° 02' 35", an arc of 690.00 feet, a chord of 668.28 feet, which
bears North 7° 13' 15" West to a point of tangency;
   Thence North 17° 48' 03" East, along the centerline of said Dr. Martin
Luther King, Jr. Drive, a distance of 275.00 feet to a point of curvature;
   Thence along the centerline of said Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive, along
a curve deflecting to the left, having a radius of 1000.00 feet, a central
angle of 50° 54' 20", an arc of 888.47 feet, a chord of 859.53 feet, which
bears North 7° 39' 07" West;
   Thence radial from said centerline North 56° 53' 45" East a distance of
35.00 feet to the East bank of Doan Creek, the principal place of beginning of
the land herein intended to be described, a capped 5/8" iron pin set;
   Thence along the following two (2) courses and distances, each to a capped
5/8" iron pin set;
   North 4° 09' 16" East a distance of 197.50 feet;
   South 74° 06' 04" East a distance of 154.76 feet;
   Thence parallel to and approximately 15' West and North of the edge of
pavement of an existing private drive the following four (4) courses and
distances, each to a capped 5/8" iron pin set;
   Along a curve deflecting to the left, having a radius of 210.00 feet, a
central angle of 31° 38' 50", an arc of 115.99 feet, a chord of 114.52 feet,
which bears South 15° 39' 29" West;
   Along a curve deflecting to the right, having a radius of 150.00 feet, a
central angle of 38° 04' 30", an arc of 99.68 feet, a chord of 97.86 feet,
which bears South 18° 52' 18" West;
   Along a curve deflecting to the right, having a radius of 100.00 feet, a
central angle of 77° 32' 34", an arc of 135.34 feet, a chord of 125.24 feet,
which bears South 76° 40' 50" West;
   North 50° 27' 26" West a distance of 56.65 feet to a point that is 35.00
feet radial from the centerline of said Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive;
   Thence along a curve deflecting to the left, parallel to and 35.00 feet East
of the centerline of said Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive, having a radius of
1035.00 feet, a central angle of 5° 52' 14", an arc of 106.05 feet, a chord of
106.00 feet, which bears North 30° 10' 10" West to the principal place of
beginning and containing 1.1765 acres of land, according to the survey of March
2006 by Braun-Prenosil Associates, Inc., by Gregory J. Chatham Professional
Surveyor No. 7882 be the same more or less but subject to all legal highways
and easements of record.
   Bearings are based on the centerline of St. Clair Street, N.E. (South 58°
43' 50" West) as recorded in deed Vol. 660, Pg. 288 of Cuyahoga County Records
and are used to denote angles only. All pins set are 30-inch long by 5/8-inch
diameter rebar with caps imprinted “Braun-Prenosil Assoc.” Gregory J. Chatham –
Professional Surveyor No. 7882.
(Ord. No. 734-09. Passed 5-18-09, eff. 5-20-09)
§ 559.239 Korean Garden
   0.7189 Acres
   Situated in the City of Cleveland, County of Cuyahoga and State of Ohio and
known as being part of Original 100 Acre Lot No. 367 of East Cleveland, and
also contained within Section "A", Brookway Division of Rockefeller Park, and
bounded and described as follows:
   Commencing at the Intersection of the Centerline of St. Clair Ave. N.E., 80
feet wide, with the East Line of said Original 100 Acre Lot No. 367, a 5/8'
Iron Pin Monument;
   Thence South 58° 43' 50" West, along said Centerline of St. Clair Ave. N.E.,
a distance of 744.20 feet to the Centerline Intersection of Dr. Martin Luther
King, Jr. Drive, a Private Road within said Rockefeller Park, which said Point
of Intersection is in the Centerline of a Bridge over passing said Dr. Martin
Luther King, Jr. Drive;
   Thence North 32° 14' 33" West, along the Centerline of Dr. Martin Luther
King, Jr. Drive, a distance of 34.91 feet;
   Thence continuing along the Centerline of Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive and
a curve deflecting to the right, having a Radius of 790.00 feet, a Central
Angle of 50° 02' 35", an Arc of 690.00 feet, a Chord of 668.28 feet, which
bears North 07° 13' 15" West to a Point of Tangency;
   Thence North 17° 48' 03" East along the Centerline of Martin Luther King,
Jr. Drive, a distance of 275.00 feet to a Point of Curvature;
   Thence continuing along the Centerline of Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive and
a Curve deflecting to the left, having a Radius of 1000.00 feet, a Central
Angle of 24° 05' 24", an Arc of 420.45 feet, a Chord of 417.36 feet, which
bears North 05° 45' 21" East to a point in said Centerline of Martin Luther
King, Jr. Drive;
   Thence radial from said Centerline, South 83° 42' 39" West, a distance of
35.00 feet to a City of Cleveland/Esber capped iron pin set in the West Line of
Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive aforesaid and the Place of Beginning;
   Thence continuing South 83° 42' 39" West along a radial line, a distance of
128.73 feet to a City of Cleveland/Esber capped iron pin set in a Curve along
the East Bank of Doan Brook;
   Thence along said East Bank of Doan Brook, and a Curve deflecting to the
right, having a Radius of 129.50 feet, a Central Angle of 56 °05' 37", an Arc
of 126.78 feet, a Chord of 121.78 feet, which bears North 19° 37' 05" West to a
Braun-Prenosil Associates capped iron pin found at a non-tangent Point of
Reverse Curvature;
   Thence continuing along the East Bank of Doan Brook aforesaid, and a Curve
deflecting to the left, having a Radius of 240.00 feet, a Central Angle of 20°
46' 10", an Arc of 87.00 feet, a Chord of 86.52 feet, which bears North 00° 35'
33" East, to a Braun-Prenosil Associates capped iron pin found;
   Thence North 69° 41' 25" East, along a Radial Line, 156.31 feet to a Braun-
Prenosil Associates capped iron pin in a Curve of the West Line of Martin
Luther King, Jr. Drive;
   Thence along said West Line of Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive, and a Curve
deflecting to the right, having a Radius of 965.00 feet, a Central Angle of 14°
01' 14", an Arc of 236.14 feet, a Chord of 235.55 feet, which bears South 13°
17' 58" East to the Place of Beginning;
   Further known as Parcel "A", containing 31,314 sq. ft., 0.7189 acres of
land, be the same more or less but subject to all legal highways and easements
of record. Basis of bearings used were derived from a survey performed by
Braun-Prenosil Associates, dated April 26, 2006.
(Ord. No. 487-13. Passed 5-20-13, eff. 5-23-13)
§ 559.240 Vietnamese Garden
   0.4691 Acres
   Situated in the City of Cleveland, County of Cuyahoga and State of Ohio and
known as being part of Original 100 Acre Lot No. 367 of East Cleveland
Township, and also contained within Section "A", Brookway Division of
Rockefeller Park, and bounded and described as follows:
   Beginning at the intersection of St. Clair Street, N.E., 80 feet wide, with
the East line of said Original 100 Acre Lot No. 367, a 5/8" iron pin monument
box found and used;
   Thence South 58° 43' 50" West, along the centerline of said St. Clair
Street, N.E. a distance of 744.20 feet to the centerline intersection of Dr.
Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive, a private road within said Rockefeller Park,
which point of intersection is in the centerline of a bridge over passing said
Martin Luther King Drive;
   Thence North 32° 14' 33" West, along the centerline of said Dr. Martin
Luther King, Jr. Drive, a distance of 34.91 feet to a point of curvature;
   Thence along the centerline of said Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive, along
a curve deflecting to the right, having a radius of 790.00 feet, a central
angle of 50° 02' 35", an arc of 690.00 feet, a chord of 668.28 feet, which
bears North 7° 13' 15" West to a point of tangency;
   Thence North 17° 48' 03" East, along the centerline of said Dr. Martin
Luther King, Jr. Drive, a distance of 275.00 feet to a point of curvature;
   Thence along the centerline of said Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive, along
a curve deflecting to the left, having a radius of 1000.00 feet, a central
angle of 19° 49' 18", an arc of 345.95 feet, a chord of 344.23 feet, which
bears North 7° 53' 24" East;
   Thence radial from said centerline North 87° 58' 45" East a distance of
35.00 feet to the principal place of beginning of the land herein intended to
be described, a capped 5/8" iron pin set;
   Thence along a curve deflecting to the left, parallel to and 35.00 feet East
of the centerline of said Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive, having a radius of
1035.00 feet, a central angle of 8° 51' 58", an arc of 160.16 feet, a chord of
160.00 feet, which bears North 6° 27' 14" West to a capped 5/8" iron pin set;
   Thence North 70° 59' 27" East a distance of 115.00 feet to a capped 5/8"
iron pin set;
   Thence South 6° 27' 14" East a distance of 210.00 feet to a capped 5/8" iron
pin set;
   Thence North 83° 53' 56" West a distance of 115.00 feet to the principal
place of beginning and containing 0.4691 acres of land, according to the survey
of March 2006 by Braun-Prenosil Associates, Inc., by Gregory J. Chatham
Professional Surveyor No. 7882 be the same more or less but subject to all
legal highways and easements of record.
   Bearings are based on the centerline of St. Clair Street, N.E. (South 58°
43' 50" West) as recorded in deed Vol. 660, Pg. 288 of Cuyahoga County Records
and are used to denote angles only.
   All pins set are 30-inch long by 5/8-inch diameter rebar with caps imprinted
"Braun-Prenosil Assoc."
(Ord. No. 857-15. Passed 8-19-15, eff. 8-24-15)
§ 559.241 Armenian Garden
   0.7205 Acres
   Situated in the City of Cleveland, County of Cuyahoga and State of Ohio and
known as being part of Original 100 Acre Lot No. 367 of East Cleveland
Township, and also contained within Section “A”, Brookway Division of
Rockefeller Park, and bounded and described as follows:
   Beginning at the intersection of St. Clair Street, N.E., 80 feet wide, with
the East line of said Original 100 Acre Lot No. 367, a 5/8" iron pin monument
box found and used;
   Thence South 58° 43' 50" West, along the centerline of said St. Clair
Street, N.E. a distance of 744.20 feet to the centerline intersection of Dr.
Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive, a private road within said Rockefeller Park,
which point of intersection is in the centerline of a bridge over passing said
Martin Luther King Drive;
   Thence North 32° 14' 33" West, along the centerline of said Dr. Martin
Luther King, Jr. Drive, a distance of 34.91 feet to a point of curvature;
   Thence along the centerline of said Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive, along
a curve deflecting to the right, having a radius of 790.00 feet, a central
angle of 50° 02 35" an are of 690.00 feet, a chord of 668.28 feet, which bears
North 7° 13 15" West to a point of tangency;
   Thence North 17° 48' 03" East, along the centerline of said Dr. Martin
Luther King, Jr. Drive, a distance of 275.00 feet to a point of curvature;
   Thence along the centerline of said Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive, along
a curve deflecting to the left, having a radius of 1000.00 feet, a central
angle of 10° 09' 23" an are of 177.26 feet, a chord of 177.03 feet, which bears
North 12° 43' 21" East;
   Thence radial from said centerline South 82° 21' 21" East a distance of
35.00 feet to the principal place of beginning of the land herein intended to
be described, a capped 5/8" iron pin set;
   Thence continuing South 82° 21' 21" East a distance of 115.00 feet to a
capped 5/8" iron pin set;
   Thence South 1° 00' 40" West a distance of 244.07 feet to a capped 5/8" iron
pin set;
   Thence South 42° 55' 17" East a distance of 33.90 feet to the Northeast
corner of Proposed Garden #30, a capped 5/8" iron pin set;
   Thence South 61° 34' 42" West, along the North line of said Proposed Garden
#30, a distance of 80.00 feet to the Northwest corner thereof, a capped 5/8"
iron pin set;
   Thence parallel to and approximately 5.5' East of the edge of pavement of an
existing private drive the following two (2) courses and distances, each to a
capped 5/8" iron pin set;
   Along a curve deflecting to the left, having a radius of 1053.00 feet, a
central angle of 1° 59' 34", an arc of 36.62 feet, a chord of 36.62 feet, which
bears North 13° 15' 59" West;
   Along a curve deflecting to the left, having a radius of 222.00 feet, a
central angle of 38° 20' 29", an arc of 148.56 feet, a chord of 145.80 feet,
which bears North 31° 13' 33" West;
   Thence North 7° 16' 35" East a distance of 126.10 feet to a point that is
35.00 feet radial from the centerline of said Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.
Drive;
   Thence along a curve deflecting to the left, parallel to and 35.00 feet East
of the centerline of said Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive, having a radius of
1035.00 feet, a central angle of 2° 03' 43", an arc of 37.25 feet, a chord of
37.25 feet, which bears North 8° 40' 31" East to the principal place of
beginning and containing 0.7205 acres of land, according to the survey of March
2006 by Braun-Prenosil Associates, Inc., by Gregory J. Chatham Professional
Surveyor No. 7882 be the same more or less but subject to all legal highways
and easements of record.
   Bearings are based on the centerline of St. Clair Street, N.E. (South 58°
43' 50" West) as recorded in deed Vol. 660, Pg. 288 of Cuyahoga County Records
and are used to denote angles only.
   All pins set are 30-inch long by 5/8-inch diameter rebar with caps imprinted
“Braun-Prenosil Assoc.”
(Ord. No. 1610-07. Passed 12-10-07, eff. 12-14-07)
§ 559.242 Turkish Garden
   0.9203 Acres
   Situated in the City of Cleveland, County of Cuyahoga and State of Ohio and
known as being part of Original 100 Acre Lot No. 367 of East Cleveland
Township, and also contained within Section "A", Brookway Division of
Rockefeller Park, and bounded and described as follows:
   Beginning at the intersection of St. Clair Street, N.E., 80 feet wide, with
the East line of said Original 100 Acre Lot No. 367, a 5/8" iron pin monument
box found and used;
   Thence South 58° 43' 50" West, along the centerline of said St. Clair
Street, N.E. a distance of 301.46 feet;
   Thence at right angles from said centerline North 31° 16' 10" West a
distance of 281.85 feet to the principal place of beginning of the land herein
intended to be described, a capped 5/8" iron pin set;
   Thence parallel to and approximately 5.5' East of the edge of pavement of an
existing private drive the following three (3) courses and distances, each to a
capped 5/8" iron pin set:
   Along a curve deflecting to the right, having a radius of 329.00 feet, a
central angle of 22° 21' 14" , an arc of 128.36 feet, a chord of 127.55 feet,
which bears North 33° 36' 55" West;
   Along a curve deflecting to the right, having a radius of 725.00 feet, a
central angle of 9° 29' 33" , an arc of 120.11 feet, a chord of 119.98 feet,
which bears North 12° 46' 17" West;
   Along a curve deflecting to the left, having a radius of 1053.00 feet, a
central angle of 5° 51' 31" , an arc of 107.67 feet, a chord of 107.62 feet,
which bears North 9° 20' 27" West to the Southwest corner of Proposed Garden
#28;
   Thence along the South line of said Proposed Garden #28, North 61° 34' 42"
East 80.00 feet to the Southeast corner thereof, a capped 5/8" iron pin set;
   Thence along the following four (4) courses and distances, each to a capped
5/8" iron pin set:
   South 42° 55' 17" East a distance of 124.14 feet;
   South 3° 44' 30" East a distance of 143.42 feet;
   South 6° 16' 44" West a distance of 118.31 feet;
   South 66° 36' 56" West a distance of 40.00 feet to the principal place of
beginning and containing 0.9203 acres of land, according to the survey of March
2006 by Braun-Prenosil Associates, Inc., by Gregory J. Chatham Professional
Surveyor No. 7882 be the same more or less but subject to all legal highways
and easements of record.
   Bearings are based on the centerline of St. Clair Street, N.E. (South 58°
43' 50" West) as recorded in deed Vol. 660, Pg. 288 of Cuyahoga County Records
and are used to denote angles only.
   All pins set are 30-inch long by 5/8-inch diameter rebar with caps imprinted
"Braun-Prenosil Assoc."
(Ord. No. 1233-12. Passed 11-19-12, eff. 11-21-12)
§ 559.243 Native American Garden
   1.2972 Acres
   Situated in the City of Cleveland, County of Cuyahoga and State of Ohio and
known as being part of Original 100 Acre Lot No. 367 of East Cleveland
Township, and also contained within Section “A”, Brookway Division of
Rockefeller Park, and bounded and described as follows:
   Beginning at the intersection of St. Clair Street, N.E., 80 feet wide, with
the East line of said Original 100 Acre Lot No. 367, a 5/8" iron pin monument
box found and used;
   Thence South 58° 43' 50" West, along the centerline of said St. Clair
Street, N.E. a distance of 744.20 feet to the centerline intersection of Dr.
Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive, a private road within said Rockefeller Park,
which point of intersection is in the centerline of a bridge over passing said
Martin Luther King Drive;
   Thence North 32° 14' 33" West, along the centerline of said Dr. Martin
Luther King, Jr. Drive a distance of 34.91 feet to a point of curvature;
   Thence along the centerline of said Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive, along
a curve deflecting to the right, having a radius of 790.00 feet, a central
angle of 16° 45' 24", an arc of 231.04 feet, a chord of 230.22 feet, which
bears North 23° 51' 51" West;
   Thence radial from said centerline North 74° 30' 51" East a distance of
23.00 feet to the principal place of beginning of the land herein intended to
be described, a capped 5/8" iron pin set;
   Thence along a curve deflecting to the right, parallel to and 23.00 feet
East of the centerline of said Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive, having a
radius of 767.00 feet, a central angle of 33° 17' 12", an arc of 445.60 feet, a
chord of 439.36 feet, which bears North 1° 09' 27" East to a capped 5/8" iron
pin set;
   Thence South 72° 11' 57" East a distance of 12.00 feet to a capped 5/8" iron
pin set;
   Thence North 17° 48' 03" East, parallel to and 35.00 feet East of the
centerline of said Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive, a distance of 50.88 feet
to the West bank of Doan Creek, a capped 5/8" iron pin set;
   Thence along the West bank of Doan creek the following four (4) courses and
distances, each to a capped 5/8" iron pin set;
   South 15° 43' 58" East a distance of 105.06 feet;
   Along a curve deflecting to the left, having a radius of 467.00 feet, a
central angle of 15° 20' 22", an arc of 125.03 feet, a chord of 124.65 feet,
which bears South 18° 07' 03" East;
   Along a curve deflecting to the right, having a radius of 288.00 feet, a
central angle of 26° 51' 52", an arc of 135.04 feet, a chord of 133.80 feet,
which bears South 23° 28' 41" East;
   South 3° 09' 56" East a distance of 97.04 feet;
   Thence South 74° 30' 51" West a distance of 167.87 feet to the principal
place of beginning and containing 1.2972 acres of land, according to the survey
of March 2006 by Braun-Prenosil Associates, Inc., by Gregory J. Chatham
Professional Surveyor No. 7882 be the same more or less but subject to all
legal highways and easements of record.
   Bearings are based on the centerline of St. Clair Street, N.E. (South 58°
43' 50" West) as recorded in deed Vol. 660, Pg. 288 of Cuyahoga County Records
and are used to denote angles only.
   All pins set are 30-inch long by 5/8-inch diameter rebar with caps imprinted
“Braun-Prenosil Assoc.”
(Ord. No. 1062-06, § 3. Passed 12-11-06, eff. 12-15-06)
§ 559.244 Future Garden at 1445 Martin Luther King, Jr. Boulevard
   Proposed Garden Site
   Situated in the City of Cleveland, County of Cuyahoga and State of Ohio and
known as being a part of Original One Hundred Acre Lot No. 385, and also
contained within Section "C", Brookway Division of Rockefeller Park, and
further bounded and described as follows:
   Beginning at a stone monument with drill hole found in the centerline of
East 105th St., 60 feet wide, at its intersection with the centerline of Wade
Park Ave., 70 feet wide; Thence South 89° 05' 12" West, along the centerline of
Wade Park Ave., also being the Southerly line of aforesaid Lot No. 385 a
distance of 986.03 feet to a point; Thence North 0° 54' 48" West, a distance of
555.59 feet to a capped iron pin set in aforesaid Section "C" at the principal
place of beginning of the parcel of land herein described;
   Thence North 19° 16' 55" East, a distance of 61.00 feet to a capped iron pin
set;
   Thence North 28° 22' 00" East, a distance of 33.00 feet to a capped iron pin
set;
   Thence North 33° 16' 00" East, a distance of 47.00 feet to a capped iron pin
set;
   Thence North 36° 25' 00" East, a distance of 138.55 feet to a capped iron
pin set at a point of curve;
   Thence Northeasterly, along a curved line deflecting to the left an arc
distance of 239.26 feet to a capped iron pin set at a point of tangency, said
curved line having a radius of 500.00 feet, a central angle of 27° 25' 00" and
a chord which bears North 22° 42' 30" East, 236.98 feet;
   Thence North 9° 00' 00" East, a distance of 27.85 feet to a capped iron pin
set;
   Thence South 74° 23' 22" East, a distance of 32.86 feet to a capped iron pin
set;
   Thence South 2° 00' 00" West, a distance of 100.68 feet to a capped iron pin
set;
   Thence South 12° 55' 00" West, a distance of 52.00 feet to a capped iron pin
set;
   Thence South 22° 13' 00" West, a distance of 89.00 feet to a capped iron pin
set;
   Thence South 35° 51' 00" West, a distance of 100.00 feet to a capped iron
pin set;
   Thence South 52° 49' 00" West, a distance of 111.00 feet to a capped iron
pin set;
   Thence South 48° 06' 00" West, a distance of 35.00 feet to a capped iron pin
set;
   Thence South 29° 00' 21" West, a distance of 83.74 feet to a capped iron pin
set;
   Thence North 67° 03' 42" West, a distance of 9.66 feet to the principal
place of beginning and containing 0.566 acres (24,673 sq. ft.) of land, as
surveyed by Stephen Hovancsek & Associates, Inc., in June, 2012 under the
direction of Robert Smoltz, Registered Surveyor No. 6763, State of Ohio, be the
same more or less but subject to all legal highways.
   The basis of bearing for this description being Ohio State Plane, North
Zone, NAD 83 (2007). All capped iron pins set are 5/8-inch diameter rebar, 30
inches long with a plastic cap stamped SH&A 6763.
(Ord. No. 1327-12. Passed 12-3-12, eff. 12-6-12)
§ 559.245 French American Garden
   Situated in the City of Cleveland, County of Cuyahoga and State of Ohio and
known as being a part of Original One Hundred Acre Lot No. 385, and also
contained within Section "C", Brookway Division of Rockefeller Park, and
further bounded and described as follows:
   Beginning at a stone monument with drill hole found in the centerline of
East 105th St., 60 feet wide, at its intersection with the centerline of Wade
Park Ave., 70 feet wide; Thence South 89° 05' 12" West, along the centerline of
Wade Park Ave., also being the Southerly line of aforesaid Lot No. 385 a
distance of 930.67 feet to a point; Thence North 0° 54' 48" West, a distance of
42.00 feet to a capped iron pin set in aforesaid Section "C" at the principal
place of beginning of the parcel of land herein described;
   Thence South 89° 05' 12" West, a distance of 221.00 to a capped iron pin
set;
   Thence North 36° 37' 00" East, a distance of 46.09 feet to a capped iron pin
set at a point of curve;
   Thence Northeasterly, along a curved line deflecting to the left an arc
distance of 163.36 feet to a capped iron pin set at a point of tangency, said
curved line having a radius of 180.00 feet, a central angle of 52° 00' 00" and
a chord which bears North 10° 37' 00" East, 157.81 feet;
   Thence North 15° 23' 00" West, a distance of 142.28 feet to a capped iron
pin set at a point of curve;
   Thence Northeasterly, along a curved line deflecting to the right an arc
distance of 159.39 feet to a capped iron pin set at a point of tangency, said
curved line having a radius of 140.00 feet, a central angle of 65° 13' 51" and
a chord which bears North 17° 13' 56" East, 150.92 feet;
   Thence North 49° 50' 51" East, a distance of 14.36 feet to a capped iron pin
set;
   Thence South 1° 15' 00" East, a distance of 40.00 feet to a capped iron pin
set at a point of curve;
   Thence Southeasterly, along a curved line deflecting to the left an arc
distance of 149.97 feet to a capped iron pin set at a point of tangency, said
curved line having a radius of 350.00 feet, a central angle of 24° 33' 00" and
a chord which bears South 13° 31' 30" East, 148.82 feet;
   Thence South 25° 48' 00" East, a distance of 173.20 feet to a capped iron
pin set;
   Thence South 21° 27' 00" East, a distance of 85.00 feet to a capped iron pin
set;
   Thence South 4° 09' 31" East, a distance of 59.59 feet to the principal
place of beginning and containing 1.137 acres (49,539 sq. ft.) of land, as
surveyed by Stephen Hovancsek & Associates, Inc., in June, 2012 under the
direction of Robert Smoltz, Registered Surveyor No. 6763, State of Ohio, be the
same more or less but subject to all legal highways.
   The basis of bearing for this description being Ohio State Plane, North
Zone, NAD 83 (2007). All capped iron pins set are 5/8-inch diameter rebar, 30
inches long with a plastic cap stamped SH&A 6763.
(Ord. No. 1021-2021. Passed 12-6-21, eff. 12-7-21)
§ 559.246 Russian Garden
   0.7189 Acres
   Situated in the City of Cleveland, County of Cuyahoga and State of Ohio and
known as being part of Original 100 Acre Lot No. 367 of East Cleveland, and
also contained within Section "A", Brookway Division of Rockefeller Park, and
bounded and described as follows:
   Commencing at the Intersection of the Centerline of St. Clair Ave. N.E., 80
feet wide, with the East Line of said Original 100 Acre Lot No. 367, a 5/8'
Iron Pin Monument;
   Thence South 58°43'50" West, along said Centerline of St. Clair Ave. N.E., a
distance of 744.20 feet to the Centerline Intersection of Martin Luther King,
Jr. Drive, a Private Road within said Rockefeller Park, which said Point of
Intersection is in the Centerline of a Bridge over passing said Martin Luther
King, Jr. Drive;
   Thence North 32°14'33" West, along the Centerline of Martin Luther King, Jr.
Drive, a distance of 34.91 feet;
   Thence continuing along the Centerline of Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive and
a curve deflecting to the right, having a Radius of 790.00 feet, a Central
Angle of 50°02'35", an Arc of 690.00 feet, a Chord of 668.28 feet, which bears
North 07°13'15" West to a Point of Tangency;
   Thence North 17°48'03" East along the Centerline of Martin Luther King, Jr.
Drive, a distance of 275.00 feet to a Point of Curvature;
   Thence continuing along the Centerline of Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive and
a Curve deflecting to the left, having a Radius of 1000.00 feet, a Central
Angle of 03°07'59", an Arc of 54.68 feet, a Chord of 54.68 feet, which bears
North 16°14'03" East to a point in said Centerline of Martin Luther King, Jr.
Drive;
   Thence radial from said Centerline, North 75°19'56" West, a distance of
35.00 feet to a Braun-Prenosil Associates capped iron pin found in the West
Line of Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive aforesaid and the Place of Beginning;
   Thence continuing North 75°19'56" West along a radial line, a distance of
81.00 feet to a Braun-Prenosil Associates capped iron pin found in the East
Bank of Doan Brook;
   Thence continuing along said East Bank of Doan Brook the following five (5)
courses, North 09°30'00"East, a distance of 53.45 feet to a Braun-Prenosil
Associates capped iron pin found;
   Thence North 06°03'51" West, a distance of 60.34 feet to a Braun-Prenosil
Associates capped iron pin found;
   Thence North 09°43'10" East, a distance of 128.29 feet to a to a Braun-
Prenosil Associates capped iron pin found at a non-tangent Point of Curvature;
   Thence Northwest along a Curve deflecting to the left, having a Radius of
82.00 feet, a Central Angle of 46°07'12", an Arc of 66.01 feet, a Chord of
64.24 feet, which bears North 22°33'55" West to a Braun-Prenosil Associates
capped iron pin found at a non-tangent Point of Reverse Curvature;
   Thence Northwest along a Curve deflecting to the right, having a Radius of
129.50 feet, a Central Angle of 12°49'09", an Arc of 28.97 feet, a Chord of
28.91 feet, which bears North 54°04'29" West to a City of Cleveland/Esber
capped iron pin set;
   Thence North 83°42'39" East, along a Radial Line, 128.73 feet to a City of
Cleveland/Esber capped iron pin set in a Curve of the West Line of Martin
Luther King, Jr. Drive;
   Thence along said West Line of Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive, and a Curve
deflecting to the right, having a Radius of 965.00 feet, a Central Angle of
20°57'25", an Arc of 352.97 feet, a Chord of 351.00 feet, which bears South
04°11'21" West to the Place of Beginning;
   Further known as Parcel "B", containing 31,316 sq. ft., 0.7189 acres of
land, be the same more or less but subject to all legal highways and easements
of record. Basis of bearings used were derived from a survey performed by
Braun-Prenosil Associates, dated April 26, 2006.
(Ord. No. 487-13. Passed 5-20-13, eff. 5-23-13)
§ 559.247 Pakistani Garden
   Beginning in the westerly line of Martin Luther King Jr. Dr. (formerly
Liberty Boulevard), at the south-easterly corner of the India Garden (Section
559.232);
   Thence southeasterly, along said westerly line of Martin Luther King Jr.
Dr., approximately 272.68 feet to a point, and the principle place of
beginning;
   Thence southwesterly, along a line parallel to the southeasterly line of
said India Garden, approximately 141.55 feet to a point in the easterly line of
Doan Brook;
   Thence southeasterly, along said easterly line of Doan Brook, approximately
474.54 feet, to a point in the aforementioned westerly line of Martin Luther
King Jr. Dr.;
   Thence northwesterly, along said westerly line of Martin Luther King Jr.
Dr., approximately 524.99 feet, to the principle place of beginning, containing
36,758 sq. ft., 0.8438 acres, be the same more or less but subject to all legal
highways.
(Ord. No. 254-2019. Passed 4-15-19, eff. 4-17-19)
§ 559.248 Colombian Cultural Garden
   Commencing for Reference at a Stone with Drill Hole in a Monument Box found
at the centerline intersection of Wade Park Avenue (70 feet wide) and East
105th Street (60 feet wide), (a Stone with a Drill Hole in a Monument Box was
found South 89°-07'-14" West along the centerline of Wade Park Avenue, a
distance of 1,763.30 feet); Thence South 89°-07'-14" West along the centerline
of Wade Park Avenue, a distance of 947.14 feet to a point; Thence North 00°-
52'-46" West, a distance of 1,587.51 feet to an iron pin set, and being the
TRUE PLACE OF BEGINNING of the area herein to be described;
   Course No. 1: thence, Northwest following the arc of a curve to the left,
having a delta of 23°-50'-36", a radius of 569.00 feet, a tangent of 120.13
feet, a chord of 235.08 feet, a chord bearing of North 60°-52'-37" West, and a
arc distance of 236.79 feet to an iron pin set;
   Course No. 2: thence, North 12°-47'-57" East, a distance of 125.00 feet to
an iron pin set;
   Course No. 3: thence, Southeast following the arc of a curve to the right,
having a delta of 93°-24'-45", a radius of 212.00 feet, a tangent of 225.02
feet, a chord of 308.61 feet, a chord bearing of South 60°-12'-20" East, and a
arc distance of 345.64 feet to a iron pin set;
   Course No. 4: thence, South 47°-21'-50" West, a distance of 122.51 feet to
the place of beginning, and containing 1.019 acres of land, more or less, as
prepared in October 2020 by McSteen & Associates, Inc. under Project No. 20-
135, and being subject to all legal highways and easements of record.
(Ord. No. 522-2024. Passed 6-3-24, eff. 6-7-24)
§ 559.24 Helen E. Simpson-Ludlow Park
   The triangle of land formed at the northeast corner of South Moreland and
South Woodland Roads, bounded on the west by South Moreland, on the east by
Hampton and on the south by South Woodland, is hereby named Helen E. Simpson-
Ludlow Park, in recognition of her numerous accomplishments and contributions
to the people of the City.
(Ord. No 1486-73. Passed 7-2-73, eff. 7-10-73)
§ 559.25 Definitions
   As used in this chapter, “Director” means the Director of Public Properties.
“Park” and “the parks” and “parks, parkways and park entrances” mean the parks,
parkways and park entrances under the control of the Director.
§ 559.26 Traffic Limitations
   (a)   Heavy laden vehicles or vehicles carrying or ordinarily used in
carrying merchandise, goods, tools, material or rubbish, and moving vans, drays
or trucks, except such as may be used in the park service, are prohibited from
passing over the driveways in any of the parks, except when permission is
granted by the Director of Public Properties. Persons operating vehicles
carrying passengers only, and such as may be carrying materials to buildings
abutting on the parkways and adjacent thereto may operate on the roadways,
drives and parkways. No funeral procession, hearse nor any vehicle carrying the
body of a deceased person shall be allowed within the limits of the parks.
   (b)   However, nothing contained in this section shall be held to conflict
with the terms and conditions set forth in the deed made by J. H. Wade and Sue
M. Wade to the City, recorded in volume 341, page 165, Cuyahoga County records
of deeds and in volume 1, City records of deeds.
   (c)   Nothing contained in this section shall be held to conflict with the
established right of travel or occupancy of any of the public streets or
avenues running through or around any of the parks.
§ 559.27 Speed Limit
   No person shall ride or drive upon any part of or portion of any park at a
rate of speed exceeding eight (8) miles per hour, nor upon any parkway at a
rate of speed exceeding fifteen (15) miles per hour, except upon such portion
thereof as the Director of Public Properties may designate for greater speeds.
Every person using the driveways, roads, parkways and bridle paths shall, as to
the rate of speed of driving or riding thereon, and as to moving or driving on,
or stopping any vehicle, horse or team in such rides or drives, be subject to
and obey the orders of any park officer.
§ 559.28 Standing upon Drives
   No vehicle or animal shall be permitted to stand upon any drive of any park,
parkway or mall, nor shall any person solicit passengers within or upon any
park, parkway or mall, except at stands specially designated by the Director.
(Ord. No. 98583. Passed 6-5-33)
§ 559.29 Obstructions and Trash Placed in Parks; Distributing Circulars
   No person shall place or permit to remain in or upon any park or parkway,
any goods, merchandise or other articles in the nature of an obstruction to the
free use and enjoyment of the park or parkways. Nor shall any person place any
straw, dirt, chips, paper, shavings, shells, ashes, swill or garbage, or other
rubbish, even though not offensive to health, in or upon the same. Nor shall
any person distribute any circulars, cards or other written or printed matter,
in any park or parkway.
§ 559.30 Posting Signs or Advertising; Permit
   The placing of any structure, sign, bulletin board or advertising device of
any kind whatever, or the erection of any post or pole or the attachment of any
notice, bill, poster, sign, wire, rod or cord to any tree, shrub, fence,
railing, fountain, wall, post or structure, or the placing of any advertising,
decorative or other device of any kind whatever, on any of the vases, statues,
bridges or monuments in any park or parkway is prohibited.
   However, the Director of Public Properties may permit the erection of
temporary decoration on occasions of public celebration or holidays, which
permit shall be in writing, signed by the Director.
§ 559.31 Bringing Plant Material into Parks
   No person other than an employee of the parks shall bring into or upon any
of the parks or have in his or her possession while therein, any flower, tree,
shrub, plant or any newly-plucked branch or leaf of a tree, shrub or plant.
(Ord. No. 1562-90. Passed 4-8-91, eff. 4-15-91)
§ 559.32 Use of Baseball Equipment
   No person shall appropriate to his or her own use, to the exclusion of the
baseball teams entitled to use the same, any baseballs, bats, playing
equipment, uniforms or other paraphernalia used in connection with amateur
baseball games in the public parks and/or in the Cleveland Stadium which is the
property of the City or the sponsors of amateur baseball teams operated through
the Division of Recreation, or remove the same from such parks, or buy, receive
or conceal any such property knowing the same to be the property of the City or
the sponsors of such baseball teams.
(Ord. No. 99768. Passed 6-12-33)
§ 559.33 Control of Dogs or Other Animals
   (a)   Dogs, unless accompanied by their owners and held in control, will not
be allowed to run at large within the parks.
   (b)   No dogs shall be allowed in a park or any section of a park where
there are signs posted prohibiting dogs in said park or any section of a park.
      (1)   The Director shall have the authority to post signs which prohibit
or allow dogs in a park or any section of a park.
      (2)   Such signs shall be posted by the Director after said Director
gives notice of his or her intention to post signs prohibiting or allowing dogs
to the councilmember or members in whose ward or wards is located a park or
section of a park where such signs are to be placed.
   (c)   Animals other than dogs will not be allowed to run at large and if
found within the park limits, may be impounded.
   (d)   No animals of any kind will be allowed to enter any of the lakes,
ponds, fountains or streams.
   (e)   Owners of dogs or other animals damaging or destroying park property
will be held liable for the full value of the property damaged or destroyed in
addition to the penalty imposed for a violation of this section.
(Ord. No. 2275-92. Passed 11-29-93, eff. 12-7-93)
§ 559.34 Vacating Areas in Emergencies
   In case of an emergency, such as blasting or in any other case where life
and property are endangered, all persons if requested to do so by the
Commissioner of Parks or other park officers shall depart from the portion of
the grounds specified by such officer and shall remain off the same until
permission is given to return.
§ 559.35 Climbing Trees
   No person shall climb any tree or walk, stand or sit upon the monuments,
vases, fountains, railings, fences or gun-carriages within any park.
§ 559.36 Picnicking
   No picnicking and lunching parties shall occupy the parks or any part
thereof, except the allotted picnic grove and parade ground in Wade Park, and
those portions of Gordon, Edgewater, Brookside, Garfield and Woodland Hills
Parks which may hereafter be designated by the Director for such use.
§ 559.37 Use of Playgrounds
   The playgrounds in Wade, Gordon, Edgewater, Fairview, Lincoln, Garfield,
Clinton and Brookside Parks and the lake front are reserved as such for
children accompanied by their parents, nurses or attendants.
§ 559.38 Games of Chance
   No game of chance of any kind whatever will be permitted within the park
boundaries; but portions of the park may be set apart by the Commissioner of
Parks for play at croquet, ball or other games.
§ 559.39 Solicitors, Showmen Prohibited
   Solicitors, agents, fakirs, peddlers, mendicants, strolling musicians, organ
grinders, exhorters and showmen are prohibited from plying their several
vocations within the park limits.
§ 559.40 Use of Firearms
   No person shall use firearms, fireworks, firecrackers, torpedoes or
explosives of any kind within the parks.
§ 559.41 Disturbing Animals or Wildlife
   (a)   No person shall be allowed to use any weapon, stick, stone or missile
of any kind to the destruction or injury of, or to in any manner disturb or
molest any wild or domestic animal, fowl or fish within the park limits.
   (b)   No person shall give or offer, or attempt to give to any animal under
control of the Commissioner of Parks within the parks, any tobacco or other
known noxious articles or anything the giving of which is prohibited by printed
notices conspicuously posted therein.
§ 559.42 Boats, etc., in Watercourses
   No persons, except such as may be designated by the Director of Public
Properties shall place any boat, float, raft or other watercraft of any kind,
on any lake, pond or stream is any of the parks or land or go upon any island
therein or touch at with a boat, or land at any point or place upon the shores
of any lake, pond or stream not designated as a landing place or occupy in any
manner the slopes between the water line and footpaths or driveways.
§ 559.43 Boat Service; Skating
   (a)   The boat service in the parks shall be under the direction and control
of a person designated by the Director of Public Properties. The boats used
shall be substantially made and of a pattern and finish to the approval of the
Director; they shall be kept in good repair, free from leakage, neatly painted
and in sufficient number to meet reasonable demands. The fees for the boat hire
shall be in accordance with a published schedule approved by the Director. The
person in attendance shall wear a badge or designating mark while on duty and
shall be polite and courteous at all times. Under the supervision of the
Commissioner of Parks, he or she shall assist in preserving order and enforcing
obedience to these regulations in and around and in close proximity to the
lakes, ponds and streams in the parks. Children under twelve (12) years of age
shall not be allowed the use of the boats unless accompanied by an adult. No
improper character or intoxicated person shall be allowed the use of a boat.
   (b)   So far as applicable the provisions of this section shall apply to the
use of the lakes, ponds or streams as skating fields.
§ 559.44 Going onto Ice
   (a)   All persons are prohibited from going onto the ice on any of the
lakes, ponds or streams in the parks, except such as are designated as skating
fields, and thereon only when the safety signal is displayed.
   (b)   Any person violating this section will do so at his or her own risk.
§ 559.45 Behavior in Parks
   Sleeping or protracted lounging on the seats or benches, or loud,
boisterous, threatening or abusive, insulting or indecent language, or
disorderly conduct or behavior, or any act tending to a breach of the public
peace is strictly prohibited.
§ 559.46 Use or Sale of Intoxicating Liquor
   (a)   No person shall take into or upon any park any intoxicating liquor,
either for sale to others or for his or her own use, or for the use of others;
nor shall any person sell, give away or dispose of any intoxicating liquors in
or upon any park.
   (b)   No intoxicated person shall be allowed to enter or remain within any
of the parks.
§ 559.47 Entering “No Admittance” Areas
   No person shall enter any building, enclosure or place within any of the
parks, upon which the words “No Admittance” are displayed or posted by sign,
placard or otherwise without the consent of the Commissioner of Parks or other
officer of the parks.
§ 559.48 Swings and Hammocks
   No swings or hammocks shall be hung or swung in any of the parks, except on
the posts erected by the Director of Public Properties for that purpose.
§ 559.49 Fishing, Wading or Swimming
   Fishing, wading, swimming or bathing in any of the lakes, ponds, fountains
or streams is prohibited.
§ 559.50 Sounding Whistles
   Whistles must not be sounded within any of the parks by visitors.
§ 559.51 Defacing Notices of Rules
   No person shall injure, deface or destroy any notice of the rules and
regulations for the government of the parks, which have been posted or
permanently fixed by order or permission of the Director of Public Properties.
§ 559.52 Hours; Posting of Signs
   (a)   The Director of Parks and Recreation is hereby authorized to determine
the hours during which the public shall be permitted within the limits of any
park or recreational facility under the supervision and control of the Director
or any portion thereof. The Director shall publish the hours determined
pursuant this division (a) in the City Record.
   (b)   The Director of Parks and Recreation shall post signs in the various
parks and recreational facilities under the supervision and control of the
Director identifying the hours during which the public shall be permitted
within the limits of the park or recreational facility as determined by the
Director pursuant to division (a) of this section.
(Ord. No. 1611-95. Passed 12-18-95, eff. 12-23-95)
§ 559.53 Trespass on City Facilities
   (a)   No person shall trespass, loiter, or remain in or upon the grounds of
any park or recreational facility under the supervision and control of the
Director of Parks and Recreation during any hour when the public is not
permitted in such park or recreational facility as determined by the Director
pursuant to Section
559.52, unless such person has been authorized to be present in the park or
recreational facility by the Director of Public Works.
   (b)   No person shall trespass, loiter, enter or remain in or upon the
grounds of any park or recreational facility under the supervision and control
of the Director of Parks and Recreation after being lawfully ordered to leave
such park or recreational facility by an authorized official or agent of the
City.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor
for a first offense. In addition to any other method of enforcement provided
for on this chapter, this minor misdemeanor may be enforced by the issuance of
a citation in compliance with Rule 4.1 of the Ohio Rules of Criminal Procedure.
For each subsequent offense, whoever violates this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 559.54 Prohibited Hours in the Mall Area
   No unauthorized person shall be or remain on or in any portion of the area
known as the Mall area between the hours of 12:00 a.m. to 5:00 a.m. Persons may
be authorized to remain on the Mall by obtaining a permit from the Director of
Parks and Recreation.
   Such permits shall be issued when the Director finds:
   (a)   That the proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere
with or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare and safety;
   (b)   That the proposed activity or use is not reasonably anticipated to
incite violence, crime or disorderly conduct;
   (c)   That the proposed activity will not entail unusual, extraordinary or
burdensome expense or police operation by the City;
   (d)   That the facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at
the day and hour required in the application.
   For the purpose of this section, the Mall area includes these areas
specifically designated as Memorial Plaza (Mall A), Mall B, including the
Leonard C. Hanna, Jr. Plaza and Mall C. It excludes therefrom all dedicated
streets.
   Memorial Plaza is that portion of the Mall A bounded by Rockwell Avenue on
the south, St. Clair Avenue on the north, the east curb line, and its
southeasterly prolongation, of the Memorial Plaza parking garage ramp extending
southeasterly to Rockwell Avenue on the east, and by West Mall Drive on the
west.
   Mall B is that portion of the Mall bounded by the Convention Center on the
east, St. Clair Avenue on the south, Lakeside Avenue on the north, and West
Mall Drive on the west.
   Mall C is that portion of the Mall bounded by Lakeside Avenue on the south,
City Hall on the east, and property lines on the north and west of parcel B2 in
the Survey, Partition and Consolidation Plat as shown volume 365, page 0 of the
Cuyahoga County Map Records, including all City Hall and City Garage property.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4cc937dcc99cd9ae45e5f9bfbf6bc5ab64112b8f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13270.jpg]
§ 559.541 Prohibited Hours in Public Square
   No unauthorized person shall remain on or in any portion of the area known
as the Public Square area between the hours of 12:00 a.m. to 5:00 a.m. Persons
may be authorized to remain in Public Square by obtaining a permit from the
Director of Parks and Recreation.
   Such permits shall be issued when the Director finds:
   (a)   That the proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere
with or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare and safety;
   (b)   That the proposed activity or use is not reasonably anticipated to
incite violence, crime or disorderly conduct;
   (c)   That the proposed activity will not entail unusual, extraordinary or
burdensome expense or police operation by the City;
   (d)   That the facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at
the day and hour required in the application.
   For purposes of this section, the "Public Square area" includes all
structures (including but not limited to walls, fountains, and flower planters)
located within Public Square and shown on the map below, but excludes all
dedicated streets, public sidewalks adjacent to dedicated streets and RTA bus
shelters within this area.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4cc937dcc99cd9ae45e5f9bfbf6bc5ab64112b8f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13268.jpg]
§ 559.55 Resisting Police
   No person shall resist any member of the police force in the discharge of
his or her duty or in any way interfere, hinder or prevent him or her from
discharging his or her duty, nor offer or endeavor so to do; nor in any manner
assist any person in custody of any member of the police force to escape, nor
attempt to rescue any person in custody.
§ 559.56 Exhibiting Permits for Inspection
   Every person claiming to have a permit from the Director of Public
Properties or any of his or her officers shall produce and exhibit such permit
upon the request of any authorized person who shall desire to inspect the same.
§ 559.57 Limitations on Permits; Liability of Holders
   All permits issued by the Director of Public Properties shall be subject to
the park rules and regulations and City ordinances. The persons to whom such
permits are issued shall be bound by the rules, regulations and ordinances as
fully as though the same were inserted in such permits. Any person to whom such
permits are issued shall be liable for any loss, damage or injury sustained by
any person whatever, by reason of the negligence of the person to whom such
permits are issued, as well as for any breach of such rules, regulations and
ordinances, to the person so suffering damages or injury.
§ 559.58 Regulations Governing Bicycles and Tricycles
   Bicycles and tricycles shall possess all the rights and privileges now
accorded to carriages drawn by horses and shall strictly comply with all rules
of the road, and in addition thereto will be subject to the following rules and
regulations:
   (a)   Every bicycle shall be provided with a gong or bell which shall be
sounded upon the approach to any person or vehicle or the crossing of any
street, driveway, footpath or bridle path. Every bicycle shall also be provided
with a lamp which shall be kept lighted during hours of darkness.
   (b)   Bicycles shall not be stacked within ten (10) feet of the driveways,
although wheelmen may rest them at proper times and places.
   (c)   Not more than two (2) bicycles shall be ridden abreast.
   (d)   Riding crosswise of the drives and curving to and fro are prohibited.
   (e)   Coasting is prohibited, except on safety bicycles provided with
brakes, but the rider must not remove his or her hands from the handles of his
or her machine.
   (f)   Wheelmen must follow the ordinary rules of the road. In meeting an
opposing vehicle they must pass on the right-hand side. In passing a vehicle
moving in the same direction they must pass on the lefthand side. Speed is
restricted to eight (8) miles per hour.
   (g)   In case a wheelman meets or overtakes any horse which may become
restive, such wheelman shall take every precaution by dismounting or otherwise,
to prevent danger or accident.
   (h)   When a wheelman is unable to ride the various hills or roadways in the
parks, he or she must dismount and push his or her machine up the adjoining
footpath, until a suitable level is reached, where he or she may remount and
proceed in the driveway.
§ 559.59 Motor Vehicles
   Persons riding in motor vehicles shall possess all the rights and privileges
and shall be subject to all the rules and regulations accorded to or prescribed
for persons riding in carriages drawn by horses. They shall further observe all
the rules and regulations not in conflict with the provisions hereof, which are
prescribed for persons riding in motor vehicles on the public highways of the
City.
§ 559.60 Restrictions on Driving and Parking
   (a)   No person shall drive, park, station or place in or upon any public
park, grounds or cemetery belonging to or under the supervision of the City,
any horse, motor vehicle, or bicycle or other vehicle except motorcycles or
motorized bicycles as defined in RC 4511.01, except upon established drives or
roadways, and other places designated and established by the Director of Public
Properties as parking spaces.
   (b)   No person shall drive, park, station or place in or upon any public
park, grounds or cemetery belonging to or under the supervision of the City,
any motorcycle or motorized bicycle, as defined in RC 4511.01.
(Ord. No. 1857-82. Passed 12-5-83, eff. 12-7-83)
§ 559.61 Jim Mahon Park
   The public space known as Jim Mahon Park and more fully described as
follows:
   Legal Description of Jim Mahon Park
   Situated in the City of Cleveland, County of Cuyahoga and State of Ohio and
known as being part of the Original Brooklyn Township Lot Numbers 50 and 51 and
being known as Cuyahoga County Auditors permanent parcel numbers 003-01-008 and
003-12-002 conveyed to the City of Cleveland and bounded on the North by
Bulkley Blvd. Now known as Cleveland Memorial Shoreway (West) and on the West
by West 45th Street and on the East by P.P.N. 003-13-007, 003-13-008 and 003-
13-006 and on the South by P.P.N. 003-12-003 and 003-12-006 through 003-12-011
and Detroit Avenue.
   Description approved by John E. Jenkins, Project Director – Plats, Surveys
and House Number Section – Division of Engineering & Construction
is hereby named Jim Mahon Park in honor of Jim Mahon and his contributions to
the neighborhood. Jim Mahon Park shall be maintained for use as a public park
by the City of Cleveland in perpetuity and the Director of Parks and Recreation
shall not permit any use or adoption of Jim Mahon Park that is inconsistent
with this purpose.
   Notwithstanding the designation of Jim Mahon Park as a park in perpetuity,
the Council may on motion of any member, or on petition, change such
designation provided that before such action is taken the matter shall first be
submitted to the Planning Commission for its opinion and recommendations. The
Commission shall allow a reasonable time, not less than thirty (30) days, for
consideration and report thereon, and a public hearing shall be held before the
appropriate committee of Council. Ten (10) days’ notice of such public hearing
and of the intent to change the designation shall be given by publication in
the City Record.
(Ord. No. 595-05. Passed 6-6-05, eff. 6-15-05)
§ 559.99 Penalty
   (a)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter or fails to comply with
the requirements thereof for which no penalty is otherwise provided shall be
fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or imprisoned not more than
sixty (60) days or both.
   (b)   Whoever violates Section
559.28 shall be fined not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for a first offense,
and not more than seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for a second offense, and not
more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for any third or subsequent offense. In
addition to any other method of enforcement provided for in this chapter, the
above listed minor misdemeanor may be enforced by the issuance of a citation in
compliance with Rule 4.1 of the Ohio Rules of Criminal Procedures.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (b) of Section
559.33 shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
   (d)   Whoever violates Section
559.53 shall be subject to the penalty set forth in that section.
   (e)   Whoever violates the provisions of Sections
559.54 and
559.541 is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on the first offense, a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree on the second offense, and a misdemeanor of the third degree
on the third and any subsequent offense.
   (f)   Whoever violates the provisions of Section
559.38 shall be subject to the penalty set forth in Section
611.02, and whoever violates the provisions of Section
559.46 shall be subject to the penalty set forth in Section
617.12.
(Ord. No. 479-16. Passed 5-9-16, eff. 5-10-16)
CHAPTER 561 – LANDFILLS – REPEALED
561.01 to
561.99   Landfills – Repealed
§§ 561.01 to 561.99 Landfills – Repealed
(Ord. No. 721-16. Passed 7-13-16, eff. 7-17-16)
TITLE XI: PORT CONTROL
   Chapter
571   City Airport
   Chapter
573   Harbor
   Chapter
575   Docks
   Chapter
577   Bridges and Viaducts
CHAPTER 571 – CITY AIRPORT
571.01   Definitions
571.02   Aviation Fuel and Lubricant Rates
571.021   Service Providers at Cleveland Hopkins International Airport
571.03   Violation of Rules and Regulations
571.04   Removal of Property
571.05   Payment of Fees and Charges
571.06   Restricted Areas
571.061   Identification Badges
571.062   Fingerprinting
571.07   Soliciting of Funds
571.08   Advertisements
571.09   Photography
571.10   Property Damage
571.11   Accidents; Reports
571.12   Animals
571.13   Vehicles for Hire
571.131   Transportation Network Services; Fees
571.132   Peer-to-Peer Vehicle Sharing at Cleveland Hopkins International
Airport; Fee
571.14   Lost Articles
571.15   Commercial Activities
571.16   Sanitation
571.17   Use of Roads and Walks
571.18   Disorderly Conduct
571.19   Gambling
571.20   Firearms and Explosives
571.21   Smoking near Flammables
571.22   Tampering with Equipment
571.23   Airport Liability
571.24   Traffic Rules
571.25   Operating Vehicle or Equipment when Intoxicated
571.26   Careless Vehicle Operation
571.27   Dangerous Vehicles
571.28   Speed Limits
571.29   Vehicle, Equipment Operation in Restricted Areas
571.30   Passenger Loading Gate Area
571.31   Speed Limits in Restricted Areas
571.32   Obstructions in Gate Area
571.33   Mobile Vehicles or Equipment in Loading Area
571.34   Obstruction to Emergency Equipment
571.35   Vehicle Operator’s License
571.36   Speed Limit in Passenger Gate Area
571.37   Parking Areas
571.38   Parking Time Limits
571.39   Vehicle Lights
571.40   Abandoned Vehicles
571.41   Traffic Signs
571.42   Pedestrian’s Right-of-way
571.43   Loading Area Use
571.44   General Aeronautical Rules
571.45   Taxi and Traffic Patterns
571.46   Brakes and Radio Receivers
571.47   Practice Area
571.48   Blocking Aircraft Prior to Engine Runup
571.49   Operator’s Certificate
571.50   Tail Skids
571.51   Acrobatics
571.52   Practice Night Landings
571.53   Careless Operation
571.54   Aircraft Parked on Taxiway
571.55   Time Limits in Gate Area
571.56   Single Engine Aircraft in Gate Area
571.57   Unsafe Areas
571.58   Registration and Use Charges for Transient Aircraft
571.59   Improperly Parked Aircraft
571.60   Aircraft Parking in Designated Areas
571.61   Aircraft Parked at Night
571.62   Control Tower Clearance
571.63   Removal of Disabled Aircraft
571.64   Visual Traffic Signals
571.65   Ground Instructions
571.66   Engine Warmup
571.67   Radio Contact
571.68   Simulated Emergencies
571.69   Restricted Aircraft
571.70   Cleaning of Aircraft
571.71   Open Flame Operation
571.72   Fire Hazards
571.73   Storage of Flammable Materials
571.74   Lubricating Oils
571.75   Waste Receptacles
571.76   Smoking in Prohibited Areas
571.77   Cleaning Fluids
571.78   Doping
571.79   Fire Apparatus
571.80   Hours of Operation and Flight Rules and Conditions for Burke Lakefront
Airport
571.81   Additional Regulations
571.82   Controlled Areas
571.83   Letters of Agreement with Federal Aviation Administration
571.84   Tie Down Spaces – Burke Lakefront Airport
571.85   Fees for Aircraft Parking on City- Controlled Ramp Areas
571.86   Fuel Trucks – Permit and Inspection Required
571.87   Fuel Trucks – Fines for Spills of Hazardous Materials
571.88   Use of and Rental Fee Schedule for Meeting Room Space at Burke
Lakefront Airport and Cleveland Hopkins International Airport
571.89   Fees for Voice and Communications Services
571.90   Banner Towing Operations; Fee
571.91   Commercial Ground Transportation Vehicles Operating at Cleveland
Hopkins International Airport and Burke Lakefront Airport; Fee
571.92   Commercial Motor or Tour Buses Operating at Cleveland Hopkins
International Airport and Burke Lakefront Airport; Fee
571.93   Electric Vehicle Charging; Fees
571.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Aeronautics, RC Ch. 4561
   Airports, RC Ch. 4563
§ 571.01 Definitions
   (a)   "Airports" means all property comprising Cleveland Hopkins
International Airport, Burke Lakefront Airport and all airports owned and
operated by the City.
   (b)   "Airport management" means the Director of Port Control or his or her
duly authorized representative.
   (c)   "Airport security program" means the comprehensive plan for security
requirements and procedures at Cleveland Hopkins International Airport,
including rules, regulations, and procedures for the issuance, display, use,
and return of identificationbadges, as that plan is approved by the
Transportation Security Administration or its equivalent ("TSA").
   (d)   "Control tower" means the agency assigned to the actual control of air
traffic at each individual airport.
   (e)   "Person" means any individual, firm, copartnership, corporation,
company, association or agency.
   (f)   "Secured area" means the Security Identification Display Area, Air
Operations Area, or sterile areas at Cleveland Hopkins International Airport,
as those areas are defined by the TSA.
   (g)   "TNC" or "transportation network company" means an organization,
whether a corporation, limited liability company, partnership, sole proprietor,
or other form, operating in the City of Cleveland using a digital network to
connect passengers with for-hire drivers using TNC endorsed vehicles. As used
in this chapter, TNC shall be consistent with the meaning of transportation
network company as defined under RC 3942.01.
   (h)   "Transportation network company services" means the provision of
transportation beginning when a transportation network company driver accepts a
ride requested by a rider through a digital network controlled by a
transportation network company, continuing while the driver transports the
requesting rider, and ending when the last requesting rider departs from the
personal vehicle.
(Ord. No. 773-16. Passed 10-24-16, eff. 10-26-16)
§ 571.02 Aviation Fuel and Lubricant Rates
   Effective July 1, 1975, all persons, firms or corporations engaged in the
sales of aviation fuel and lubricants directly or indirectly, from or at a
Municipally owned airport facility of the City to transient or based aircraft
owners and/or operators, shall pay the City a fee for the privilege and right
to make such sales from the airport premises. The fee shall be based upon and
for the quantities of aviation fuel and lubricants delivered to the premises or
facilities of such person, firm or corporation for sale from and at its airport
premises and shall be at the following rates:
 
Aviation Sale Rate per Gallon
Fuel          $0.05
Lubricants    $0.15
 
   The Director of Port Control may at any time increase or decrease aviation
fuel and lubricant fee rates, subject to the prior approval of the Board of
Control.
(Ord. No. 1674-75. Passed 10-13-75, eff. 10-15-75)
§ 571.021 Service Providers at Cleveland Hopkins International Airport
   All entities, including Scheduled Airlines that provide services to other
Scheduled Airlines, other than those airlines that are signatories, or
majority-owned subsidiaries of signatories, to the Agreement and Lease
authorized by Ordinance No. 1585-A-76, passed August 16, 1976, or signatories
of a lease, lease by way of concession or other agreement that exempts them
from such fees, that provide services at Cleveland Hopkins International
Airport, including, but not limited to services related to ground handling,
cargo handling, fueling aircraft, fueling ground equipment, aircraft
maintenance, ground vehicle maintenance, interior and exterior aircraft
cleaning, catering, deicing, and laboratory services for aircraft, shall pay
Cleveland Hopkins International Airport a fee of seven percent (7%) of gross
revenues derived from providing those services for the privilege of providing
such services at Cleveland Hopkins International Airport.
   The Director may, at any time, increase or decrease the percentage fee
authorized herein, subject to prior authorization of Cleveland City Council.
(Ord. No. 744-2000. Passed 10-30-00, eff. 11-7-00)
§ 571.03 Violation of Rules and Regulations
   Any person operating or handling aircraft, or operating any vehicle,
equipment or apparatus on the Airport, or using any of the Airport facilities
in violation of any Federal or State law, or in violation of the following
rules and regulations, shall be prosecuted or deprived of further use of
Airport facilities for such length of time as may be determined by the
Commissioner of Airports, or both. It will be assumed upon entrance of any
person upon Airport property, that such person has agreed to observe all such
rules and regulations.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.04 Removal of Property
   No person shall remove or use any aircraft, aircraft parts, motor vehicles
or tools owned by any other person while such aircraft, aircraft parts, motor
vehicles or tools are on the Airport or within its hangars, without presenting
the written consent of the owner or other satisfactory evidence of the right to
same to the Airport Management.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.05 Payment of Fees and Charges
   No person shall refuse or attempt to evade payment of any fees or charges as
established, for use of Airport facilities. All such fees and charges shall be
payable in cash unless satisfactory credit arrangements have been made in
advance.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.06 Restricted Areas
   No person shall enter any area posted as being closed to the public with the
exception of:
   (a)   Airport personnel assigned to duty within;
   (b)   Persons authorized by the Airport Management;
   (c)   Passengers entering such area for the purpose of embarkation or
debarkation.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.061 Identification Badges
   (a)   The Director of Port Control or the Director’s designee shall be
authorized to issue and revalidate identification badges in accordance with the
rules, regulations, and directives (collectively, “Regulations”) of the
Transportation Security Administration or its equivalent (“TSA”).
   (b)   An identification badge issued by the Director of Port Control or the
Director’s designee shall be possessed and displayed in accordance with TSA
Regulations and the Airport Security Program. Identification badges shall be of
a design and contain such information as is determined by the Director of Port
Control in accordance with TSA Regulations.
   (c)   Any person with an identification badge issued under division (a) of
this section shall return the badge to the Department of Port Control within
twenty- four (24) hours of a determination by the Director of Port Control or
the Director’s designee that the person no longer has access to a Secured Area
at the Airport. The reasons for this determination include, termination or
suspension from employment; change in duties of employment; breach, termination
or expiration of a City contract; and any additional reasons as set forth in
TSA Regulations or in the Airport Security Program.
   (d)   The Director of Port Control or the Director’s designee may assess and
collect fees or charges related to Secured Area identification badges
including, but not limited to, fees for new, lost, stolen, or missing badges,
charges for failing to obtain or return a badge when required, and charges for
violations of TSA Regulations or the Airport Security Program related to a
badge. The fees and charges are to be determined by the Director of or the
Director’s designee and be displayed in the Airport Security Office.
   (e)   Airport tenants, contractors and subcontractors, and any person or
entity that has been issued a Secured Area identification badge, shall be
responsible for assuring the compliance of their officers, employees, agents,
contractors, and subcontractors with the requirements of this section, TSA
Regulations, and the Airport Security Program, and shall be responsible for the
payment of any fees and charges assessed against those persons and entities
under division (d) of this section.
(Ord. No. 798-2025. Passed 8-13-25, eff. 8-18-25)
§ 571.062 Fingerprinting
   (a)   The Director of Port Control, or the Director’s designee shall be
authorized to fingerprint persons requiring unescorted access to any of the
airport areas, both secure and unsecure, as required by federal regulations
(collectively, “Persons”) and process all fingerprints under the rules,
regulations, and directives (collectively, “Regulations”) of the Transportation
Security Administration, successor entity to the FAA, or its equivalent
(“TSA”).
   (b)   The Director of Port Control or the director’s designee may assess and
collect fees or charges (collectively, “Fees”) related to fingerprinting under
the following schedule:
      (1)   A charge to reimburse the City for its cost as set by the TSA, to
electronically transmit the fingerprints of each Person to the Transportation
Security Clearinghouse, or its equivalent, to transmit the fingerprints to the
Federal Bureau of Investigations to perform a criminal-history record check;
      (2)   A reasonable administrative fee, to be determined in writing by the
Director or the Director’s designee, to reimburse the City for additional
administrative costs incurred to fingerprint and process all such fingerprints.
   (c)   City employees and Airport volunteers shall be exempt from the Fees
set forth in division (b) of this section.
(Ord. No. 100-08. Passed 3-10-08, eff. 3-12-08)
§ 571.07 Soliciting of Funds
   No person shall solicit funds for any purpose while on the Airport, unless
prior approval has been received from the Airport Management.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.08 Advertisements
   No person shall post, distribute or display signs, advertisements or
circulars without prior approval of the Airport Management, and only in such
manner as may be prescribed.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.09 Photography
   No person shall take still, sound or motion pictures for commercial use
while on the Airport without the approval of the Airport Management.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.10 Property Damage
   Any and all Airport property destroyed or damaged, by accident or otherwise,
shall be paid for by the party responsible.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.11 Accidents; Reports
   Participants and witnesses of any accident occurring on Airport property
shall make a full report of same to the Airport Management with names and
addresses of parties concerned, at the first opportunity.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.12 Animals
   No person shall enter the Terminal Building with a dog or other animal with
the exception of properly leashed dogs that aid individuals with disabilities,
or animals to be transported by air that are properly confined. Dogs and other
animals will be permitted in areas other than the Terminal Building which are
open to the public, provided that such are properly leashed or confined in such
a way as to be under full control.
(Ord. No. 31-92. Passed 4-6-92, eff. 4-15-92)
§ 571.13 Vehicles for Hire
   No person shall operate any vehicle for hire or TNC carrying passengers,
unless such operation has been approved by the Airport Management and subject
to such terms and conditions as may be prescribe. Nothing in this section shall
be construed as altering or limiting the requirements in Chapter 443 of these
codified ordinances.
(Ord. No. 773-16. Passed 10-24-16, eff. 10-26-16)
§ 571.131 Transportation Network Services; Fees
   (a)   No person shall provide any transportation network company services,
unless the TNC has been approved by the Airport Management and subject to such
terms and conditions as may be prescribed under the rules and regulations
promulgated by the Director.
   (b)   No owner of a TNC or provider of transportation network company
services shall fail to incorporate in their mobile application technology a
geo-fence, self-monitoring electronic border control system. The geographic
coordinates of the geo-fence area shall be defined by the Director of Port
Control.
   (c)   The Director is authorized to charge and collect a per trip fee for
TNC services to, from, or on the property of the airport. The fee shall be in
an amount set by the Board of Control.
   (d)   The Director is authorized to promulgate rules and regulations
applicable to TNC services. Such rules and regulations shall become effective
ten (10) days after their publication in the City Record.
(Ord. No. 773-16. Passed 10-24-16, eff. 10-26-16)
§ 571.132 Peer-to-Peer Vehicle Sharing at Cleveland Hopkins International
Airport; Fee
   (a)   For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
      (1)   "Airport" means Cleveland Hopkins International Airport.
      (2)   "Motor vehicle" has the same meaning as defined in RC 4509.01.
      (3)   "Peer-to-Peer Vehicle Sharing" means the authorized use of a motor
vehicle by an individual other than the motor vehicle's owner through a Peer-
to-Peer Vehicle Sharing Service.
      (4)   "Peer-to-Peer Vehicle Sharing Services" means a business platform
that connects a Shared Vehicle owner to a Shared Vehicle driver to enable the
sharing of vehicles for financial consideration.
      (5)   "Shared Vehicle" means a personal motor vehicle that is registered
as a passenger car under RC Chapter 4503 or a substantially similar law in
another state and that is available for sharing through a Peer-to-Peer Vehicle
Sharing Service.
   (b)   No person or entity shall provide any Peer-to-Peer Vehicle Sharing
Services, unless it has been approved by the Airport management and subject to
RC Chapter 4516 and such terms and conditions as may be prescribed under the
rules and regulations promulgated by the Director.
   (c)   The Director is authorized to charge and collect a fee based upon the
gross revenue or upon a per transaction basis of Peer-to-Peer Vehicle Sharing
Services on the property of the airport. The fee shall be in an amount as
established from time to time by the Board of Control.
   (d)   The Director may require an identifying decal to be displayed on all
Shared Vehicles that operate on Airport property.
   (e)   The Director may require the purchase and use of equipment, or
establish other appropriate mechanisms for monitoring and auditing compliance,
including requiring Peer-to-Peer Vehicle Sharing Services to provide data to
the Director for purposes of monitoring and auditing compliance.
   (f)   The Director may designate a location where Shared Vehicles may stage
in the Airport facility.
   (g)   The Director is authorized to promulgate rules and regulations
applicable to commercial ground transportation services. Such rules and
regulations shall become effective ten (10) days after their publication in the
City Record.
(Ord. No. 584-2023. Passed 6-5-23, eff. 6-8-23)
§ 571.14 Lost Articles
   Any person finding lost articles shall deposit them with the office of the
Airport Management.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.15 Commercial Activities
   No person shall use the Airport for conducting revenue-producing activities
without securing an appropriate permit for such activity and the approval of
the Airport Management.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.16 Sanitation
   No person shall deposit garbage, waste paper or other refuse except in
receptacles provided for that purpose.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.17 Use of Roads and Walks
   (a)   No person shall occupy any walk or roadway in such a way as to hinder
or obstruct the use of the same by other traffic.
   (b)   No person shall travel upon the Airport other than on walks, roadways
or other areas provided for the particular class of traffic.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.18 Disorderly Conduct
   No person shall commit any disorderly, obscene, indecent or unlawful act
while on the Airport.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.19 Gambling
   No person shall indulge in or operate any form of gambling while on the
Airport.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.20 Firearms and Explosives
   No person except duly authorized persons, peace officials, Federal, Airport
and air carrier employees, or members of the armed forces of the United States
on official business, shall carry any firearms or explosives on the Airport
without the written permission of the Airport Management. All other persons
shall turn over such firearms or explosives to the office of the Airport
Management or to the patrolman on duty.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.21 Smoking near Flammables
   No person shall carry a lighted cigarette, pipe, cigar or any object with an
open flame within fifty (50) feet of any aircraft, gasoline truck or area
containing or housing flammable fluids.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.22 Tampering with Equipment
   No person shall tamper with or maliciously destroy any part of the Airport
or any of the equipment thereon.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.23 Airport Liability
   The Airport Management and the City shall not be liable for any injuries,
damage or loss to persons or property as a result of any accident, mishap or
incident of any nature whatsoever or from any cause whatsoever to any
individual, aircraft or property, occurring on the Airport or in the use of the
Airport facilities.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.24 Traffic Rules
   No person shall operate any mobile vehicle on the Airport in violation of
the rules and regulations governing the operation of mobile vehicles in the
State, and as established by the Airport Management.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.25 Operating Vehicle or Equipment when Intoxicated
   No person shall be permitted to operate any mobile vehicle or equipment on
the Airport while under the influence of any habit forming drug, narcotic or
intoxicating liquor.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.26 Careless Vehicle Operation
   No person shall operate any mobile vehicle on Airport roadways or in parking
areas in a careless or negligent manner, or at a speed or in a manner which
endangers or is likely to endanger persons or property, or in disregard of the
rights and safety of others.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.27 Dangerous Vehicles
   No person shall operate any mobile vehicle on the Airport if such vehicle is
so constructed, equipped or loaded as to be a danger, or is likely to endanger
persons or property.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.28 Speed Limits
   Mobile vehicles shall be operated in strict compliance with the speed limits
established by the Airport Management, for the area in which the vehicle is
being operated, and shall not at any time exceed a speed of twenty-five (25)
miles per hour.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.29 Vehicle, Equipment Operation in Restricted Areas
   No person shall operate any mobile vehicle or equipment on the aircraft
loading ramp, aircraft landing area, taxiways or beyond the hangar line, with
the exception of:
   (a)   Persons assigned to duty therein; or
   (b)   Persons with authorization of the Airport Management.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.30 Passenger Loading Gate Area
   No mobile vehicle will be permitted within the confines of the passenger
loading gate area unless authorization has been received from the Airport
Management.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.31 Speed Limits in Restricted Areas
   Operators of mobile equipment on the inner taxiway, aircraft loading ramp
and aircraft parking areas shall operate such equipment with extreme caution,
and shall not at any time exceed a speed of fifteen (15) miles per hour.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.32 Obstructions in Gate Area
   No person shall park or place any mobile vehicle, equipment or apparatus
within the aircraft loading area in such a way or manner as to bar or obstruct
the area to parking aircraft.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.33 Mobile Vehicles or Equipment in Loading Area
   No person shall operate any mobile vehicle or equipment in such a manner as
to pass between the passenger loading gates and aircraft parked in the gate
area.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.34 Obstruction to Emergency Equipment
   No mobile equipment, vehicle or apparatus shall be placed on any roadway,
driveway, hangar ramp or other area in such a manner as to obstruct the passage
of emergency or snow removal equipment.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.35 Vehicle Operator’s License
   No person shall operate any mobile vehicle on the Airport unless such person
possesses a valid operator’s license issued by the state of residence or by the
Airport Management.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.36 Speed Limit in Passenger Gate Area
   Persons operating mobile vehicles within the confines of the passenger gate
area shall use extreme caution and shall not exceed a speed of ten (10) miles
per hour at any time.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.37 Parking Areas
   No person shall park a mobile vehicle in any area other than that area
designated for the parking of vehicles and in such manner as may be prescribed.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.38 Parking Time Limits
   No person shall park any mobile vehicle in excess of the time limit
established, or in reserved or restricted areas unless instructed to do so by
authorized personnel.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.39 Vehicle Lights
   All mobile vehicles, except motorcycles, operated on the Airport between the
hours of sunset and sunrise, shall be equipped with two (2) headlights and one
(1) or more tail lights, the headlights to be of sufficient brilliance to
insure safe operation at night. Lights shall be on at all times during the
hours of darkness that the vehicle is being operated, and when parked in such
areas that it constitutes a hazard to Airport operation.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.40 Abandoned Vehicles
   No person shall abandon any vehicle on Airport property.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.41 Traffic Signs
   Operators of mobile vehicles on the Airport shall observe and comply with
all traffic signs and signals.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.42 Pedestrian’s Right-of-way
   Pedestrian traffic shall have right-of-way over all vehicular traffic while
on the Airport.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.43 Loading Area Use
   No mobile vehicle, private or commercial, shall load or unload in any area
other than that designated for such purpose.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.44 General Aeronautical Rules
   No person shall navigate any aircraft, land upon, fly the same from,
service, maintain, repair any aircraft or conduct any aircraft operations on or
from the Airport in any manner not in conformity with current Federal Civil
Aeronautics Administration and Civil Aeronautics Board rules and regulations
and the following rules and regulations established by the Airport Management.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.45 Taxi and Traffic Patterns
   All pilots operating from the Airport shall be required to know and observe
all taxi and traffic patterns established by the control tower.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.46 Brakes and Radio Receivers
   All aircraft landing at, or departing from, the Airport shall be equipped
with a radio receiver, capable of receiving instructions from the control
tower, and brakes in good operating condition.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.47 Practice Area
   All students and instructors operating in the practice area of the Airport
shall maintain a listening watch on the control tower frequency at all times
while within the area.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.48 Blocking Aircraft Prior to Engine Runup
   No aircraft engine shall be started or allowed to run unless a certified
pilot or mechanic is attending the controls. Blocks or other suitable means of
blocking the aircraft shall be placed in front of the main landing wheels
before starting any engine, unless the aircraft is equipped with a suitable
parking brake.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.49 Operator’s Certificate
   No person shall operate any aircraft on the Airport unless that person has
in his or her immediate possession an appropriate certificate, issued in his or
her name, authorizing such control of aircraft, and the permission of the
owner.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.50 Tail Skids
   No person shall land or take off any aircraft equipped with a tail skid or
device other than a nose or tail wheel unless authorized by the Airport
Management.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.51 Acrobatics
   No aircraft shall be flown within the control zone of the Airport in any
manner other than required for normal, routine operation.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.52 Practice Night Landings
   All pilots desiring to use the facilities of the Airport for practice night
landings shall obtain prior approval from the Airport Management and the
control tower. All aircraft used in such operation shall be equipped with two
(2) way radio.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.53 Careless Operation
   No person shall operate any aircraft on the aircraft landing area, aircraft
ramp and parking areas or taxiways in a careless or negligent manner, or at a
speed or in a manner that endangers or is likely to endanger persons or
property, or in disregard of the rights and safety of others.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.54 Aircraft Parked on Taxiway
   No aircraft shall be parked or placed on any taxiway or in any area in such
a way or manner as to obstruct or prohibit the safe operation of other
aircraft, or prevent the passage of emergency equipment.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.55 Time Limits in Gate Area
   No aircraft shall be parked in the passenger gate area in excess of the time
limit established except under the conditions covering charges for excessive
time in the gate area.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.56 Single Engine Aircraft in Gate Area
   Operators of single engine aircraft desiring to use the gate area for
loading or unloading passengers shall obtain permission from the Airport
Management and the control tower.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.57 Unsafe Areas
   No aircraft shall use any portion of the aircraft landing area or taxiways
considered unsafe for the operation of such aircraft. Such areas shall be
marked with red flags by day and flares at night or notice shall be given to
the control tower, or both.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.58 Registration and Use Charges for Transient Aircraft
   All operators of transient aircraft are required to register the arrival of
their aircraft with the office of the Airport Management. All operators of
aircraft shall pay the fee for Airport use before departure clearance will be
given. All such fees shall be payable in cash unless prior credit arrangements
have been made.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.59 Improperly Parked Aircraft
   Upon direction of the Airport Management, the owner or operator, or his or
her agent, of any aircraft parked or stored on the Airport shall move the
aircraft from the area in which it is parked or stored to such area as may be
designated by the Airport Management. Should the owner, or his or her agent,
fail to comply with such directive, the Airport Management shall have the
aircraft towed to the specified area at the owner’s expense, without assuming
liability for damage that may result in the course of such moving.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.60 Aircraft Parking in Designated Areas
   No person shall park, or cause to be parked, any aircraft in any area other
than that designated for the purpose.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.61 Aircraft Parked at Night
   In the event that it becomes necessary for any aircraft to be parked on a
taxiway, or within five hundred (500) feet of the center line of a runway
during the hours of darkness, it will be the responsibility of the owner or
operator to provide a means of outlining the aircraft as an obstruction, in the
form of navigation lights or a suitable substitute. The owner or operator shall
be held responsible for any damage resulting from failure to do so.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.62 Control Tower Clearance
   Operators of aircraft shall not take off, taxi or land at the Airport
without proper clearance from the control tower, except in emergencies.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.63 Removal of Disabled Aircraft
   The owner, operator or agent shall be responsible for the prompt removal of
disabled aircraft and aircraft parts from the landing area, unless instructed
otherwise for the purpose of investigation as a result of accidents.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.64 Visual Traffic Signals
   All pilots operating from the Airport shall be familiar with current
regulations regarding visual traffic signals.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.65 Ground Instructions
   Pilots shall follow all instructions issued by the Airport Management and
the control tower while operating on the Airport.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.66 Engine Warmup
   Aircraft engines shall not be warmed up or run in any area other than that
designated for the purpose.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.67 Radio Contact
   All radio contacts between pilots of aircraft and the control tower shall be
conducted in strict accordance with standard procedures and phraseologies as
established by the Federal Civil Aeronautics Administration and the Federal
Communications Commission.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.68 Simulated Emergencies
   No operator of an aircraft shall simulate an emergency while within the
control zone, unless the control tower and the Airport Management have been
notified in advance.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.69 Restricted Aircraft
   No person shall operate any aircraft on the Airport if such aircraft is so
constructed, equipped or loaded as to be a danger, or is likely to endanger
persons or property.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.70 Cleaning of Aircraft
   No person shall use flammable volatile liquids in the cleaning of aircraft,
aircraft engines, propellers, and appliances unless such cleaning operations
are conducted in open air, or in a room specifically set aside for that
purpose, which room must be properly fireproofed and equipped with adequate and
readily accessible fire extinguishing apparatus.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.71 Open Flame Operation
   No person shall conduct any open flame operation in any hangar, or on the
Airport grounds, or part thereof unless specifically authorized to do so by the
Airport Management.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.72 Fire Hazards
   No person shall store or stock material or equipment on the Airport in such
a manner as to constitute a fire hazard.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.73 Storage of Flammable Materials
   No person shall keep or store any flammable liquids, gases, signal flares or
other similar equipment in the hangars or in the buildings on the Airport,
provided that such material may be kept in an aircraft in the proper
receptacles installed in the aircraft for that purpose, or in rooms or areas
specifically approved for such storage by the Airport Management.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.74 Lubricating Oils
   No person shall keep or store lubricating oils in or about the hangars,
provided that such material may be kept in aircraft in the proper receptacles
provided for that purpose or in containers provided with suitable draw-off
devices.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.75 Waste Receptacles
   Lessees of hangars shall provide suitable metal containers with self-closing
covers for the storage of oily rags, waste and other rubbish.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.76 Smoking in Prohibited Areas
   No person shall smoke in any hangar or shop or in any building, room or
place on the Airport where it is specifically prohibited by the Airport
Management.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.77 Cleaning Fluids
   No person shall use volatile flammable substances for the cleaning of floors
in the hangars or in other buildings of the Airport.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.78 Doping
   Doping processes shall be conducted only in properly designated, fireproofed
and ventilated rooms and buildings.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.79 Fire Apparatus
   All tenants or lessees of hangars or shop facilities shall supply and
maintain such adequate and readily accessible fire extinguishers and fire
equipment and provide for such periodic fire drills as may be prescribed.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.80 Hours of Operation and Flight Rules and Conditions for Burke Lakefront
Airport
   (a)   Burke Lakefront Airport is open twenty-four (24) hours and operates
under Visual and Instrument Flight Rule conditions.
   (b)   No aircraft shall be operated in such a manner as to pass over
Cleveland Municipal Stadium at any time.
   (c)   All aircraft operating from the Airport shall make their turn after
take off in such a manner that the Airport shall be between the aircraft and
the City.
   (d)   All aircraft operating in the traffic pattern at the Airport shall
operate in such a manner as to fly between the breakwall and the active runway,
over the water, on the downwind leg of the pattern.
      (1)   Southwest traffic pattern: right hand.
      (2)   Northeast traffic pattern: left hand.
(Ord. No. 1333-08. Passed 10-6-08, eff. 10-9-08)
§ 571.81 Additional Regulations
   The Commissioner of Airports is hereby authorized to make such other or
further regulations not inconsistent with the foregoing as may be deemed
necessary. All such regulations shall become effective within ten (10) days
after publication in the City Record.
(Ord. No. 1819-50. Passed 12-4-50)
§ 571.82 Controlled Areas
   (a)   Except as provided in division (b) of this section, no person shall
knowingly enter or remain in an area the use of which is controlled by a
screening device under a security program required and approved by the Federal
Aviation Administration without submitting to a search of his or her person or
property by the approved screening device and/or the attending security person
or law enforcement officer for the purpose of deterring or preventing the
carrying aboard airplanes of any explosive, incendiary device or a deadly or
dangerous weapon.
   (b)   The provisions of division (a) of this section do not apply to those
individuals and groups specifically identified in the Airport Security Master
Program, as approved by the Federal Aviation Administration.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second
degree.
(Ord. No. 957-92. Passed 6-15-92, eff. 6-24-92)
§ 571.83 Letters of Agreement with Federal Aviation Administration
   The Director of Port Control is hereby authorized to enter in Letters of
Agreement with the Federal Aviation Administration (“FAA”), its successors in
interest or instrumentalities, including specifically the FAA tower and/or the
FAA Flight Service Station (“FSS”) at Burke Lakefront and/or Cleveland Hopkins
International Airport, with respect to the following subjects only:
   (a)   Airport emergency service;
   (b)   Operation of airport lighting;
   (c)   Reporting airport conditions;
   (d)   Control of vehicular traffic on airport movement areas, including a
hold harmless clause where appropriate;
   (e)   Operations under an exemption from the Federal Aviation Regulations
concerning the Control Zones within which special VFR weather minimums are not
authorized; and
   (f)   Other similar agreements involving airport operations, which require
coordination between the City and Tower or FSS.
   Except as a result of the hold harmless clause authorized in paragraph (d),
such Letters of Agreement may not authorize or obligate the City to expend
money. Copies of said letters of agreement shall be filed with the Council.
(Ord. No. 745-85. Passed 6-24-85, eff. 7-1-85)
§ 571.84 Tie Down Spaces – Burke Lakefront Airport
   The Commissioner of Burke Lakefront Airport is authorized to enter into
permit agreements for use and occupancy of aircraft tie-down spaces at Burke
Lakefront Airport, provided that the term of such agreement shall not exceed
one (1) year. The Commissioner of Burke Lakefront Airport shall fix the rental
for such tie-down spaces.
(Ord. No. 2147-90. Passed 11-5-90, eff. 11-9-90)
§ 571.85 Fees for Aircraft Parking on City- Controlled Ramp Areas
   The Director of Port Control is hereby authorized to charge and collect a
fee for the parking of aircraft on City-owned and operated ramp areas at
Cleveland Hopkins International Airport and Burke Lakefront Airport. The fees
authorized herein shall be fixed by the Director of Port Control in such
amounts as deemed appropriate by said director, and as approved by the Board of
Control. Such fees shall be reviewed and set annually by the Board of Control.
(Ord. No. 829-95. Passed 6-12-95, eff. 6-21-95)
§ 571.86 Fuel Trucks – Permit and Inspection Required
   (a)   No person shall operate a fuel truck at Cleveland Hopkins
International Airport or Burke Lakefront Airport without a permit issued by the
Director of Port Control.
   (b)   No permit shall be issued pursuant to division (a) of this section
until the fuel truck passes inspection conducted by the Department of Port
Control, ensuring compliance with all relevant state and federal laws, and FAA
rules and regulations.
   (c)   The fee for such permit is seventy-five dollars ($75.00). The permit
is good for one (1) year from the date of issuance. Upon expiration, an
inspection must occur before another permit is issued.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and
shall be fined one hundred dollars ($100.00).
(Ord. No. 880-97. Passed 6-16-97, eff. 6-24-97)
§ 571.87 Fuel Trucks – Fines for Spills of Hazardous Materials
   (a)   The Director of Port Control is authorized to assess a fine against
the owner of any fuel truck involved in a spill of its hazardous contents on
Airport grounds, when such spill is caused by a malfunctioning or damaged fuel
truck.
   (b)   The fine shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for the first such fuel
spill, fifty dollars ($50.00) for the second spill, and one hundred dollars
($100.00) for the third spill, if such subsequent spills are caused by failure
to correct the problem in the fuel truck which caused the original spill.
(Ord. No. 880-97. Passed 6-16-97, eff. 6-24-97)
§ 571.88 Use of and Rental Fee Schedule for Meeting Room Space at Burke
Lakefront Airport and Cleveland Hopkins International Airport
   (a)   Airport Management may rent meeting room space at the Airports to
private Persons provided that such Persons pay the fees authorized in division
(c) of this section and that the space is required for no greater than seventy-
two (72) consecutive hours, and has an estimated rental cost of no greater than
twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00).
   (b)   Airport Management may permit the following public parties to use
meeting room space at the Airports at no cost provided that the meeting room
space will not be used to raise money for political campaigns or political
issues:
      (1)   Branches, departments or offices of the City of Cleveland if the
use furthers the functions or goals of that branch, department, or office;
      (2)   Non-profit organizations and neighborhood organizations located in
the City of Cleveland, including block clubs, street clubs, and ward clubs, if
the use is to provide social services, including direct health and welfare
services to individuals, or to address safety, building, or housing issues;
      (3)   Schools located in the City of Cleveland if the use furthers an
educational or recreational purpose.
   (c)   Airport Management shall assess and collect fees for the rental of
meeting room space at the Airports according to a Rental Fee Schedule, which
Rental Fee Schedule shall be set by the Board of Control.
(Ord. No. 2055-04. Passed 1-31-05, eff. 2-2-05)
§ 571.89 Fees for Voice and Communications Services
   The Director of Port Control is authorized to charge and collect fees for
voice and communications services for on-airport and off-air-port tenants at
Cleveland Hopkins International Airport and Burke Lakefront Airport. The fees
authorized shall be fixed by the Director of Port Control and approved by the
Board of Control. The fees shall be reviewed and set annually by the Board of
Control.
(Ord. No. 1049-09. Passed 10-5-09, eff. 10-9-09)
§ 571.90 Banner Towing Operations; Fee
   (a)   The Commissioner of Burke Lakefront Airport is authorized to charge
and collect fees for banner towing operations at Burke Lakefront Airport. The
banner tow operator will pay a non-refundable deposit for each month they
conduct their operation. Once the operator matches their deposit amount against
the banners towed for that month, a per banner charge will then assessed until
such time as the next monthly non-refundable deposit is due. The monthly
deposit and the per-banner fee authorized shall be fixed by the Commissioner of
Burke Lakefront Airport and shall be approved by the Board of Control. The fees
shall be reviewed and set annually by the Board of Control.
   (b)   All landing fees associated with the operation will be assessed.
   (c)   The Commissioner of Burke Lakefront Airport shall enter into annual
permit agreements with banner tow operators before the operators conduct their
operations.
   (d)   The Commissioner of Burke Lakefront Airport is authorized to issue
further regulations deemed necessary to protect Airport aircraft using the
Airport and the general public. The regulations shall become effective ten (10)
days after publication in the City Record.
(Ord. No. 806-10. Passed 8-18-10, eff. 8-20-10)
§ 571.91 Commercial Ground Transportation Vehicles Operating at Cleveland
Hopkins International Airport and Burke Lakefront Airport; Fee
   (a)   For purposes of this section, "commercial ground transportation
vehicles" include:
      (1)   Taxis; except those operating as part of the Airport's Taxi
Concession program;
      (2)   Limousines;
      (3)   Shared-ride vans;
      (4)   Courtesy vehicles including those operated by hotels and motels,
off-airport parking, and institutional shuttles, such as college shuttles, and
corporate shuttles.
   (b)   No person or entity shall provide any commercial ground transportation
services using commercial ground transportation vehicles, unless it has been
approved by the Airport Management and subject to such terms and conditions as
may be prescribed under the rules and regulations promulgated by the Director.
   (c)   The Director is authorized to charge and collect a per trip fee to be
imposed a maximum of one hundred thousand (100,000) trips in a calendar year
beginning January 1st of each year, for any one (1) company using its own
vehicles for commercial ground transportation vehicle services to, from, or on
the property of the airport. The fee shall be in an amount set by the Board of
Control not to exceed four dollars ($4.00) unless approved by City Council.
   (d)   The Director is authorized to promulgate rules and regulations
applicable to commercial ground transportation vehicle services. Such rules and
regulations shall become effective ten (10) days after their publication in the
City Record.
(Ord. No. 571-18. Passed 10-29-18, eff. 1-1-19)
   Note: Pursuant to Section 4 of Ord. No. 571-18, this section shall take
effect and be in force on January 1, 2019.
§ 571.92 Commercial Motor or Tour Buses Operating at Cleveland Hopkins
International Airport and Burke Lakefront Airport; Fee
   (a)   No person or entity shall provide any commercial motor or tour bus
services at Cleveland Hopkins International Airport or Burke Lakefront Airport,
unless it has been approved by the Airport Management and subject to such terms
and conditions as may be prescribed under the rules and regulations promulgated
by the Director.
   (b)   The Director of Port Control is authorized to charge and collect a per
trip fee for commercial motor or tour bus services to, from, or on the property
of the airports. The fee shall be in an amount set by the Board of Control.
   (c)   The Director of Port Control is authorized to promulgate rules and
regulations applicable to commercial motor or tour bus services. Such rules and
regulations shall become effective ten (10) days after their publication in the
City Record.
(Ord. No. 864-22. Passed 10-10-22, eff. 10-14-22)
§ 571.93 Electric Vehicle Charging; Fees.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions apply:
      (1)   “Airport Property” means all real property located at Cleveland
Hopkins International Airport and Burke Lakefront Airport.
      (2)   “Electric vehicle” means a vehicle that can be powered by an
electric motor that draws electricity from a battery and is capable of being
charged from an external source. An electric vehicle includes both a vehicle
that can only be powered by an electric motor that draws electricity from a
battery (all-electric vehicle or battery-electric vehicle) and a vehicle that
can be powered by an electric motor that draws electricity from a battery and
by an internal combustion engine (plug-in hybrid electric vehicle).
      (3)   “Electric vehicle charging station” means equipment located at
Airport Property, owned or controlled by the City, that has as its primary
purpose the transfer of electricity to a battery or other energy storage device
in an electric vehicle.
      (4)   “Electric vehicle parking space” means any marked parking space
located at Airport Property, owned or controlled by the City, that identifies
the use of the space to be exclusively for the parking and charging of an
electric vehicle by a designated electric vehicle charging station.
   (b)   The Director of Port Control is hereby authorized to establish and
manage electric vehicle charging stations, owned or controlled by the City of
Cleveland, on Airport property, or portions thereof as may be deemed necessary.
   (c)   Electric vehicle charging stations may be used by any member of the
public, subject to the payment of applicable fees and charges for charging and
for parking on Airport property and any posted limitations on hours of
operation and length of time an electric vehicle may be parked in an electric
vehicle parking space.
   (d)   The Director of Port Control is authorized to charge and collect a fee
for the use of an electric vehicle charging station on Airport Property in an
amount established by the Board of Control.
   (e)   The Director of Port Control is authorized to promulgate rules and
regulations governing electric vehicle charging stations. Such rules and
regulations shall become effective ten (10) days after their publication in the
City Record.
(Ord. No. 813-2024. Passed 9-23-24, eff. 9-30-24)
§ 571.99 Penalty
   (a)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, is guilty of a 4th degree misdemeanor.
   (b)   Whoever violates Section
571.06 is guilty of a 1st degree misdemeanor.
   (c)   Whoever violates Section
571.91 is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 571-18. Passed 10-29-18, eff. 10-31-18)
CHAPTER 573 – HARBOR
573.01   Harbor Boundaries Defined
573.02   Removal of Obstructions in Harbor; Notice; Enforcement
573.03   Retaining Works in the Harbor
573.04   Construction or Repair of Retaining Works Adjoining the Harbor;
Notice; Enforcement
573.05   Retaining Works; Specifications
573.06   Prohibition Against Encroachment into Harbor
573.07   Prohibition Against Placing Materials in Harbor
573.08   Prohibition Against Placing Obstructions in Harbor
573.09   Rules and Regulations Concerning the Harbor
573.10   Responsibilities of Abutting Property Owners
573.11   Prohibited Acts in Marginal Water Areas; Permit
573.12   Permit Application
573.13   Mandatory Referral to Planning Commission and Port and Harbor
Commission
573.14   Permit Issuance
573.15   Operations by City Exempted
573.16   Regulation of Vessels; Enforcement
573.17   Publication of Ordinances Relating to Bridges; Viaducts
573.18   Harbor Master’s Jurisdiction and Duties
573.19   Unloading or Tying up Without Permission
573.20   Vessel Movement Causing Bridge Damage
573.21   Rules of Road near Bridges
573.22   Liability for Damages
573.23   Obstructing Drawbridges
573.24   Running Vessels against Piers, Bridges or Viaducts
573.25   Ship in Distress Assisted by Other Vessels; Compensation
573.26   Obstructing Harbor
573.27   Housing Anchor; Ship’s Lights
573.28   Reserved
573.29   Reserved
573.30   Dragging Anchor; Markers Locating Pipes, Wires and Cables
573.31   Regulations for Rafts of Timber
573.32   Rafts Obstructing Harbor
573.33   Obstructing Harbor inside Breakwater with Raft
573.34   Anchoring West of Breakwater Entrance
573.35   Blowing Whistle near Bridges
573.36   Working Engines
573.37   Reserved
573.38   Reserved
573.39   Renting Vessels to Persons under Sixteen
573.40   Renting Vessels to Intoxicated Persons
573.41   Unlawful Anchorages
573.42   Obstructing Certain Portions of Harbor
573.43   Blowing Whistles
573.99   Penalty
   Note: The legislative history of this chapter, except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 63410-A, passed
September 22, 1924.
Cross-references:
   Duties of bridge tenders, CO
577.05
   Littering in lakes, rivers, watercourses, CO
613.09
   Public landings: establishment, use, charges, CO
575.01 et seq.
   Signals and passage through drawbridges, CO
577.07 et seq.
Statutory reference:
   Watercraft and navigation, RC Ch. 1547
§ 573.01 Harbor Boundaries Defined
   The harbor shall consist of that portion of the Cuyahoga River from the
Newburg and South Shore Railroad Bridge to the east and west pier lights on the
south shore of Lake Erie, the Old River Channel from Channel Park Marina to the
channels confluence with the Cuyahoga River at Willow Street, that portion of
Lake Erie within the federal breakwater between the western end of the
Cleveland Bulk Terminal and the lake approach to the east entrance light on the
federal breakwater at approximately East 72nd Street, and the lake approach to
the Cuyahoga River from Lake Erie between the east and west pierhead lights on
the federal breakwater and the mouth of the river at the south shore of Lake
Erie. A map showing the boundaries of the Harbor as described in this section
is contained in File No. 1606-11-A.
(Ord. No. 1606-11. Passed 3-19-12, eff. 3-22-12)
§ 573.02 Removal of Obstructions in Harbor; Notice; Enforcement
   (a)   The existence of obstructions in the harbor that cause or potentially
cause interference with the use and enjoyment of the harbor constitute a public
nuisance which may affect or endanger the health, safety and welfare of the
public. The Director of Port Control, or the Director’s designee, shall
investigate and take appropriate measures to cause the abatement of any
nuisance found to exist with obstructions in the harbor.
   (b)   No person shall fail or refuse to comply with an order issued by the
Director of Port Control, or the Director’s designee, as provided in this
section.
   (c)   Whenever the Director of Port Control, or the Director’s designee,
determines that there exits an obstruction within the limits of the harbor
constituting a nuisance to be removed, the Director, or the Director’s
designee, shall cause written notice to be served by certified mail on the
owner of the lot or land bounding or abutting the harbor where the obstruction
is located, or the owner’s agent, ordering the removal of the obstruction. The
notice shall describe the obstruction, provide the date by which the
obstruction is to be removed, and contain such additional information as the
Director, or the Director’s designee, deems necessary. The notice shall be
addressed to the owner, or the owner’s agent, at their last known address or to
the address to which tax bills are sent, or by a combination of the foregoing
methods. If it appears by the return of the certified mail notice that the
owner or owner’s agent cannot be found, notice shall be served by publication
of the notice once in a newspaper of general circulation in the City.
   (d)   If the obstruction is not removed by the owner or the owner’s agent
within the time period specified in the notice, the Director of Port Control,
or the Director’s designee, may have the obstruction removed at the expense of
the owner, and, if the owner does not pay the cost of the removal, refer the
cost of the removal to the County to be assessed against the property and
thereby made a lien upon it and collected as other taxes.
(Ord. No. 1606-11. Passed 3-19-12, eff. 3-22-12)
§ 573.03 Retaining Works in the Harbor
   For the free, convenient and safe navigation within the harbor and in order
to provide against the subsidence, washing, falling or depositing therein of
earth or any other material from the abutting land by reason of any work or
structure erected or maintained thereon, or material deposited or operations
conducted therein, retaining works and structures and such repairs of existing
works or structures as are suitable and necessary to preserve the channel and
to prevent such depositing of earth or other material shall be constructed in
the manner and at the times provided in Sections
573.04 and
573.05.
(Ord. No. 1606-11. Passed 3-19-12, eff. 3-22-12)
§ 573.04 Construction or Repair of Retaining Works Adjoining the Harbor;
Notice; Enforcement
   (a)   The lack or disrepair of retaining works and structures on property
adjoining the harbor which cause or potentially cause interference with the
free, convenient and safe navigation of the harbor constitute a public nuisance
which may affect or endanger the health, safety and welfare of the public. The
Director of Port Control, or the Director’s designee, shall investigate and
take appropriate measures to cause the abatement of any nuisance found to
exist.
   (b)   No person shall fail or refuse to comply with an order issued by the
Director of Port Control, or the Director’s designee, as provided in this
section.
   (c)   Whenever the Director of Port Control, or the Director’s designee,
determines that a condition exists requiring construction of retaining works or
structures on parcels of land adjoining the Harbor, or repair of existing
retaining works or structures on parcels of land adjoining the Harbor, the
Director, or the Director’s designee, shall cause written notice to be served
by certified mail on the owner of the parcel of land, or the owner’s agent,
ordering the construction or repair of retaining works or structures. The
notice shall describe the unsafe condition or disrepair and the corrective
measures to be taken, provide the date by which the work is to be completed,
and contain such additional information as the Director, or the Director’s
designee, deems necessary. The notice shall be addressed to the owner, or the
owner’s agent, at their last known address or to the address to which tax bills
are sent, or by a combination of the foregoing methods. If it appears by the
return of the certified mail notice that the owner or owner’s agent cannot be
found, notice shall be served by publication of the notice once in a newspaper
of general circulation in the City. As used in this section, “retaining works
or structures” shall include but are not limited to wharves, docks, walls,
bulkheads and revetments.
   (d)   If the requirements of the notice are not observed by the owner or the
owner’s agent within the time period specified in the notice, the Director of
Port Control, or the Director’s designee, may have the work done at the expense
of the owner and, if the owner does not pay the cost of the work, refer the
cost of the work to the County to be assessed against the property and thereby
made a lien upon it and collected as other taxes.
(Ord. No. 1606-11. Passed 3-19-12, eff. 3-22-12)
§ 573.05 Retaining Works; Specifications
   All retaining works and structures, including wharves, docks, piers,
bulkheads, or revetments constructed or repaired along the harbor shall be
built at such locations as are determined by the Director of Port Control, or
the Director’s designee, and shall comply with design, material, engineering
and construction requirements specified in rules promulgated by the Director
under Section
573.09. Council may by resolution prescribe requirements for construction or
repairs additional to those specified by the Director of Port Control in order
that the requirements of any particular or peculiar condition may be met. No
retaining wall or structure, including wharves, docks, piers, bulkheads or
revetments shall be constructed, repaired or renewed along the harbor (except
that portion of harbor under the jurisdiction of the United States Government)
without first securing written permission from the Director, or the Director’s
designee, which permission shall only be given after submitting to the
Director, or the Director’s designee, detailed plans of the proposed
construction.
(Ord. No. 1606-11. Passed 3-19-12, eff. 3-22-12)
§ 573.06 Prohibition Against Encroachment into Harbor
   No person shall encroach upon the waters of the harbor by the placement of
retaining walls or structures without written permission of the Director of
Port Control, or the Director’s designee, as provided in Section
573.05.
(Ord. No. 1606-11. Passed 3-19-12, eff. 3-22-12)
§ 573.07 Prohibition Against Placing Materials in Harbor
   No person shall throw or deposit, or cause to be thrown or deposited in the
harbor any earth, garbage, logs or debris of any description, or any
obstructions; nor place any such material on the bank, wharves, docks or piers
of the harbor, in such position as to be washed off or otherwise conveyed into
the harbor.
(Ord. No. 1606-11. Passed 3-19-12, eff. 3-22-12)
§ 573.08 Prohibition Against Placing Obstructions in Harbor
   No person shall drive or place, or cause to be driven or placed, any pile,
stone, timber, earth or other obstruction in the Harbor without prior
permission of the Director of Port Control or the Director’s designee.
(Ord. No. 1606-11. Passed 3-19-12, eff. 3-22-12)
§ 573.09 Rules and Regulations Concerning the Harbor
   The Director of Port Control may promulgate rules and regulations defining
the duties and responsibilities of the managers of the harbor and for the
maintenance of the harbor, including specifications for the design, material,
engineering and construction of retaining works under Section
573.05. Such rules and regulations shall become effective ten (10) days after
publication in the City Record and shall be enforced as ordinances of the City.
(Ord. No. 1606-11. Passed 3-19-12, eff. 3-22-12)
§ 573.10 Responsibilities of Abutting Property Owners
   (a)   Every owner or occupant of premises abutting on the harbor shall at
all times keep the wharves and docks, bulkheads and embankments on the premises
in good repair and safe condition. Whoever violates this section shall be held
liable for all damages to persons or property by reason of such unsafe
conditions or wharves and docks.
   (b)   No later than May 31, 2001, every owner of any property, whether
improved or not, abutting the Cuyahoga River from the Norfolk Southern Bridge
south on the river to the Center St. Bridge and every owner of any property on
which alcohol is sold abutting the Cuyahoga River or Old River, where the
vertical rise prevents egress to the shore, shall install and maintain at least
one (1) ladder facilitating access from the river to the shore per one hundred
fifty (150) linear feet of property along the shoreline, but no less than one
(1) ladder per property. Owners of property on the portion of Whiskey Island
that abuts the Cuyahoga River south of the Norfolk Southern Bridge where the
vertical rise prevents egress to the shore are excluded from the above
requirement, except for owners of property abutting the river on which alcohol
is sold. The bottom of the ladder shall reach a depth of two (2) feet below the
mean low water level, which is five hundred and sixty nine and two-tenths feet
(569.2) above sea level. The top of the ladder shall terminate no less than one
(1) foot above the mean high water level, which is five hundred and seventy-
four and three- tenths feet (574.3) above sea level, and shall be designed to
facilitate safe egress to the shore. The ladders shall be constructed of
durable, marine compatible materials. All required permits shall be obtained
for installation of the ladders and a Certificate of Appropriateness shall be
obtained from the City. The review process for the Certificate of
Appropriateness shall include review of the design of the ladders by the City
Planning Commission and the Division of Building and Housing. The City Planning
Commission shall refer an application for a Certificate of Appropriateness to
the local design review committee. Upon receipt of a recommendation from the
local design review committee, the City Planning Commission shall review the
application at the next regularly scheduled City Planning Commission meeting.
   (c)   No later than May 31, 2001, every occupant of property, whether
improved or not, abutting the Cuyahoga River from the Norfolk Southern Bridge
south on the Cuyahoga River to the Center St. Bridge, every occupant of any
property on which alcohol is sold abutting the Cuyahoga River or Old River,
every occupant of property, whether improved or not, abutting a deck that abuts
the Cuyahoga River from the Norfolk Southern Bridge south on the river to the
Center St. Bridge, and every occupant of any property on which alcohol is sold
abutting a deck that abuts the Cuyahoga River or Old River shall provide and
maintain at least one (1) serviceable thirty (30) inch ring life buoy, or
approved rescue line-throwing bag, per one hundred fifty (150) linear feet of
property along the shoreline. Occupants of property on the portion of Whiskey
Island that abuts the Cuyahoga River, or that abuts a deck that abuts the
Cuyahoga River, south of the Norfolk Southern Bridge, are excluded from the
above requirement, except for occupants of property abutting the river, or
abutting a deck that abuts the river, on which alcohol is sold. There shall be
no less than one (1) ring buoy or approved rescue line- throwing bag per
business establishment located within the area described above. At least
seventy-five (75) feet of suitable floating line shall be attached to each ring
buoy or line-throwing bag. The ring buoy or line- throwing bag shall be
accessible to the public at or near the bank of the river.
   (d)   No later than May 31, 2001, every occupant of improved property
abutting the Cuyahoga River or Old River or abutting a deck that abuts the
Cuyahoga River or Old River and containing a commercial establishment selling
alcohol shall provide at least one (1) twelve (12) foot minimum length pole to
be used to retrieve persons or property from the water and at least one (1)
portable hand-held lantern of sufficient power to identify floating objects in
the water at a minimum distance of fifty (50) feet. The pole and portable light
may be accessible to employees only.
   (e)   The denial of a Certificate of Appropriateness may be appealed to the
Board of Zoning Appeals consistent with the Charter, ordinances and rules
applicable to that Board.
   (f)   There shall be a chart conspicuously posted to indicate which
individuals will be responsible for monitoring compliance of this section.
   (g)   Whoever violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(Ord. No. 861-08. Passed 7-2-08, eff. 7-7-08)
§ 573.11 Prohibited Acts in Marginal Water Areas; Permit
   No person shall do any of the following described acts on, in or over any
submerged or artificially filled lands made by accretion resulting from
artificial encroachments or structures on the water side of the last natural
shore line of any privately owned littoral land within the territory covered or
formerly covered by the waters of Lake Erie, title to which is in the State,
and within the limits of the City as defined in RC 721.04, without first having
obtained a permit from the Director of Port Control:
   (a)   Place by dumping or otherwise earth or other material within the part
of any such area now submerged or continue in the doing thereof upon any
existing fills or places within such area.
   (b)   Erect or deposit any structure or things or by any works change the
existing condition of any part of such area submerged or filled.
   (c)   Remove or continue to remove any sand or other earth, material or
mineral content from such area.
(Ord. No. 1484-54. Passed 6-21-54, eff. 6-29-54)
§ 573.12 Permit Application
   Before any permit in Section
573.11 is issued, the applicant therefor shall file with the Director of Port
Control a written application which sets forth the following:
   (a)   A description of the littoral land in front of which the applicant
proposes to operate; the name of the owner of such littoral land and, if the
applicant is not the owner, the interest the applicant has therein. Such
description shall include a map showing the existing natural shore line of such
littoral land or the last natural shore line before any previous filling or
construction was done on the water side of such line;
   (b)   A description of what operations are proposed to be done or continued
by the applicant on the water side of such last natural shore line and, if the
erection of any structure or works is involved, plans thereof, as required by
the Building Code or other applicable ordinances.
(Ord. No. 1484-54. Passed 6-21-54, eff. 6-29-54)
§ 573.13 Mandatory Referral to Planning Commission and Port and Harbor
Commission
   (a)   Such application shall be referred by the Director of Port Control to
the Port and Harbor Commission and to the Planning Commission. No permit shall
be issued without the approval of both Commissions except when expressly
authorized by ordinance of Council.
   (b)   Either Commission may formulate conditions to be incorporated in such
permit which it may deem necessary to protect the interest of the public in the
water area, and if the proposed operations by the appellant involve
construction of a building or other works, the plans therefor must first be
approved and permits issued as required by other applicable ordinances of the
City before any permit provided hereby shall be issued.
(Ord. No. 1484-54. Passed 6-21-54, eff. 6-29-54)
§ 573.14 Permit Issuance
   Upon the receipt of the approvals required by Section
573.13, the Director of Port Control shall issue to the applicant a permit
conforming with and not in derogation of the laws of Ohio applicable thereto
and in form approved by the Director of Law, but all such permits shall be
considered as temporary in nature pending demand of the site covered thereby
for more permanent use in aid of navigation and commerce or other public use to
which it is adapted. No such permit shall give the applicant, his or her
successor or assignee, any right to occupy or use the area covered by the
permit for a period of more than three (3) years, or, in the alternative, be
revocable at the will of the Director of Port Control or by action of Council.
If the use of the applicant of the area covered by a permit is for commercial
purposes of the applicant, the Director of Port Control shall fix a reasonable
charge for such use to be paid by the applicant unless the Director considers
that the filling or improvements to be done by the applicant which, under the
terms of the permit, will become the property of the City or State on
termination, will be a reasonable compensation for such use; but no charge
shall be required in case a littoral owner or his or her tenant is the
applicant and proposes to place in the submerged area, while it remains in its
natural state, reasonable facilities for the taking of water for use on such
littoral land.
(Ord. No. 1484-54. Passed 6-21-54, eff. 6-29-54)
§ 573.15 Operations by City Exempted
   Nothing in Sections
573.11 to
573.14 shall limit the power of the City to permit dumping or other operations
by the City or a lessee of the City in any area, title to which is in the State
as defined in RC 721.04, which the City has taken possession of or leased, to
be filled in or otherwise improved and used by itself or its lessee.
(Ord. No. 1484-54. Passed 6-21-54, eff. 6-29-54)
§ 573.16 Regulation of Vessels; Enforcement
   In addition to the regulations set forth in Sections
573.08 to
573.42 and
573.99, the Director of Port Control is hereby authorized to adopt regulations
not in conflict with law or ordinance for the operation of vessels within the
harbor, as the same is defined and described in Section
573.07. As used in this section “vessels” includes every description of water
craft, including non-displacement craft and seaplanes, used or capable of being
used as a means of transportation. Regulations shall provide, among others, for
the safe speed of operation, proper use of the mooring and landing facilities
and for the conduct of persons using the harbor for commercial shipping,
recreation, fishing, water sports and other aquatic events. Regulations shall
also provide for prohibition of mooring in Safety Zones established by the U.S.
Coast Guard, unless partial waivers are provided by the U.S. Coast Guard. No
such regulation shall permit the operation of any such craft in a negligent
manner or at an excessive speed except in cases of fire or extreme emergency,
nor permit the operation within the harbor of vessels which do not meet the
equipment requirements of the United States Coast Guard. As used in this
section, “operation in a negligent manner” means operating so as to endanger
life, limb, or property. Within the limits of the Cuyahoga River, “excessive
speed” means a speed greater than six (6) miles per hour or a speed of six (6)
mph or less at which the vessel produces a wake capable of endangering life,
limb or property. Regulations shall have the force and effect of ordinances
until amended or rescinded by the Director or disapproved by ordinance of
Council or in conflict therewith. Violations of such regulations shall be
subject to the penalties provided in Section
573.99. Such regulations so adopted and published shall be enforced by the
Director of Port Control, the Commissioner of Harbors, the Harbor Master or the
person in the Division of Harbor designated by any of them for such purpose, or
the Chief of Police pursuant to Section
481.03 of the Traffic Code, or by any police officer acting at the direction of
any of the above described officials.
(Ord. No. 1348-90. Passed 8-23-90, eff. 8-31-90)
§ 573.17 Publication of Ordinances Relating to Bridges; Viaducts
   (a)   A copy of the ordinances relating to the management of bridges and
viaducts and the signals for opening and closing the same shall be posted up in
the pilot house of every tug employed in navigating the Cuyahoga River or old
river bed. The Harbor Master is hereby instructed to furnish, upon application,
a printed copy of the same to the master of any such tug.
   (b)   As used in this chapter “bridge” means all structures usually classed
as bridges or viaducts.
§ 573.18 Harbor Master’s Jurisdiction and Duties
   The Harbor Master, or person designated by the Director of Port Control to
carry out the Harbor Master’s duties is hereby authorized and required to give
such orders and directions relative to the location, change of place or
station, the manner of moving in the harbor of every vessel, lying, moving or
laid up in the harbor, as may be necessary to promote order therein, and the
safety and equal convenience of such vessels. The authority and jurisdiction of
the Harbor Master are hereby extended to all vessels entering, navigating or
lying in any slip within the City. All penalties prescribed in this chapter for
a violation of regulations, or disobedience of the orders or directions of the
Harbor Master, are hereby made applicable to the owners, masters or other
persons having charge of such vessels and may be imposed in the same manner and
to the same extent as is prescribed against owners, masters or other persons in
charge of vessels within the limits of the harbor. No owner, master or other
person, having in charge the same, shall refuse or neglect to obey any such
order or direction.
(Ord. No. 1348-90. Passed 8-23-90, eff. 8-31-90)
§ 573.19 Unloading or Tying up Without Permission
   No person shall unload any boat or vessel at, on or in any of the public
wharves, docks, bridges or public grounds of the City or otherwise place or
deposit on any such wharf, dock, bridge or public ground, any stone, lumber,
timber, firewood or other material, without permission from the Harbor Master;
nor shall any owner, master or other person having in charge any steamboat or
other vessel, craft or float, fasten or lay or cause to be fastened or laid any
steamboat, vessel or other craft or float to any private or public dock, wharf,
bridge or public grounds of the harbor after having been forbidden to do so by
the Harbor Master.
§ 573.20 Vessel Movement Causing Bridge Damage
   No vessel, float, boat or other watercraft navigating the Cuyahoga River, or
other watercourse or channel shall be so moved as to run against or injure any
bridge, draw or abutment of any bridge within the City.
§ 573.21 Rules of Road near Bridges
   All vessels, when passing through any bridge across the harbor, shall take
the right-hand side of the bridge unless otherwise permitted by the bridge
tender or other competent authority, and shall be moved as expeditiously as
possible, but in no case shall any vessel occupy the draw of any bridge across
the harbor, so as to prevent such draw from being either closed or opened, for
a period longer than ten (10) minutes. Every person in charge of any vessel
desiring to pass with such vessel through any bridge, shall give notice to the
bridge tender of his or her intention, allowing a reasonable time for the
opening of such bridge. No vessel shall be laid, anchored, moored or made fast,
so as to prevent any bridge from being opened or closed speedily; nor shall any
line or fastening be run or made fast to any bridge, or to any pile or other
timber appertaining to or connected with any bridge.
   As used in this section, “vessel” has the same meaning as in 33 U.S.C. 242.
§ 573.22 Liability for Damages
   No person owning or having charge of any vessel, float, boat or other craft,
shall suffer or permit his or her vessel, float, boat or other watercraft, to
be used or moved so as to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. The
vessel, float, boat or other watercraft, and the owners or persons having
charge of the same, shall be further liable to the City for all damages
sustained.
§ 573.23 Obstructing Drawbridges
   No boat or other craft shall be anchored or moored, or made fast so as to
prevent the draw of a bridge from being speedily opened or closed, or in any
manner obstruct the passage of boats through the draw of such bridge, or be
made fast to any part of the same.
§ 573.24 Running Vessels against Piers, Bridges or Viaducts
   No vessel, float, boat or other craft navigating the Cuyahoga River shall be
so moved as to run against the river piers of any bridge or viaduct or the iron
draw or fixed spans of the same.
§ 573.25 Ship in Distress Assisted by Other Vessels; Compensation
   If any steamboat, vessel or other craft in making or leaving the harbor is
in distress or danger and obliged to anchor outside the harbor, or if any
steamboat, vessel or other craft by anchoring inside the piers or other part of
the harbor, or by winding or other cause shall get foul and obstruct the
navigation or passage of other boats or crafts, the Harbor Master shall have
power and is hereby authorized to order to its assistance men, boats and tackle
from any tug lying in the harbor, or any other boat or craft in port, unless
such vessel or craft contemplates immediate departure from port or departs
within thirty (30) minutes after having been called upon for such assistance.
Every master or officer of such boat, craft or tug shall render the assistance
so ordered; every master or officer shall receive such assistance when his or
her vessel obstructs the passage of any other vessel. Any steamboat, vessel or
other craft or float receiving such assistance shall pay to the person
rendering the same any sum fixed by the Harbor Master, not exceeding fifty
dollars ($50.00).
§ 573.26 Obstructing Harbor
   No owner, master or other person having in charge any vessel shall anchor or
otherwise fasten or permit to be anchored or fastened any such vessel in the
harbor so as to obstruct the passage of any other vessel in coming into or
going out of the harbor. No such vessel shall make fast to any pile driven as a
fender to either the east or west government pier. No vessel shall moor in a
Safety Zone established by the U.S. Coast Guard unless granted a Coast Guard
partial waiver.
(Ord. No. 1348-90. Passed 8-23-90, eff. 8-31-90)
§ 573.27 Housing Anchor; Ship’s Lights
   All vessels while lying in the harbor or at any of its slips or piers shall
carry their anchors in such a manner that they shall not in any way do damages
to or come in contact with any vessel that is coming in or going out of the
harbor or moving about therein; and in entering or leaving the harbor shall be
moved slowly and under a low head of steam, or short sail, so as not to
endanger any other vessel. All steamboats, vessels, canal boats or other
watercrafts, shall keep outboard, during the night, a conspicuous light, and
shall have extinguished, or secured safely at dark, all fires that may be kept
on board.
§ 573.28 Reserved
§ 573.29 Reserved
§ 573.30 Dragging Anchor; Markers Locating Pipes, Wires and Cables
   All vessels of any description navigating the harbor are hereby prohibited
from dragging their anchors at any point in the Cuyahoga River or old river
bed. Any owner, master, officer or other person in charge of any such vessels,
violating any provisions of this section, shall be liable to the person injured
for all damages sustained by reason of such violation to the water pipes of the
City, or to the gas pipes of any gas and coke company or gas company, or the
wires or cables of the City, or of any person or company having proper
authority for laying such wires or cables located within the limits of the
harbor. The Director of Port Control shall cause suitable signboards to be
erected on each side of the River, indicating the location of all water and gas
pipes, or wires and cables.
(Ord. No. 1484-54. Passed 6-21-54, eff. 6-29-54)
§ 573.31 Regulations for Rafts of Timber
   No person having in charge any raft of lumber, logs or timber, shall have
more than eight (8) cribs of pine lumber, logs or timber, or not to exceed four
hundred fifty (450) of hardwood lumber, logs or timber, towed in any raft in
the harbor. All such rafts shall be drawn or towed at least fifteen (15)
minutes apart while navigating the Cuyahoga River or old river bed. All lumber,
logs or timber, making up or constituting such cribs shall be properly secured,
so that the same shall not break adrift.
§ 573.32 Rafts Obstructing Harbor
   No person having in charge any raft of lumber, logs or timber shall refuse
or neglect to comply with the orders of the Harbor Master relative to the
change of location or removal of the same. No owner, master or officer of any
tug, propeller or steamboat shall leave any such raft of lumber, logs or timber
within the harbor, where the same shall be or become an obstruction to
commerce.
§ 573.33 Obstructing Harbor inside Breakwater with Raft
   Any tug, propeller or steamboat having in tow any raft of lumber, logs or
timber, and making or entering the government breakwater, shall tow such raft
to such place in the water, so as not to obstruct or interfere with any vessel,
craft or float desiring to enter and anchor in the breakwater. The Harbor
Master shall cause the removal of any such raft when the same so obstructs any
vessel or craft and the cost of such removal shall be chargeable upon the
property so removed, and may be collected of the owner thereof.
§ 573.34 Anchoring West of Breakwater Entrance
   No owner, master or any other person in charge of any vessel, craft or float
entering the government breakwater shall anchor any such vessel, craft or float
within two thousand (2,000) feet west of the entrance thereof, such two
thousand (2,000) feet being designated by a beacon or pole erected on the
northerly line of the breakwater. Any owner, master or other person having in
charge any such vessel or other craft or float anchoring the same within the
limits of the breakwater as above described, shall immediately cause such
vessel, craft or float to be moved above the limits, and in case of refusal or
neglect on the part of the owner, master or other person having in charge any
such vessel, craft or float to comply with the removal of such vessel, craft or
float, as aforesaid, the Harbor Master shall cause the same to be so removed at
the expense of such owner, master or other person in charge.
§ 573.35 Blowing Whistle near Bridges
   No person in charge of any propeller, tug or steamboat shall blow her
whistle or cause the same to be blown, while occupying the draw of any bridge
in the City, or within one hundred fifty (150) feet thereof, unless the same is
blown by a steamer, propeller or tug lying at a dock as a signal for the
opening of the next nearest bridge, or when required by Federal laws or
regulations. However, this section shall not apply to cases of fire or
distress.
§ 573.36 Working Engines
   No vessel, while lying in the harbor or along the wharves or docks of the
same, shall work its engine (turn its propeller(s)) in excess of ten (10)
minutes previous to leaving the harbor, or moving from one (1) dock to another,
without the permission of the Harbor Master; provided, that owners, masters or
other persons in charge of new boats just launched, or boats fitting out and
desirous of working and testing their engines, shall, before working or testing
such engine, station some person in such a place or position so as to signal
the engineer to stop such engines at least two hundred (200) feet from an
approaching vessel, craft or float. The engine shall be kept from working until
the approaching vessel, craft or float has passed the wheel of the new boat, or
boat fitting out, a distance of two hundred (200) feet. This section shall not
apply to cases of fire. Whoever violates this section shall be liable for any
damage to persons or property sustained by reason of such violation.
(Ord. No. 1348-90. Passed 8-23-90, eff. 8-31-90)
§ 573.37 Reserved
§ 573.38 Reserved
§ 573.39 Renting Vessels to Persons under Sixteen
   No person shall let, loan or rent, with or without hire, any boat, raft or
vessel to any person under sixteen (16) years of age. However, any person may
let, loan or rent any boat, raft or vessel to persons under sixteen (16) years
of age, when accompanied in the use of such raft, boat or vessel, by a
competent person to take charge of and manage the same.
§ 573.40 Renting Vessels to Intoxicated Persons
   No person shall let, loan or rent, with or without hire, any boat, raft or
vessel to any person who is under the influence of liquor, or who, by reason of
having been drinking liquor, may be incompetent to take charge of the
management of a boat, raft or vessel.
§ 573.41 Unlawful Anchorages
   No boat, raft or vessel shall lie or anchor in the range of the east or west
pier, or at the mouth of the harbor, so as to obstruct navigation. However,
this section shall not prevent vessels from anchoring at any point in case of
accident or stress of weather.
§ 573.42 Obstructing Certain Portions of Harbor
   During transit of a commercial vessel no vessel shall make fast or lie
alongside of another or lap one (1) another or moor in any Safety Zone
identified in regulations issued by the U.S. Coast Guard, referenced in Section
573.16, or at any location contrary to the orders of the U.S. Coast Guard,
Guard or the Harbor Master. For purposes of this section “commercial vessel”
means any vessel exceeding seventy-nine (79) feet in length.
(Ord. No. 1348-90. Passed 8-23-90, eff. 8-31-90)
§ 573.43 Blowing Whistles
   (a)   No person shall blow or cause to be blown the whistle of any vessel
while lying at any wharf in the City of Cleveland, or when approaching or
leaving such wharf, or navigating the Cuyahoga River, except when absolutely
necessary as a signal of danger or in the cases and under the circumstances
prescribed by the rules of navigation, or the laws and regulations of the
United States requiring the use of such whistles.
   (b)   The sound signal to request the opening of any bridge in the Cuyahoga
is one (1) prolonged blast of four (4) to six (6) seconds duration followed by
one (1) short blast of approximately one (1) second duration sounded not more
than three (3) seconds after the prolonged blast.
(Ord. No. 1348-90. Passed 8-23-90, eff. 8-31-90)
§ 573.99 Penalty
   (a)   Whoever violates division (b) of Section
573.02, division (b) of Section
573.04, Section
573.06, Section
573.07, Section
573.08 or Section
573.10 is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (b)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no other
penalty is provided shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (c)   A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which an offense occurs or continues, after notification by the Director of
Port Control or the Director’s designee of a violation.
(Ord. No. 1606-11. Passed 3-19-12, eff. 3-22-12)
CHAPTER 575 – DOCKS
575.01   Public Landings Established
575.02   Restrictions and Charges for Use of Public Landings
575.03   Collection of Dock Charges
575.04   Collectors of Wharfage; License; Bond
575.05   Dock Lines
575.06   Dock or Wharf Lines of Ship Channel for Westerly and Easterly Sides
575.07   Dock or Wharf Lines of Old River Bed for Northwesterly Side
575.08   Base Line for Southeasterly Side
575.09   Dock or Wharf Lines for Southeasterly Side
575.10   Dock or Wharf Lines from Front Ave. N.W. to Middle W. 3rd St. Bridge
575.11   Base Line for Easterly Side
575.12   Dock Lines for Easterly Side
575.13   Base Line for Westerly Side
575.14   Dock or Wharf Line for Westerly Side
575.15   Dock or Wharf Lines for Middle W. 3rd St. Bridge to Upper W. 3rd St.
Bridge
575.16   Base Line for Westerly Side
575.17   Dock Lines for Westerly Side
575.18   Base Line for Easterly Side
575.19   Dock Lines for Easterly Side
575.20   Dock or Wharf Lines for Upper W. 3rd St. Bridge to Denison-Harvard
Viaduct
575.21   Dock or Wharf Line for Westerly Side
575.22   Dock or Wharf Line for Westerly Side
575.23   Dock or Wharf Line for Easterly Side
575.24   Dock or Wharf Line for Easterly Side
575.99   Penalty
   Note: The legislative history of this chapter, except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 63410-A, passed
September 22, 1924.
Cross-reference:
   Harbor boundaries, CO
573.07
   Vessels running against piers, CO
573.24
§ 575.01 Public Landings Established
   All public landings and all streets bounding and abutting (or the
termination thereof), upon the harbor line, as before specified, or upon the
line of survey of the ship channel and old river bed, or upon such portion of
the Ohio canal, or Lake Erie, as lies within the limits of the City, at or upon
which no bridges exist or shall be constructed by the authority of Council, are
hereby designated and set apart as public landings, and as such are to be under
the control of the Harbor Master or such other officers as Council shall
provide, under such rules and regulations as Council shall prescribe.
§ 575.02 Restrictions and Charges for Use of Public Landings
   All goods or other property hereafter landed from any steamboat, canal boat,
vessel or other watercraft, or unloaded or deposited from any dray, cart or
wagon, or other vehicle, upon the public landings, docks or wharves of the City
at the foot of the streets or elsewhere, shall be subject and liable to charges
as fixed by the Director of Public Service. No person shall remove any property
landed or deposited without permission of the Harbor Master, before paying the
aforesaid dock charges. No vessel shall be permitted to lie at any of the
public landings, docks or wharves of the City for a longer period than three
(3) hours, unless by permission of the Harbor Master. At the option of the
Harbor Master the payment of one dollar ($1.00) per hour after the period
heretofore mentioned may be collected from the owner or person in charge of
such vessel.
§ 575.03 Collection of Dock Charges
   Every person depositing property on the docks and wharves of the City shall
pay the dock charges on demand to the Harbor Master, and in depositing or
removing property shall obey his or her orders both as to the manner and time.
The Harbor Master shall collect such charges and pay the same into the City
Treasury, and also make complaint of any violations of this chapter to the
criminal branch of the Municipal Court.
§ 575.04 Collectors of Wharfage; License; Bond
   The Director of Port Control shall annually, on or before the first Monday
in March of each year, advertise for two (2) weeks in two (2) daily papers of
the City for bids of cash, to be paid in advance for the right to collect
wharfage upon any or all of the public landings of the City, which bids shall
be reported to Council without unnecessary delay. The Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses, upon payment to him or her of the amount bid, shall
issue to any person to whom award has been made, a license to collect wharfage
upon such public landings as may have been awarded to such person, the license
to expire on the first Monday in April next following. Any person so licensed
shall give a bond with sufficient security, to keep such landings in as good
repair as when he or she took control of them, the natural wear and decay of
the landings excepted.
(Ord. No. 1484-54. Passed 6-21-54, eff. 6-29-54)
§ 575.05 Dock Lines
   The dock lines of the City are hereby established as set forth in Sections
575.06 to
575.24.
(Ord. No. 1213-51. Passed 5-28-51)
§ 575.06 Dock or Wharf Lines of Ship Channel for Westerly and Easterly Sides
   The said dock or wharf lines on the westerly side of said ship channel begin
at a point in the northerly line of Riverbed Ave. N.W. three hundred and one
and sixty-six one-hundredths (301.66) feet easterly of the intersection of the
center line of Division Ave. N.W., produced with the said northerly line of
said Riverbed Ave. N.W.; thence northerly at right angles with Riverbed Ave.
N.W. to the dock line of the Cuyahoga River on the westerly side thereof; and
the dock line of the easterly side of said ship channel is parallel to, and one
hundred and ninety-eight (198) feet easterly from the above-described line, and
extends from said northerly line of Riverbed Ave. N.W. to the Cuyahoga River.
§ 575.07 Dock or Wharf Lines of Old River Bed for Northwesterly Side
   The said dock or wharf line of the said ship channel and old river bed on
the northwesterly side thereof, begins at the end of the west concrete pier as
built by the U.S. Government and thence southerly along this line produced
until it intersects the line which is at right angles to the east line of
Riverbed Ave. N.W. and through said point in the northerly line of Riverbed
Ave. N.W. three hundred and one and sixty-six one-hundredths (301.66) feet
easterly of the center line of Division Ave. N.W. produced; thence south 39
degrees 45 minutes west, forty-eight (48) feet; thence south 46 degrees 45
minutes west, sixty-six (66) feet; thence south 53 degrees 45 minutes west,
sixty-six (66) feet; thence south 60 degrees 45 minutes west, sixty-six (66)
feet; thence south 67 degrees 45 minutes west, sixty-six (66) feet; thence
south 74 degrees 45 minutes west, sixty-six (66) feet, to a point twenty- eight
and five-tenths (28.5) feet, at right angles from a point in the easterly line
of Division Ave. N.W. one hundred and sixty-one and eight one-hundredths
(161.08) feet, southerly from its intersection with the southerly line of
Riverbed Ave. N.W.; thence south 84 degrees 30 minutes west, six hundred and
sixty-two and sixty-six one-hundredths (662.66) feet to the northwest corner of
said second division of the ship channel; which corner is fifty-three and five-
tenths (53.5) feet at right angles from a point in the northerly line of Elm
St. N.W. ninety and twenty-five one-hundredths (90.25) feet easterly of its
intersection with the easterly line of Macy St. N.W.; thence south 24 degrees
32 minutes west, five hundred and thirty and twenty one- hundredths (530.20)
feet, to a point thirty-six and eighty-three one-hundredths (36.83) feet
distant at right angles, from a point in the easterly line of Macy St. N.W. one
hundred and sixteen and four one-hundredths (116.04) feet northerly from its
intersection with the northerly line of Mulberry St. N.W.; thence south 10
degrees 30 minutes west, eight hundred and thirty-eight and sixty-six one-
hundredths (838.66) feet to a point in 28th St. N.W. fifteen and eighty-three
one-hundredths (15.83) feet, at right angles northerly of the southerly line
thereof, and one hundred and fifty-seven and sixteen one-hundredths (157.16)
feet easterly of the easterly line of Macy St. N.W.; thence south 23 degrees 41
minutes west, three hundred and eleven and seventy- five one-hundredths
(311.75) feet to a point four and seventy one-hundredths (4.70) feet, at right
angles southerly, from a point in the northerly line of Union St., one hundred
and thirty and twenty-nine one- hundredths (130.29) feet easterly from its
intersection with the easterly line of Macy St. N.W.; thence south 36 degrees
15 minutes west, two hundred and thirty- nine and seventy-nine one-hundredths
(239.79) feet; thence south 60 degrees 13 minutes west, three hundred and
eighty-eight and seventy-five one-hundredths (388.75) feet, to a point which is
one hundred and nine and fifty one-hundredths (109.50) feet distant, at right
angles from a point in the northerly line of Andrew St., and one hundred and
forty-four and sixteen one- hundredths (144.16) feet from its intersection with
the southerly line of Giddings St.; thence south 83 degrees 32 minutes 30
seconds west, three hundred and seventy-nine and fifty one-hundredths (379.50)
feet; thence south 88 degrees 56 minutes west, fourteen hundred and eight and
four one-hundredths (1408.04) feet, to a point five and four one-hundredths
(5.04) feet, westerly on the last mentioned course, from a point in the center
line of Carter St., one hundred and thirty- seven and ninety-two one-hundredths
(137.92) feet southerly from its intersection with the southerly line of
Andrews St.; thence north 77 degrees 35 minutes west, four hundred and seventy-
five and ninety-eight one- hundredths (475.98) feet to the westerly line of
54th St. N.W. produced, and four hundred and sixty-two and thirty-three one-
hundredths (462.33) feet from the intersection of said westerly line with the
northerly line of old River Ave. N.W.
§ 575.08 Base Line for Southeasterly Side
   Base line on the southeasterly side of Old Riverbed begins at a stone
monument in the center line of Main Ave. N.W. and Elm St. N.W. and extends to a
stone monument at the intersection of Elm St. N.W. and Division Ave. N.W.;
thence deflecting to the left 89 degrees 48 minutes 30 seconds two thousand and
six and forty-four one-hundredths (2006.44) feet to a stone monument at the
angle in Division Ave. N.W.; thence deflecting to the right 41 degrees 49
minutes 30 seconds a distance of nine hundred and fourteen and twenty-two one-
hundredths (914.22) feet to a stone monument; thence deflecting to the right 30
degrees 2 minutes a distance of two hundred and eighty and eighty-four one-
hundredths (280.84) feet to a stone monument; thence deflecting to the right 45
degrees 24 minutes 30 seconds a distance of ninety-one and thirty- six one-
hundredths (91.36) feet to a stone monument; thence deflecting to the left 39
degrees 28 minutes 50 seconds a distance of two hundred and sixteen one-
hundredths (200.16) feet to a stone monument; thence deflecting to the left 4
degrees 16 minutes a distance of one thousand six hundred and eighty-seven
(1687) feet to a stone monument which is at the center of old River Ave. N.W.
and 54th St. N.W.
§ 575.09 Dock or Wharf Lines for Southeasterly Side
   The said dock or wharf lines of the said ship channel and old river bed on
the southeasterly side thereof, begin in the said northerly line of Riverbed
Ave. N.W. one hundred and ninety-eight (198) feet easterly of the beginning of
the northwesterly side; thence south 9 degrees 15 minutes west, at right angles
with said northerly line of Riverbed Ave. N.W. fifty- five and eighty-three
one-hundredths (55.83) feet; thence south 40 degrees 41 minutes west, one
hundred and twenty-five and thirty-three one-hundredths (125.33) feet; thence
south 47 degrees 41 minutes west, ninety and thirty-three one-hundredths
(90.33) feet; thence south 54 degrees 41 minutes west, ninety and thirty-three
one-hundredths (90.33) feet; thence south 61 degrees 41 minutes west, ninety
and thirty-three one-hundredths (90.33) feet; thence south 68 degrees 41
minutes west, ninety and thirty-three one-hundredths (90.33) feet; thence south
76 degrees 38 minutes west, one hundred (100) feet to a point one hundred and
forty-two and eighty-nine one-hundredths (142.89) feet distant at right angles
from a point in the northerly line of Elm St. N.W., one hundred and ten and
sixty-six one-hundredths (110.66) feet, easterly from its intersection with the
easterly line of Division Ave. N.W., thence southwesterly to a point which is
about one hundred and ninety-five (195) feet from the last mentioned point and
said point is ninety-six and seventeen one-hundredths (96.17) feet from a point
in the center line of Elm St. N.W. and measured along the north line of
Division Ave. N.W.; at a point one hundred and sixty-one (161) feet southerly
from a stone monument at the intersection of Division Ave. N.W. and Elm St.
N.W., said dock line is three hundred and forty-eight and eighty-four one-
hundredths (348.84) feet at right angles from this point; at a point two
hundred and seven and fifty one-hundredths (207.50) feet from the
abovementioned monument, said dock line is three hundred and sixty-eight and
two one- hundredths (368.02) feet at right angles from this point; at a point
six hundred and twenty-three and fifty one- hundredths (623.50) feet from the
above-mentioned monument, said dock line is three hundred and seventy- six and
forty-nine one-hundredths (376.49) feet at right angles from this point; thence
south 10 degrees 30 minutes west, six hundred and forty (640) feet to a point
in 28th St. N.W., thirty-seven and seventy-five one-hundredths (37.75) feet
southerly, at right angles from a point in its northerly line two hundred and
thirty-nine and seventy-five one-hundredths (239.75) feet westerly from its
intersection with the westerly line of Division Ave. N.W.; thence south 20
degrees west, five hundred and seven (507) feet to a point which is one
thousand seven hundred and seventy and eighty one-hundredths (1770.80) feet
from the stone monument at the intersection of Elm St. N.W. and Division Ave.
N.W. measured along the center line of Division Ave. N.W.; said dock line is
two hundred and ninety and fifty-four one-hundredths (290.54) feet at right
angles from said point; thence southwesterly six hundred and fifty-three (653)
feet to a point which is three hundred and thirty (330) feet at right angles
from a point in the center line of Division Ave. N.W. said point being six
hundred and sixty-six and ninety-eight one-hundredths (666.98) feet from the
angle in Division Ave. N.W.; thence south 82 degrees 48 minutes west, four
hundred and thirty-seven and seventy one-hundredths (437.70) feet to a point
two hundred and sixty-nine (269) feet north of the center line of old River
Ave. N.W., measured on a line parallel with and one hundred and sixty-three
(163) feet distant from the west line of 45th St. N.W.; thence south 89 degrees
58 minutes west one thousand four hundred and forty-four and thirty-three one-
hundredths (1444.33) feet to a point two hundred and ten and fifty one-
hundredths (210.50) feet distant at right angles from a point in the center
line of old River Ave. N.W. and four hundred and thirty-two (432) feet easterly
of its intersection with the westerly line of 54th St. N.W.; thence north 78
degrees 23 minutes west, four hundred and fifty-one and sixty-six one-
hundredths (451.66) feet to a point in the westerly line of 54th St. N.W. two
hundred and fifty-one (251) feet northerly of its intersection with the
northerly line of old River Ave. N.W.
§ 575.10 Dock or Wharf Lines from Front Ave. N.W. to Middle W. 3rd St. Bridge
   The dock or wharf lines of the Cuyahoga River between Front Ave. N.W. and
Middle W. 3rd St. Bridge, also the base lines to which the same have reference,
are hereby re-established as follows in Sections
575.11 to
575.14.
§ 575.11 Base Line for Easterly Side
   The said base line on the easterly side of Cuyahoga River commences at the
center of the stone monument marked R.S. 1, near the center line of River Ave.
N.W., produced northwesterly one hundred and forty-eight (148) feet from the
intersection of the supposed center line of said River Ave. N.W. with the
supposed southerly line of Front Ave. N.W.; thence southeasterly on a straight
line near the center line of River Ave. N.W. eleven hundred and twenty-seven
and seventy-six one-hundredths (1127.76) feet to a stone monument marked R.S.
2, at the supposed angle in said River Ave. N.W. on the line between original
lots 195 and 196; thence deflecting westerly 20 degrees 52 minutes 30 seconds
on a straight line, and continuing near the center line of said River Ave. N.W.
seven hundred and fifty-nine and sixty-two one-hundredths (759.62) feet to a
stone monument marked R.S. 3; thence continuing on the same straight line three
hundred and sixty-eight and sixty-eight one-hundredths (368.68) feet to a stone
monument marked R.S. 4, near the center of River Ave. N.W.; thence deflecting
westerly 17 degrees 44 minutes a distance of two hundred and one and sixty-nine
one-hundredths (201.69) feet to a stone monument marked R.S. 5, at the supposed
intersection of the center line of Superior Ave. N.W. and Merwin St. N.W.;
thence deflecting westerly 55 degrees a distance of five hundred and sixty-
seven and fifty-seven one-hundredths (567.57) feet to a stone monument marked
R.S. 6; thence deflecting westerly 8 degrees 28 minutes a distance of four
hundred and fifty-six and thirty-five one- hundredths (456.35) feet to a stone
monument marked R.S. 7, at the intersection of Center St. N.W. and Merwin St.
N.W.; thence deflecting easterly 7 degrees 46 minutes 30 seconds a distance of
seven hundred and seventy (770) feet to a stone monument marked R.S. 8, at or
near the center line of said Merwin St.; thence on the same straight line four
hundred and forty-four and thirty one-hundredths (444.30) feet to a stone
monument marked R.S. 9, thence deflecting easterly 54 degrees 24 minutes a
distance of six hundred and forty- eight and sixty-four one-hundredths (648.64)
feet to a stone monument marked R.S. 10, at the supposed angle in said Merwin
St. N.W.; thence deflecting easterly 31 degrees 20 minutes a distance of seven
hundred and seventy-four and seventy-three one-hundredths (774.73) feet to a
stone monument marked R.S. 11, six (6) feet southerly and two (2) feet easterly
of the supposed intersection of the center line of Leonard St. N.W. with the
easterly line of Columbus Rd. N.W.; thence deflecting northerly 85 degrees 17
minutes a distance of two hundred and ten and six-tenths (210.6) feet to a
stone monument marked R.S. 12, in said Leonard St. N.W. and extending a
distance of four hundred and nineteen (419) feet to a stone monument marked
R.S. 31, at the intersection of the center line of Leonard St. N.W.; thence
deflecting westerly 63 degrees 29 minutes a distance of six hundred and sixty-
eight and forty-four one-hundredths (668.44) feet to a stone monument marked
R.S. 32; thence deflecting easterly 31 degrees 13 minutes a distance of seven
hundred and forty-seven and seventy-one one- hundredths (747.71) feet to a
stone monument marked R.S. 33; thence deflecting easterly 90 degrees a distance
of one hundred and ninety-three and fifty-two one-hundredths (193.52) feet to a
stone monument marked R.S. 34; thence deflecting northerly 42 degrees 45
minutes a distance of four hundred and eighty-seven (487) feet to a stone
monument marked R.S. 35, on the easterly side of the C. C. C. & St. L. R. R.
bridge, and from thence runs in a direct line to a stone monument marked R.S.
39, set in the towing path of the Ohio Canal in or near the westerly line of W.
3rd St.; thence along the Ohio Canal Commission base lines between stones C. C.
S. No. 6 and C. C. S. No. 9.
§ 575.12 Dock Lines for Easterly Side
   The said dock or wharf line on the easterly side of said Cuyahoga River
commences at the southerly end of the government stone pier at a point one
hundred and twenty-five and eighty-four one-hundredths (125.84) feet from a
stone monument marked R.S. 1, on a line making an angle of 92 degrees with said
base line between stone monuments R.S. 1 and R.S. 2; at a point in said base
line sixty-two and seventy-one one- hundredths (62.71) feet from said stone
R.S. 1, said dock line is one hundred and fifty-five and eight-tenths (155.8)
feet distant on a line perpendicular to said base line; at a point in said base
line one hundred and thirty- two and twenty-one one-hundredths (132.21) feet
from said stone R.S. 1, said dock line is one hundred and seventy-six and
twenty-four one-hundredths (176.24) feet distant on a line perpendicular to
said base line; at a point in said base line two hundred and twenty and forty-
one one-hundredths (220.41) feet from said stone R.S. 1, said dock line is one
hundred and eighty-five (185) feet distant on a line perpendicular to said base
line; at a point in said base line three hundred and fifty- seven and seventy-
one one-hundredths (357.71) feet from said stone R.S. 1, said dock line is one
hundred and eighty-one and nine-tenths (181.9) feet distant on a line
perpendicular to said base line; at a point in said base line four hundred and
sixty-one and seventy-one one-hundredths (461.71) feet from said stone R.S. 1,
said dock line is one hundred and seventy-eight and fifty-seven one-hundredths
(178.57) feet distant on a line perpendicular to said base line; at a point
seven hundred and seventy-two and two one-hundredths (772.02) feet from said
stone R.S. 1, said dock line is one hundred and fifty-three and fourteen one-
hundredths (153.14) feet distant on a line perpendicular to said base line; at
a point in said base line eight hundred and fifty-one and two one-hundredths
(851.02) feet from said stone R.S. 1, said dock line is one hundred and forty-
four (144) feet distant on a line making an angle of 90 degrees 5 minutes with
said base line between said points in said base line and said stone R.S. 2; at
a point in said base line eight hundred and eighty-seven and two one-hundredths
(887.02) feet from said stone R.S. 1, said dock line is one hundred and forty-
five (145) feet distant on a line perpendicular to said base line; at a point
in said base line nine hundred and forty-seven and two one-hundredths (947.02)
feet distant from said stone R.S. 1, said dock line is one hundred and forty-
four and six one- hundredths (144.06) feet distant on a line perpendicular to
said base line; at a point in said base line nine hundred and ninety-four and
two one-hundredths (994.02) feet from said stone R.S. 1, said dock line is one
hundred and forty-six (146) feet distant on a line perpendicular to said base
line; at a point in said base line eleven hundred and nine and twenty-one one-
hundredths (1109.21) feet from said stone R.S. 1, said dock line is one hundred
and sixty-three and one-tenth (163.1) feet distant on a line perpendicular to
said base line; at a point in said base line one hundred and eighty-one and
seventy-nine one-hundredths (181.79) feet from said stone R.S. 2, said dock
line is one hundred and forty-five and five-tenths (145.5) feet distant on a
line perpendicular to said base line; at a point in said base line three
hundred and forty-three and fifty-five one-hundredths (343.55) feet from said
stone R.S. 2, said dock line is one hundred and forty- one and five-tenths
(141.5) feet distant on a line perpendicular to said base line; at a point in
said base line four hundred and fifty-one and fifty-five one- hundredths
(451.55) feet from said stone R.S. 2, said dock line is one hundred and forty
(140) feet distant on a line perpendicular to said base line; at a point in
said base line five hundred and ninety-two and sixty-two one-hundredths
(592.62) feet from said stone R.S. 2, said dock line is one hundred and thirty-
five (135) feet distant on a line perpendicular to said base line; at a point
in said base line sixteen and four-tenths (16.4) feet from said stone R.S. 3,
said dock line is one hundred and four and seventy-three one-hundredths
(104.73) feet distant on a line perpendicular to said base line; at a point in
said base line one hundred and eleven and five-tenths (111.5) feet from said
stone R.S. 3, said dock line is one hundred and three and eight- tenths (103.8)
feet distant on a line perpendicular to said base line; at a point in said base
line two hundred and four (204) feet from said stone R.S. 3, said dock line is
one hundred and three and eight-tenths (103.8) feet distant on a line
perpendicular to said base line; at a point in said base line three hundred and
six (306) feet from said stone R.S. 3, said dock line is one hundred and
twenty-four and five-tenths (124.5) feet distant on a line perpendicular to
said base line; at said stone R.S. 5, said dock line is one hundred and eighty-
eight (188) feet distant on a line making an angle of 71 degrees with said base
line between said stones R.S. 5 and R.S. 6; at a point in said base line two
hundred and seven (207) feet distant from said stone R.S. 5, said dock line is
one hundred and nineteen (119) feet; at a point in said base line four hundred
and ninety-seven and fifty-seven one-hundredths (497.57) feet from said stone
R.S. 5, said dock line is one hundred and forty- eight (148) feet distant on a
line perpendicular to said base line; at said stone R.S. 7, said dock line is
one hundred and fifty-nine (159) feet distant on a line making an angle of 79
degrees with said base line between said stones R.S. 7 and R.S. 8; at a point
in said base line ninety-two (92) feet from said stone R.S. 7, said dock line
is one hundred and fifty and five-tenths (150.5) feet distant on a line
perpendicular to said base line; at a point in said base line four hundred and
sixty- two (462) feet from said stone R.S. 7, said dock line is one hundred and
seventy (170) feet distant on a line perpendicular to said base line; at a
point in said base line one hundred and two (102) feet from said stone R.S. 8,
said dock line is one hundred and sixty-five (165) feet distant on a line
perpendicular with said base line; at stone R.S. 9, said dock line is one
hundred and thirty-two and thirty-two one-hundredths (132.32) feet distant on a
line making an angle of 114 degrees 51 minutes with said base line between said
stones R.S. 9 and R.S. 10; at a point in said base line thirteen (13) feet from
said stone R.S. 9, said dock line is one hundred and seventy-two and six-tenths
(172.6) feet distant on a line perpendicular to said base line; at a point in
said base line eighty-four and five-tenths (84.5) feet from said stone R.S. 9,
said dock line is two hundred and eight (208) feet distant on a line
perpendicular to said base line; at a point in said base line one hundred and
sixty-one and five-tenths (161.5) feet from said stone R.S. 9, said line is two
hundred and twenty-eight and five-tenths (228.5) feet distant on a line
perpendicular to said base line; at a point in said base line two hundred and
forty (240) feet from said stone R.S. 9, said dock line is two hundred and
forty- four (244) feet distant on a line perpendicular to said base line; at a
point in said base line three hundred and ten (310) feet from said stone R.S.
9, said dock line is two hundred and fifty-seven (257) feet distant on a line
perpendicular to said base line; at a point in said base line three hundred and
eighty-two (382) feet from said stone R.S. 9, said dock line is two hundred and
sixty- one and five-tenths (261.5) feet distant on a line perpendicular to said
base line; at a point in said base line four hundred and forty-seven and five-
tenths (447.5) feet from said stone R.S. 9, said dock line is two hundred and
fifty-four and four-tenths (254.4) feet distant on a line perpendicular to said
base line; at a point in said base line five hundred and fourteen and five-
tenths (514.5) feet from said stone R.S. 9, said dock line is two hundred and
forty-one (241) feet distant on a line perpendicular to said base line; at a
point in said base line five hundred and eighty-three and five-tenths (583.5)
feet from said stone R.S. 9, said dock line is two hundred and eighteen and
seven-tenths (218.7) feet distant on a line perpendicular to said base line; at
said stone R.S. 10, said dock line is one hundred and seventy-three and thirty
one-hundredths (173.30) feet distant on a line perpendicular to said base line,
between said stones R.S. 10 and R.S. 11; at a point in said base line one
hundred and eighty-five and five-tenths (185.5) feet from said stone R.S. 10,
said dock line is one hundred and seventy-eight and forty-five one-hundredths
(178.45) feet distant on a line perpendicular to said base line; at a point in
said base line four hundred and forty-six and five-tenths (446.5) feet from
said stone R.S. 10, said dock line is one hundred and sixty-seven and fifty
one-hundredths (167.50) feet distant on a line perpendicular to said baseline;
at a point in said base line six hundred and ninety and twenty-three one-
hundredths (690.23) feet from said stone R.S. 10, said dock line is one hundred
and thirty-eight and forty-five one-hundredths (138.45) feet distant on a line
perpendicular to said base line; at a point in said base line seven hundred and
sixty-four and seventy-three one-hundredths (764.73) feet from said stone R.S.
10, said dock line is one hundred and eight and fifty one-hundredths (108.50)
feet distant on a line perpendicular to said base line; at said stone R.S. 11,
said dock line is ninety-eight and seventy-seven one-hundredths (98.77) feet
distant, making an angle of 117 degrees 8 minutes 30 seconds with said base
line between said stones R.S. 11 and R.S. 10; at said stone R.S. 11, said dock
line is one hundred and eighteen and eighty-five one-hundredths (118.85) feet
distant on a line making an angle of 164 degrees 21 minutes 30 seconds with
said point in said base line between said stones R.S. 11 and R.S. 10; at a
point in said base line forty-two (42) feet from said stone R.S. 11, said dock
line is one hundred and fifty-two (152) feet distant on a line perpendicular to
said base line; at a point in said base line one hundred and eighteen and six-
tenths (118.6) feet from said stone R.S. 11, said dock line is one hundred and
seventy-five (175) feet distant on a line perpendicular to said base line; at a
point in said base line one hundred and twenty-two (122) feet from said stone
R.S. 12, said dock line is one hundred and forty-six (146) feet distant on a
line making an angle of 90 degrees 19 minutes 30 seconds with said base line
between stones R.S. 12 and R.S. 31; at a point in said base line three hundred
and ninety-three (393) feet from said stone R.S. 12, said dock line is sixty-
two (62) feet distant on a line perpendicular to said base line; at a point in
said base line ninety-two (92) feet from said stone R.S. 31, said dock line is
ninety-eight (98) feet distant on a line perpendicular to said base line; at a
point in said base line two hundred and seventy-seven and eight-tenths (277.8)
feet from said stone R.S. 31, said dock line is one hundred and forty-three and
nineteen one-hundredths (143.19) feet distant on a line perpendicular to said
base line; between said stones R.S. 32 and R.S. 33 and one hundred and fourteen
(114) feet from R.S. 32, said dock line is ninety-three (93) feet distant on a
line perpendicular to said base line; at a point in said base line five hundred
and seventy and two-tenths (570.2) feet from said stone R.S. 32, said dock line
is ninety-six and seventy-five one-hundredths (96.75) feet distant on a line
perpendicular to said base line; at a point in said base line six hundred and
fifty-eight (658) feet from said stone R.S. 32, said dock line is one hundred
and thirty- five (135) feet distant on a line perpendicular to said base line;
at a point in said base line seven hundred and thirty-four (734) feet from said
stone R.S. 32, said dock line is one hundred and ninety (190) feet distant on a
line perpendicular to said base line; at a point in said base line between said
stones R.S. 34 and R.S. 35 and four hundred and forty (440) feet distant from
R.S. 34, said dock line is three (3) feet distant on a line perpendicular to
said base line; thence in a direct line to a point five (5) feet at right
angles northerly from a point in said base line eight hundred and seventy-five
(875) feet from said stone monument marked R.S. 35; thence in a direct line to
a point five (5) feet at right angles northerly from a point in said base line
eleven hundred and eighty (1180) feet easterly from said stone monument marked
R.S. 35; thence in a direct line to a point forty-five (45) feet from said
stone monument marked R.S. 39 in a direction at right angles southerly from
said base line between said monuments R.S. 35 and R.S. 39; thence in a direct
line to a point eighty-six (86) feet at right angles to the Ohio Canal
Commission base line between C. C. S. No. 5 and C. C. S. No. 6 and two hundred
and sixty-seven (267) feet from C. C. S. No. 6; thence to a point sixty-three
(63) feet at right angles from said base line between C. C. S. No. 6 and C. C.
S. No. 7 and two hundred and sixty-six (266) feet from C. C. S. No. 6; thence
to a point one hundred and twenty-seven (127) feet at right angles from said
base line between C. C. S. No. 8 and C. C. S. No. 9 twenty- two (22) feet from
C. C. S. No. 8; thence in a direct line to a point one hundred and thirty (130)
feet at right angles from said canal commission base line between C. C. S. No.
8 and C. C. S. No. 9 and sixty-nine (69) feet from C. C. S. No. 8; thence to a
point 263.13 feet at right angles from said Canal Commission base line between
C. C. S. No. 8 and C. C. S. No. 9 and 319.44 feet from C. C. S. No. 8; thence
to a point on the center line of W. 3rd St., which point is 221 feet
northwesterly measured along said center line of W. 3rd St. from River Stone
No. 114, said river stone being the intersection of the center line of W. 3rd
St. with the center line of that portion of Stone’s Levee S.W. westerly from
said W. 3rd St.
(Ord. No. 859-44. Passed 10-2-44)
§ 575.13 Base Line for Westerly Side
   The base line on the westerly side of Cuyahoga River commences at the center
of a stone monument marked R.S. 148 in the center line of W. 3rd St. four
hundred and ten and ninety-seven one-hundredths (410.97) feet southerly from
the center line of Scranton Rd. N.W.; thence northerly along the center line of
W. 3rd St. four hundred and ten and ninety-seven one- hundredths (410.97) feet
to a stone monument marked R.S. 147 in the center of Scranton Rd. N.W.; thence
southerly along the center line of Scranton Rd. N.W. four hundred and fifty and
eighty-nine one-hundredths (450.89) feet to a stone monument marked R.S. 139,
at the intersection of the center line of Carter Rd. N.W.; thence westerly
along the center line of Carter Rd. N.W. one thousand and six and eighty-eight
one- hundredths (1006.88) feet to a stone monument marked R.S. 140; thence
deflecting to the left 16 degrees 5 minutes a distance of one hundred and ten
and twenty- one one-hundredths (110.21) feet to a stone monument marked R.S.
141; thence deflecting to the left 26 degrees 41 minutes 15 seconds along the
center line of Carter Rd. N.W. two hundred and ninety-nine and nineteen one-
hundredths (299.19) feet to a stone monument marked R.S. 142; thence southerly
along the center line of Carter Rd. N.W. seven hundred and forty- three and
thirty-six one-hundredths (743.36) feet to a stone monument marked R.S. 143;
thence southerly along the center line of Carter Rd. N.W. six hundred and forty
and seventy-three one-hundredths (640.73) feet to a stone monument marked R.S.
144; thence a distance of three hundred and forty-eight and fifty one-
hundredths (348.50) feet to a stone monument marked R.S. 13 at the supposed
intersection of the center lines of W. 20th St. and Riverbed Ave. N.W.; thence
westerly a distance of three hundred and seventy-two and ninety-seven one-
hundredths (372.97) feet to a stone monument marked R.S. 14 at the supposed
intersection of the center line of said Riverbed Ave. with the easterly line of
Columbus Rd. N.W.; thence deflecting northerly 13 degrees 3 minutes a distance
of eighty and four one-hundredths (80.04) feet to a stone monument marked R.S.
15, at the supposed intersection of said Riverbed Ave. N.W. with the westerly
line of Columbus Rd. N.W.; thence deflecting northerly 13 degrees 3 minutes on
a straight line near the center of said Riverbed Ave. N.W. three hundred and
eighty-six and fifty-seven one-hundredths (386.57) feet to a stone monument
marked R.S. 16; thence deflecting northerly 15 degrees 14 minutes a distance of
four hundred and seventy-nine one-hundredths (400.79) feet to a stone monument
marked R.S. 17, at the supposed center and angle in said Riverbed Ave. N.W. at
Hurd St.; thence deflecting northerly 4 degrees 43 minutes a distance of four
hundred and ninety-seven and eighty-six one- hundredths (497.86) feet to a
stone monument marked R.S. 18; thence deflecting easterly 22 degrees a distance
of two hundred and twenty-three (223) feet to a stone monument marked R.S. 19;
thence deflecting easterly 17 degrees a distance of two hundred and twenty-one
and fifty one-hundredths (221.50) feet to a stone monument marked R.S. 20;
thence deflecting easterly 15 degrees a distance of two hundred and sixty (260)
feet to a stone monument marked R.S. 21; thence deflecting easterly 15 degrees
30 minutes a distance of three hundred (300) feet to a stone monument marked
R.S. 22; thence a distance of five hundred and seventy- four and sixty-three
one-hundredths (574.63) feet to a stone monument marked R.S. 23; thence on the
same straight line to the center line of Riverbed Ave. N.W.; thence along the
center line of Riverbed Ave. N.W. to the center line of Division Ave. N.W.
§ 575.14 Dock or Wharf Line for Westerly Side
   The said dock or wharf line on the westerly side of Cuyahoga River commences
at a point in the easterly line of W. 3rd St. N.W. fifty-four and eleven one-
hundredths (54.11) feet southerly and at right angles from a stone monument
marked R.S. 148, in the center line of W. 3rd St. N.W.; at a point in said base
line eight and thirty-seven one-hundredths (8.37) feet northerly from said
stone R.S. 148, said dock line is one hundred and thirty-seven (137) feet
distant on a line perpendicular to said base line; at a point in said base line
four hundred and one and thirty-seven one- hundredths (401.37) feet from said
stone R.S. 148, said dock line is one hundred and twenty-three and thirty- five
one-hundredths (123.35) feet distant on a line perpendicular to said base line;
at a point in said base line twenty-eight (28) feet from a stone R.S. 139, said
dock line is four hundred and ninety-six (496) feet distant on a line
perpendicular to said base line; at a point in said base line two hundred and
twenty-three (223) feet from stone R.S. 139, said dock line is five hundred and
five (505) feet distant on a line perpendicular to said base line; at a point
in said base line seven hundred (700) feet from stone R.S. 139, the said dock
line is four hundred and ninety-four (494) feet distant on a line perpendicular
to said base line; at a point in said base line nine hundred and sixty-one
(961) feet from stone R.S. 139, the said dock line is four hundred and eighty-
three (483) feet distant on a line perpendicular to said base line; at a point
in said base line fifty-nine and forty-six one-hundredths (59.46) feet from
said stone R.S. 140, said dock line is five hundred (500) feet distant on the
center line of the C. C. C. & St. L. R. R. right-of-way from said base line; at
said stone R.S. 141, said dock line is four hundred and ninety (490) feet
distant on a line making an angle of 105 degrees 30 minutes with said base line
between stones R.S. 141 and R.S. 142; at a point in said base line one hundred
and forty-five (145) feet from stone R.S. 141, said dock line is five hundred
and thirty-eight (538) feet distant on a line perpendicular to said base line;
at said stone R.S. 142, said dock line is five hundred and twenty-two (522)
feet on a line making an angle of 92 degrees 30 minutes with said base line
between stones R.S. 141 and R.S. 142, also at said stone R.S. 142, said dock
line is four hundred and forty-three (443) feet distant on a line making an
angle of 102 degrees with said base line between stones R.S. 142 and R.S. 143;
at a point two hundred and ninety (290) feet in said base line from stone R.S.
142, said dock line is two hundred and eighty-three (283) feet distant on a
line perpendicular to said base line; at a point in said base line five hundred
and seventy (570) feet from stone R.S. 142, said dock line is one hundred and
ninety (190) feet distant on a line perpendicular to said base line; at a point
in said base line six hundred and twenty-eight (628) feet from said stone R.S.
142, said dock line is one hundred and eighty-five (185) feet on a line
perpendicular to said base line; at a point in said base line seventy-eight
(78) feet from said stone R.S. 143, said dock line is two hundred and one (201)
feet on a line perpendicular to said base line; at a point in said base line
five hundred and ninety-seven (597) feet from stone R.S. 143, said dock line is
two hundred and fifty-two (252) feet distant on a line perpendicular to said
base line, said dock line is one hundred and eighty (180) feet from said stone
R.S. 13, on a straight line in a northerly direction making an angle of 102
degrees 30 minutes with said base line between said stone R.S. 13 and R.S. 14;
at a point in said base line two hundred and ten (210) feet from said stone
R.S. 13, said dock line is ninety-eight (98) feet distant on a line
perpendicular to said base line; at a point in the said base line forty (40)
feet from said stone R.S. 14, said dock line is one hundred and four (104) feet
distant on a line perpendicular to said base line, between said stones R.S. 14
and R.S. 15; at a point in said base line forty-eight and fifty-six one-
hundredths (48.56) feet from said stone R.S. 16, said dock line is one hundred
and seventeen and five-tenths (117.5) feet distant on a line perpendicular to
said base line, between stones R.S. 16 and R.S. 17; at a point in said base
line three hundred and eighteen (318) feet from said stone R.S. 16, said dock
line is one hundred and three (103) feet distant on a line perpendicular to
said base line; at a point in said base line eighty-nine and ninety-three one-
hundredths (89.93) feet from said stone R.S. 17, said dock line is one hundred
and six (106) feet distant on a line perpendicular to said base line; at a
point in said base line, two hundred and sixty-seven and forty-three one-
hundredths (267.43) feet from said stone R.S. 17, said dock line is one hundred
and five and six-tenths (105.6) feet distant on a line perpendicular to said
base line; at a point in said base line three hundred and eighty-nine and
thirty-six one-hundredths (389.36) feet from said stone R.S. 17, said dock line
is one hundred and eighteen (118) feet distant on a line perpendicular to said
base line; at a point in said base line thirty-three and seven one-hundredths
(33.07) feet from said stone R.S. 18, said dock line is one hundred and thirty-
eight and thirteen one-hundredths (138.13) feet distant on a line perpendicular
to said base line; at a point in said base line eighty-three and seventy-three
one-hundredths (83.73) feet from said stone R.S. 18, said dock line is one
hundred and thirty-nine and six one-hundredths (139.06) feet distant to a line
perpendicular to said base line; at a point in said base line one hundred and
thirty- three and seventy-three one-hundredths (133.73) feet from said stone
R.S. 18, said dock line is one hundred and forty-two (142) feet distant on a
line perpendicular to said base line; at a point in said base line thirty-seven
(37) feet from said stone R.S. 19, said dock line is one hundred and forty-
eight (148) feet distant on a line perpendicular to said base line; at a point
in said base line one hundred and twenty-three (123) feet from said stone R.S.
19, said dock line is one hundred and thirty- nine and seventy-two one-
hundredths (139.72) feet distant on a line perpendicular to said base line; at
a point in said base line thirty-two (32) feet from said stone R.S. 20, said
dock line is one hundred and thirty- six and fifty one-hundredths (136.50) feet
distant on a line perpendicular to said base line; at a point in said base line
one hundred and thirty-one (131) feet from said stone R.S. 20, said dock line
is one hundred and eighteen (118) feet distant on a line perpendicular to said
base line; at a point in said base line two hundred and forty-one (241) feet
from said stone R.S. 20, said dock line is one hundred and fourteen and fifty
one- hundredths (114.50) feet distant on a line perpendicular to said base
line; at a point in said base line one hundred and twenty-two (122) feet from
said stone R.S. 21, said dock line is one hundred and four (104) feet distant
on a line perpendicular to said base line; at a point in said base line two
hundred and sixty-five and sixty-three one-hundredths (265.63) feet from said
stone R.S. 21, said dock line is one hundred and ten and fifty one-hundredths
(110.50) feet distant on a line perpendicular to said base line; at a point in
said base line one hundred and forty-four and sixty-eight one- hundredths
(144.68) feet from said stone R.S. 22, said dock line is one hundred and
twenty-nine and fifty one- hundredths (129.50) feet distant on a line
perpendicular to said base line; at a point in the center of Riverbed Ave. N.W.
two hundred and forty-eight and three one- hundredths (248.03) feet northerly
from the center line of Center St. N.W., which point is also fifty-four and
thirty-seven one-hundredths (54.37) feet southerly from the center line of Elm
St. N.W., said dock line is ninety-three and forty-eight one-hundredths (93.48)
feet distant on a line perpendicular to said center line; at a point in said
center line seven hundred and fifteen and fifty-eight one-hundredths (715.58)
feet northerly from the center line of Center St. N.W. which point is also one
hundred and thirteen and sixty one-hundredths (113.60) feet northerly from the
center line of Sycamore St. N.W., said dock line is fifteen and forty- eight
one-hundredths (15.48) feet distant on a line perpendicular to said center
line; at a point in the center line of Riverbed Ave. N.W. two hundred and
thirty- eight and eighty-six one-hundredths (238.86) feet westerly from the
stone in the angle in Riverbed Ave. N.W. near Cathan’s Corner, so-called, said
dock line is seventy (70) feet distant on a line perpendicular to said center
line; at a point in the center line of Main Ave. N.W., said dock line is one
hundred and sixty (160) feet northerly from the center line of Riverbed Ave.
N.W., at a point in said center line one hundred and ninety-four and fifty-
seven one-hundredths (194.57) feet easterly from the center line of Division
Ave. N.W., said dock line is one hundred and ninety and twenty-four one-
hundredths (190.24) feet on a line perpendicular to the center line of Riverbed
Ave. N.W., said last-mentioned point being in the westerly line of the river as
fixed by the U.S. Government Engineer, 1900.
§ 575.15 Dock or Wharf Lines for Middle W. 3rd St. Bridge to Upper W. 3rd St.
Bridge
   The dock or wharf lines of the Cuyahoga River between the Middle W. 3rd St.
Bridge and the Upper W. 3rd St. Bridge, also the base lines to which the same
have reference, are hereby re-established as follows in Sections
575.16 to
575.19.
§ 575.16 Base Line for Westerly Side
   The said base line on the westerly side of Cuyahoga River commences at the
center of the stone monument marked R.S. 129 at the intersection of the center
line of W. 3rd St. and Cuyahoga Ave. S.W.; thence westerly along the center
line of Cuyahoga Ave. S.W. a distance of one thousand one hundred and forty-
eight and ninety-seven one-hundredths (1148.97) feet to a stone monument marked
R.S. 130; thence continuing a distance of three hundred and twenty-four and
seventy-three one-hundredths (324.73) feet to its intersection with the center
line of University Rd. S.W. produced easterly sixty-six and seventy-four one-
hundredths (66.74) feet from the stone on the center line of W. 11th St.;
thence deflecting to the right 44 degrees 00 minutes 50 seconds along said
center line produced sixty-six and seventy-four one-hundredths (66.74) feet to
a stone monument at the intersection of the center line of University Rd. S.W.
three hundred and ninety-two and twenty-one one-hundredths (392.21) feet to a
stone monument; thence deflecting to the right 23 degrees 14 minutes along the
center line of W. 14th St. produced east two hundred and fifty-one (251.00)
feet to a stone monument at the westerly line of W. 14th St.; thence along the
center line of W. 14th St. nine hundred and thirteen and forty-seven one-
hundredths (913.47) feet to a stone monument at the center of Scranton Rd.
S.W.; thence deflecting to the right 64 degrees 26 minutes along the center
line of Scranton Rd. S.W. two hundred and forty and sixty-five one-hundredths
(240.65) feet to a stone monument at an angle in Scranton Rd. S.W.; thence
deflecting to the left 4 degrees 2 minutes 40 seconds along the center line of
Scranton Rd. S.W. two hundred and eighty-nine and seventy-four one-hundredths
(289.74) feet to a stone monument marked R.S. 137; thence continuing on the
same center line one thousand one hundred and nineteen and two one-hundredths
(1119.02) feet to a stone monument marked R.S. 138 at an angle in Scranton Rd.
S.W.; thence deflecting to the right 20 degrees 25 minutes 45 seconds along the
center line of Scranton Rd. S.W. nine hundred and ninety-five and thirty-six
one-hundredths (995.36) feet to a stone monument marked R.S. 139 at the center
of Carter Rd. N.W.; thence continuing on the same center line four hundred and
fifty and ninety one-hundredths (450.90) feet to a stone monument marked R.S.
147 at the center of W. 3rd St.; thence deflecting to the right 100 degrees 00
minutes 50 seconds along the center line of W. 3rd St. four hundred and ten and
ninety-seven one- hundredths (410.97) feet to a stone monument marked R.S. 148.
§ 575.17 Dock Lines for Westerly Side
   The said dock or wharf line on the westerly side of Cuyahoga River commences
at a point in the center line of W. 3rd St., two hundred sixty-seven (267) feet
north from the stone monument marked R.S. 129; at a point in said base line
four hundred and sixty and fifty-five one-hundredths (460.55) feet westerly
from said stone R.S. 129, said dock line is two hundred and seventy- two (272)
feet distant on a line perpendicular to said base line; at a point in said base
line eight hundred and twenty and five-tenths (820.5) feet from said stone R.S.
129, said dock line is one hundred and ninety-three (193) feet distant on a
line perpendicular to said base line; at a point in said base line eighty-seven
(87) feet westerly from said stone R.S. 130, said dock line is two hundred and
thirty-five (235) feet distant on a line perpendicular to said base line; at a
point in said base line three hundred and five (305) feet westerly from the
stone monument at the center of W. 11th St., said dock line is three hundred
thirty-eight (338) feet distant on a line perpendicular to said base line; at a
point in said base line three hundred and five (305) feet from a stone monument
on the westerly line of W. 14th St., said dock line is two hundred and seventy
(270) feet distant on a line perpendicular to said base line; at a point in
said base line five hundred and twenty (520) feet from said stone on the
westerly line of W. 14th St., said dock line is two hundred and ninety-seven
(297) feet distant on a line perpendicular to said base line; at a point in
said base line seventy-six (76) feet southerly from said stone R.S. 137, said
dock line is two hundred and seventy-eight (278) feet distant on a line
perpendicular to said base line; at a point in said base line one hundred
ninety-five and fifty one-hundredths (195.50) feet northerly from said stone
R.S. 137, said dock line is one hundred eighty-eight and eighty-four one-
hundredths (188.84) feet distant on a line perpendicular to said base line; at
a point in said base line three hundred thirty-four and twenty-two one-
hundredths (334.22) feet northerly from R.S. 137, said dock line is one hundred
seventy-one and seventy-two one- hundredths (171.72) feet distant on a line
perpendicular to said base line; at a point in said base line five hundred
twenty-eight and one one-hundredth (528.01) feet northerly from said stone R.S.
137, said dock line is one hundred thirty-nine and fifty-four one- hundredths
(139.54) feet distant on a line perpendicular to said base line; at a point in
said base line one hundred ninety-five (195) feet southerly from stone R.S.
138, said dock line is one hundred and fifty-six (156) feet distant on a line
perpendicular to said base line; at a point in said base line three hundred and
forty (340) feet northerly from said stone R.S. 138, said dock line is one
hundred thirty-nine (139) feet distant on a line perpendicular to said base
line; at a point in said base line two hundred and eighty-six (286) feet
southerly from said stone R.S. 139, said dock line is one hundred sixty-nine
(169) feet distant on a line perpendicular to said base line; at a point in
said base line five (5) feet southerly from said stone R.S. 139, said dock line
is two hundred and forty-eight (248) feet distant on a line perpendicular to
said base line; at a point in the produced base line over stones 147 and 148,
said dock line is fifty-five (55) feet distant southerly from said stone R.S.
148.
(Ord. No. 91407. Passed 9-29-30)
§ 575.18 Base Line for Easterly Side
   The said base line on the easterly side of Cuyahoga River commences at the
center of a stone monument marked R.S. 114 at the intersection of the center
lines of W. 3rd St. and Stones Levee S.W.; thence southerly along the center
line of Stones Levee S.W. two hundred and ninety-five and seventy-seven one-
hundredths (295.77) feet to a stone monument marked R.S. 115; thence deflecting
to the left 5 degrees 17 minutes along the center line of Stones Levee S.W. two
hundred and eleven and fifty-nine one-hundredths (211.59) feet, to a stone
monument marked R.S. 116; thence deflecting to the left 12 degrees 26 minutes
along the center line of Stones Levee S.W. one hundred and seventy-four and
sixty-six one-hundredths (174.66) feet, to a stone monument marked R.S. 117;
thence deflecting to the left 9 degrees 11 minutes 45 seconds along the center
line of Stones Levee S.W. one hundred and ninety-one and seventy-nine one-
hundredths (191.79) feet, to a stone monument marked R.S. 118; thence
deflecting to the left 13 degrees 38 minutes 40 seconds along the center line
of Stones Levee S.W. three hundred and twelve and thirty-four one- hundredths
(312.34) feet, to a stone monument marked R.S. 119; thence deflecting to the
left 2 degrees 39 minutes 50 seconds a distance of two hundred and fifty-three
and six one-hundredths (253.06) feet to a stone monument marked R.S. 120;
thence continuing on the same straight line two hundred and ninety-one and
thirty-two one hundredths (291.32) feet, to a stone monument marked R.S. 121;
thence deflecting to the left 19 degrees 11 minutes 15 seconds a distance of
six hundred and sixty-five and thirty-five one-hundredths (665.35) feet to a
stone monument marked R.S. 123; thence deflecting to the left 46 degrees 11
minutes 45 seconds a distance of two hundred and fifty-five and ten one-
hundredths (255.10) feet to a stone monument marked R.S. 124; thence deflecting
to the left 20 degrees 43 minutes 10 seconds a distance of two hundred and
sixty-seven and seventy-five one- hundredths (267.75) feet to a stone monument
marked R.S. 125, which point is also the point of the center line of the right-
of-way of the Central viaduct lands; thence deflecting to the left 33 degrees
38 minutes 20 seconds a distance of two hundred and thirty-six and twenty- four
one-hundredths (236.24) feet to a stone monument marked R.S. 127, which point
is also on the north line of Stones Levee S.W.; thence deflecting to the left 5
degrees 39 minutes 40 seconds a distance of one thousand and fifty-one and
twenty-four one-hundredths. (1051.24) feet to a stone monument marked R.S. 128
on the center line of W. 3rd St. S.W.; thence deflecting to the right 83
degrees 29 minutes 20 seconds along the center line of W. 3rd St. S.W. one
hundred and seventeen one-hundredths (100.17) feet to a stone monument marked
R.S. 150.
§ 575.19 Dock Lines for Easterly Side
   The said dock or wharf line on the easterly side of Cuyahoga River commences
at a point in the center line of W. 3rd St. two hundred and twenty-one (221)
feet northerly from a stone monument marked R.S. 114; at a stone R.S. 115 said
dock line is two hundred and twenty-five (225) feet distant on a line making an
angle of 91 degrees 30 minutes with said base line between said stones R.S. 114
and R.S. 115; at a point in said base line seventy-three and five-tenths (73.5)
feet southerly from said stone R.S. 116, said dock line is two hundred and
twenty-two (222) feet distant on a line perpendicular to said base line; at a
point in said base line twenty (20) feet southerly from said stone R.S. 117,
said dock line is two hundred and seven (207) feet distant on a line
perpendicular to said base line; at a point in said base line ninety-four and
five-tenths (94.5) feet southerly from said stone R.S. 118, said dock line is
one hundred and ninety-eight (198) feet distant on a line perpendicular to said
base line; at said stone R.S. 119, said dock line is two hundred and four (204)
feet distant on a line making an angle of 88 degrees 30 minutes with said base
line between stones R.S. 118 and R.S. 119; at said stone R.S. 120, said dock
line is one hundred and ninety-eight (198) feet distant on a line making an
angle of 84 degrees 40 minutes with said base line between stones R.S. 119 and
R.S. 120; at said stone R.S. 121, said dock line is one hundred and eighty
(180) feet distant on a line making an angle of 67 degrees 15 minutes with said
base line between said stones R.S. 120 and R.S. 121; at a point in said base
line one hundred and sixty-six (166) feet from said stone 121, said dock line
is one hundred and fifty-six (156) feet distant on a line perpendicular to said
base line; at a point in said base line four hundred and twelve (412) feet from
said stone R.S. 121, said dock line is one hundred and thirty-seven (137) feet
distant on a line perpendicular to said base line; at a point in said base line
five hundred and sixty-eight (568) feet from said stone R.S. 121, said dock
line is ninety-four (94) feet distant on a line perpendicular to said base
line; at a point in said base line two (2) feet from said stone R.S. 123, said
dock line is fifty-two (52) feet distant on a line perpendicular to said base
line; at a point in said base line two hundred (200) feet from said stone R.S.
123, said dock line is sixty-nine (69) feet distant on a line perpendicular to
said base line; at a point in said base line one hundred and eighty-six (186)
feet from said stone R.S. 124, said dock line is one hundred and eight (108)
feet distant on a line perpendicular to said base line; at said stone R.S. 127,
said dock line is two hundred and eighty-six (286) feet distant on a line
perpendicular to said base line between stones R.S. 127 and R.S. 128; at a
point in said base line seven hundred and seventy-four (774) feet from said
stone R.S. 127, said dock line is one hundred and forty (140) feet distant on a
line perpendicular to said base line; at a point in the center line of W. 3rd
St., said dock line is forty (40) feet south from stone R.S. 150.
§ 575.20 Dock or Wharf Lines for Upper W. 3rd St. Bridge to Denison-Harvard
Viaduct
   The dock or wharf lines of the Cuyahoga River from Upper W. 3rd St. Bridge
to the Denison-Harvard Viaduct are hereby re-established as follows in Sections
575.21 to
575.24.
§ 575.21 Dock or Wharf Line for Westerly Side
   Beginning on the westerly established dock line of the Cuyahoga River at its
intersection with the center line of W. 3rd St., said beginning point being
north 38 degrees 13 minutes 55 seconds west 206.00 feet measured along said
center line from its intersection with the center line of Cuyahoga Ave. S.W.;
thence north 59 degrees 53 minutes 01 seconds east 815.10 feet to an angle;
thence north 76 degrees 55 minutes 23 seconds east 230.00 feet to an angle;
thence south 68 degrees 59 minutes 53 seconds east 230.00 feet to an angle;
thence south 34 degrees 58 minutes 14 seconds east 230.79 feet to an angle;
thence south 17 degrees 52 minutes 45 seconds east 864.22 feet to an angle;
thence south 50 degrees 57 minutes 35 seconds east 714.38 feet to an angle;
thence south 27 degrees 04 minutes 05 seconds east 37.40 feet to a point that
is south 85 degrees 53 minutes 35 seconds east 45.38 feet from River Stone No.
194; thence continuing south 27 degrees 04 minutes 05 seconds east 65.41 feet
to an angle; thence south 21 degrees 20 minutes 40 seconds east 67.08 feet to
an angle; thence south 17 degrees 47 minutes 55 seconds east 819.38 feet to a
point on the center line of Jefferson Ave. S.W. which point is south 88 degrees
33 minutes 45 seconds east 22.00 feet measured along said center line on
Jefferson Ave. S.W. from River Stone No. 193; thence south 10 degrees 33
minutes 40 seconds east 747.01 feet to an angle point on the center line of
Mary Ave. S.W. which point is north 52 degrees 02 minutes 40 seconds east
314.71 feet measured along said center line from its intersection with the
center line of W. 3rd St.; thence south 39 degrees 43 minutes 05 seconds east
2167.86 feet to an angle; thence south 22 degrees 16 minutes 25 seconds east
1042.14 feet to an angle; thence south 8 degrees 09 minutes 55 seconds east
644.09 feet to an angle; thence south 2 degrees 56 minutes 55 seconds east
299.54 feet to a point on the center line of Clark Ave. S.W. which point is
south 86 degrees 49 minutes 25 seconds west 368.22 feet measured along said
center line of Clark Ave. S.W. and Pershing Ave. S.E. from its intersection
with the center line of Independence Rd. S.E.
(Ord. No. 1946-A-48. Passed 4-4-49)
§ 575.22 Dock or Wharf Line for Westerly Side
   Beginning on the westerly established dock line of the Cuyahoga River at its
intersection with the center line of Clark Ave., S.W., said beginning point
being south 86 degrees 49 minutes 25 seconds west 368.22 feet measured along
said center line of Clark Ave., S.W. and Pershing Ave., S.E. from its
intersection with the center line of Independence Rd., S.E.; thence south 2
degrees 56 minutes 55 seconds east 81.23 feet to an angle; thence south 15
degrees 25 minutes 36 seconds west 204.08 feet to an angle; thence south 35
degrees 34 minutes 25 seconds west 1781.79 feet to an angle; thence south 57
degrees 57 minutes 31 seconds west 200.00 feet to an angle; thence south 80
degrees 20 minutes 37 seconds west 930.02 feet to an angle point which angle
point is south 14 degrees 24 minutes 07 seconds west 109.51 feet from a stone
monument; thence south 74 degrees 50 minutes 37 seconds west 632.22 feet to an
angle; thence south 36 degrees 20 minutes 37 seconds west 1771.31 feet to an
angle; thence south 8 degrees 10 minutes 37 seconds west 2157.31 feet to an
angle; thence south 14 degrees 55 minutes 46 seconds east 294.72 feet to the
center line of the Wheeling and Lake Erie Railway Company’s right-of-way, which
point is north 35 degrees 15 minutes 48 seconds east 1056.47 feet measured
along said center line from its intersection with the center line of Denison
Ave., S.W.; thence south 14 degrees 57 minutes 28 seconds east 1642.49 feet to
an angle; thence south 22 degrees 20 minutes 17 seconds west 120.75 feet to a
point in the northerly face of the concrete piers of the Harvard-Denison
Viaduct, which last mentioned point is south 36 degrees 55 minutes 47 seconds
east 373.00 feet from a stone monument in the center line of Denison Ave. S.W.
at its easterly end.
(Ord. No. 76-62. Passed 2-5-62, eff. 2-6-62)
§ 575.23 Dock or Wharf Line for Easterly Side
   Beginning on the easterly established dock line of the Cuyahoga River at its
intersection with the center line of W. 3rd St., said beginning point being
south 38 degrees 13 minutes 55 seconds east 140.17 feet measured along said
center line of W. 3rd St. from River Stone No. 128; thence north 60 degrees 01
minute 35 seconds east 351.24 feet to an angle; thence north 54 degrees 22
minutes 40 seconds east 667.87 feet to an angle; thence north 72 degrees 54
minutes 56 seconds east 366.78 feet to an angle; thence south 73 degrees 16
minutes 20 seconds east 158.71 feet to an angle; thence south 44 degrees 11
minutes 11 seconds east 176.51 feet to an angle which point is south 11 degrees
18 minutes 15 seconds west 150.00 feet from Canal Commission Survey Monument
No. 15; thence south 17 degrees 00 minutes 20 seconds east 1020.60 feet to a
point of curvature; thence southeasterly along the arc of a circle deflecting
to the left 256.47 feet whose radius is 573.83 feet and whose chord bears south
34 degrees 13 minutes 21 seconds east 254.34 feet; thence south 47 degrees 01
minute 35 seconds east 610.12 feet to a point of curvature; thence
southeasterly along the arc of a circle deflecting to the right 120.33 feet
whose radius is 388.38 feet and whose chord bears south 38 degrees 09 minutes
03 seconds east 119.85 feet; thence south 29 degrees 16 minutes 30 seconds east
104.11 feet to an angle; thence south 21 degrees 59 minutes 30 seconds east
48.60 feet to a point which bears south 85 degrees 53 minutes 35 seconds east
279.53 feet from River Stone No. 194 and along a line between River Stone No.
194 and Canal Commission Survey Monument No. 19; thence south 17 degrees 44
minutes 10 seconds east 863.49 feet to an angle; thence south 10 degrees 33
minutes 40 seconds east 67.96 feet to a point on the center line of Jefferson
Ave. S.E. which point bears south 88 degrees 33 minutes 45 seconds east 226.47
feet measured along said center line of Jefferson Ave. from River Stone No.
193; thence continuing south 10 degrees 33 minutes 40 seconds east 652.49 feet
to an angle; thence south 39 degrees 43 minutes 05 seconds east 1210.11 feet to
an angle; thence south 61 degrees 42 minutes 15 seconds east 185.45 feet to an
angle; thence south 83 degrees 41 minutes 25 seconds east 553.27 feet to an
angle; thence north 79 degrees 48 minutes 13 seconds east 88.73 feet to a point
on the easterly line of original 100-acre lot No. 269 which point is south 2
degrees 25 minutes 45 seconds east 196.81 feet measured along said original lot
line from its intersection with the center line of Independence Rd. S.E.;
thence continuing north 79 degrees 48 minutes 13 seconds east 55.67 feet to an
angle; thence south 47 degrees 43 minutes 05 seconds east 63.19 feet to an
angle; thence south 39 degrees 43 minutes 05 seconds east 52.18 feet to an
angle; thence south 50 degrees 16 minutes 55 seconds west 291.26 feet to an
angle; thence south 8 degrees 05 minutes 05 seconds west 453.20 feet to an
angle; thence south 22 degrees 16 minutes 25 seconds east 967.56 feet to an
angle; thence south 8 degrees 09 minutes 55 seconds east 677.96 feet to an
angle; thence south 2 degrees 56 minutes 55 seconds east 307.85 feet to a point
in the center line of Pershing Ave. S.E. which point is south 86 degrees 49
minutes 25 seconds west 168.22 feet measured along said center line of Pershing
Ave. S.E. from its intersection with the center line of Independence Rd. S.E.
(Ord. No. 1946-A-48. Passed 4-4-49)
§ 575.24 Dock or Wharf Line for Easterly Side
   Beginning on the easterly established dock line of the Cuyahoga River at its
intersection with the center line of Pershing Ave., S.E., said beginning point
being south 86 degrees 49 minutes 25 seconds, west 168.22 feet measured along
said center line of Pershing Ave., S.E., from its intersection with the center
line of Independence Rd., S.E., thence south 2 degrees 56 minutes 55 seconds
east 114.37 feet to an angle; thence south 15 degrees 25 minutes 36 seconds
west 271.96 feet to an angle; thence south 35 degrees 34 minutes 25 seconds
west 913.59 feet to an angle; thence south 30 degrees 06 minutes 05 seconds
west 883.91 feet to an angle; thence south 57 degrees 57 minutes 32 seconds
west 404.66 feet to an angle; thence south 84 degrees 09 minutes 17 seconds
west 948.53 feet to an angle; thence south 74 degrees 51 minutes 13 seconds
west 105.76 feet to a point that is north 14 degrees 24 minutes 07 seconds east
114.98 feet from a stone monument and south 14 degrees 24 minutes 07 seconds
west 230.02 feet from an angle in the westerly dock line; thence south 74
degrees 50 minutes 49 seconds west 248.81 feet to an angle; thence south 55
degrees 35 minutes 43 seconds west 377.63 feet to an angle; thence south 36
degrees 20 minutes 37 seconds west 1351.29 feet to an angle; thence south 22
degrees 15 minutes 37 seconds west 193.99 feet to an angle; thence south 8
degrees 10 minutes 37 seconds west 1966.25 feet to an angle; thence south 14
degrees 55 minutes 46 seconds east 87.16 feet to a point in the center line of
the Wheeling and Lake Erie Railway Company’s right-of-way, which point is north
35 degrees 14 minutes 42 seconds east 1316.82 feet measured along said center
line from its intersection with the center line of Denison Ave., S.W.; thence
south 14 degrees 57 minutes 28 seconds east 1137.86 feet to an angle; thence
south 63 degrees 02 minutes 18 seconds east 90.00 feet to an angle; thence
south 20 degrees 41 minutes 21 seconds east 722.95 feet to an angle; thence
south 74 degrees 37 minutes 22 seconds west 160.00 feet to an angle; thence
south 48 degrees 28 minutes 49 seconds west 20 feet to an angle; thence south
22 degrees 20 minutes 17 seconds west 124.37 feet to a point in the northerly
face of the concrete piers of the Harvard-Denison Viaduct, which last mentioned
point is south 67 degrees 39 minutes 43 seconds east 200.00 feet from the most
southerly point on the westerly established dock line of the Cuyahoga River.
(Ord. No. 1598-69. Passed 10-13-69, eff. 10-16-69)
§ 575.99 Penalty
   Whoever violates Sections
575.01,
575.02 or
575.03 shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than fifty
dollars ($50.00).
CHAPTER 577 – BRIDGES AND VIADUCTS
577.01   Enforcement of Provisions
577.02   Passage through Draws
577.03   Signals on Drawbridges
577.04   Signals from Vessels at Drawbridges
577.05   Duties of Bridge Tenders
577.06   Red Signal at Bridges
577.07   Closing Bridges against Vessels
577.08   Ten Minute Periods for Opening and Closing Bridges
577.09   Hours when Drawbridge Closed for Traffic
577.10   Closing Bridges for Fire Apparatus
577.11   Funeral Processions
577.12   Cases of Danger or Inability to Open Bridge
577.13   Defacing, Damaging or Climbing on Bridges
577.14   Rubbish under Viaducts; Posting Bills
577.15   Fixed Bridges Prohibited
577.16   Bridges Required to Have Draws or Swings
577.99   Penalty
   Note: The legislative history of this chapter, except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 63410-A, passed
September 22, 1924.
Cross-reference:
   Blowing whistles near bridges, CO
573.35
   Bridges in harbor, Cuyahoga River areas, CO
573.20 et seq.
   Harbor boundaries, CO
573.07
   Locomotive operation on drawbridges, CO
631.07
   Obstructing drawbridges, CO
573.23
   Publication of ordinances relating to bridges and viaducts, CO
573.17
   Vessels running against piers, bridges or viaducts, CO
573.24
§ 577.01 Enforcement of Provisions
   The Harbor Master shall see that the provisions of this chapter are fully
and faithfully observed, and, when necessary, he or she may call on the Chief
of Police for aid.
§ 577.02 Passage through Draws
   No more than one (1) boat or craft for which the draw of any bridge has to
be opened or swung shall pass through the draw at the same time.
§ 577.03 Signals on Drawbridges
   The Director of Port Control shall provide and maintain vessel signals on
each City drawbridge; such signals shall consist of a red ball not less than
fifteen (15) inches in diameter for use in daylight, and a red lantern for use
in the night time. Such signals shall be placed near the center of each such
bridge, except that on the Columbus Street bridge signals shall be placed on
the south draw span thereof. Such signals shall be so arranged when elevated as
to be seen easily up or down the River.
(Ord. No. 1484-54. Passed 6-21-54, eff. 6-29-54)
§ 577.04 Signals from Vessels at Drawbridges
   No tug or other steam craft shall give more than one (1) call or signal to
open a drawbridge, unless the captain, bridge tender or other person in charge
of the drawbridge shall fail to promptly run up the red ball or lantern on the
bridge signaled to be opened.
§ 577.05 Duties of Bridge Tenders
   All bridge tenders and other persons in charge of drawbridges in the City
shall always be on duty and constant watch during the hours assigned to them,
and shall, as soon as they hear the signal given by any tug or other steam
craft for their bridge to be opened, immediately run up the red ball during the
day, or a red lantern during the night, and in addition to the abovementioned
signals ring the bell, or give such other signal as may be on the bridge, so
that the persons in charge of the approaching craft may know that the bridge is
to be opened for them to pass through. The red ball or light shall be lowered
as soon as the vessel has passed the draw. Whoever violates this section shall
be subject to dismissal.
§ 577.06 Red Signal at Bridges
   No owner, officer or other person in charge of any tug, steamer or other
vessel navigating the Cuyahoga River or old river bed, shall attempt to pass
any City drawbridge until the red ball or lantern is up, nor shall they
approach so near to any City bridge at such times as to damage the same while
being opened or closed.
§ 577.07 Closing Bridges against Vessels
   The captain, bridge tenders or other persons in charge of any of the
drawbridges shall not close the same against vessels or boats seeking to pass
through, until passengers and teams have been delayed fully ten (10) minutes by
the draws of the abovementioned bridges being open.
§ 577.08 Ten Minute Periods for Opening and Closing Bridges
   Whenever, between the hours of 7:15 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. persons, teams or
vehicles have been delayed fully ten (10) minutes, by reason of the drawbridges
being open for vessels or boats to pass through, the captain, bridge tender or
other person in charge of the drawbridge, shall lower the red ball or red
lantern, and immediately close such draw and keep the same closed for fully ten
(10) minutes for such persons, teams or vehicles to pass over, if so much time
shall be required, when such draw shall be opened again and be kept open, if
necessary for vessels or boats to pass, for a like period of ten (10) minutes,
and so on alternately if necessary, during the hours aforesaid.
§ 577.09 Hours when Drawbridge Closed for Traffic
   The Director of Port Control shall by rule designate the hours when it may
be necessary to keep any City drawbridge closed for the accommodation of
traffic.
(Ord. No. 1484-54. Passed 6-21-54, eff. 6-29-54)
§ 577.10 Closing Bridges for Fire Apparatus
   Whenever at any alarm or fire, any fire engine, hose cart or other fire
apparatus approaches any drawbridge for the purpose of crossing the same,
toward such fire, the captain, bridge tender or other person in charge of the
draw, shall, if such bridge is open, lower the signal and close the draw as
soon as practicable, or if closed, keep closed until such engine or other fire
apparatus has had an opportunity to pass over the drawbridge, notwithstanding
vessels or boats may thereby be delayed.
§ 577.11 Funeral Processions
   Whenever a funeral procession may be crossing a drawbridge, and a signal is
given by a vessel or boat passing up or down the Cuyahoga River, to open the
draw, the captain, bridge tender or other person in charge of the drawbridge,
over which the procession is passing, shall raise the red ball or lantern, but
shall not ring the bell or give such other signal as may be on the bridge, or
open the draw, until the procession has passed over. After raising the red ball
or lantern, indicating that the vessel signal has been recognized, he or she
shall immediately lower the red ball or lantern and keep the same lowered until
the procession has passed, when he or she shall again raise it.
§ 577.12 Cases of Danger or Inability to Open Bridge
   In case of danger or inability to open any drawbridge, the captain or tender
in charge thereof shall lower the red ball or lantern, as an indication to
approaching vessels that the passage is closed.
§ 577.13 Defacing, Damaging or Climbing on Bridges
   No person shall deface or injure any part of any bridge or viaduct, or
commit a nuisance upon or underneath any part of the same, or upon or
underneath any part of the stairways connected therewith; nor shall any person
be permitted to climb among the iron trusses of the fixed spans or drawbridges
thereof, except the employees on such bridge or viaduct.
§ 577.14 Rubbish under Viaducts; Posting Bills
   No material of any kind shall be deposited under any of the viaducts,
without a permit from the Director of Port Control; no material shall be
deposited adjacent to a viaduct that would injure the structure in case of
fire. No bills, posters or advertisements of any kind shall be posted on any
part of any viaduct.
(Ord. No. 1484-54. Passed 6-21-54, eff. 6-29-54)
§ 577.15 Fixed Bridges Prohibited
   No individual or corporation shall hereafter build or maintain, at any point
across the Cuyahoga River, within the limits of the City, any bridge unprovided
with a swing or draw, so that the same cannot easily be swung or drawn, to
allow any and all vessels navigating the River to pass without interruption.
§ 577.16 Bridges Required to Have Draws or Swings
   No person or corporation, or the officers of such corporation, shall build
any bridge across the River within the City, not provided with a swing or draw,
as aforesaid, or shall allow any such bridge already built to remain without
the construction of a swing or draw therein.
§ 577.99 Penalty
   (a)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no other
penalty is provided shall be fined not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more
than twenty-five dollars ($25.00), and shall also be liable to the City for all
damage that may be done to any of the drawbridges by collision or otherwise.
   (b)   Whoever violates Section
577.16 shall be fined not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first
offense, and one hundred dollars ($100.00) for every subsequent offense, and
ten dollars ($10.00) per day for every day subsequent to the first conviction,
that such bridge is allowed to remain.
PART SIX: OFFENSES AND BUSINESS ACTIVITIES CODE
Title I: General Offenses
   Chapter
601   General Provisions and Penalty
   Chapter
602   Facial Coverings and Social Distancing During the COVID-19 Pandemic
   Chapter
603   Animals and Fowl
   Chapter
603A   Exotic Animals
   Chapter
604   Dogs That Pose a Threat to Public Safety
   Chapter
605   Disorderly Conduct and Activity
   Chapter
607   Drug Abuse Control
   Chapter
609   Family Offenses
   Chapter
611   Gambling
   Chapter
613   Littering
   Chapter
615   Law Enforcement and Public Office
   Chapter
617   Liquor Control
   Chapter
618   Liquor Permit Manager Registry
   Chapter
619   Obscenity and Sex Offenses
   Chapter
621   Offenses Against Persons
   Chapter
623   Property Offenses
   Chapter
625   Theft and Fraud
   Chapter
627   Weapons
   Chapter
627A   Possession of Firearms by Children
   Chapter
628   Gun Offender Registry
   Chapter
629   Safety and Sanitation
   Chapter
630   Criminal Activity Nuisances
   Chapter
631   Railroads
   Chapter
633   Obstruction Marking and Lighting
Title III: Consumer Protection
   Chapter
641   Definitions
   Chapter
643   Enforcement, Orders and Penalty
   Chapter
645   Prescription Drug Prices
   Chapter
647   Unit Pricing
   Chapter
649   Gasoline Prices
   Chapter
651   Packaging and Labeling
   Chapter
653   Deceptive Advertising
   Chapter
655   Returns and Refunds
   Chapter
656   Layaway Agreements
   Chapter
657   Motor Vehicle Repairs
   Chapter
659   Predatory Lending
Title V: Discrimination
   Chapter
661   Unfair Labor Practices
   Chapter
663   Fair Employment Practices
   Chapter
665   Fair Housing
   Chapter
667   Unlawful Discriminatory Conduct
   Chapter
669   Unlawful Discriminatory Salary Practices
Title VII: Business Regulation
   Chapter
670   Commissioning of Armed Security Guards
   Chapter
670A   Unnecessary Police Alarms
   Chapter
670B   Outdoor Pay Telephones
   Chapter
671   Auctions
   Chapter
672   Christmas Tree Sales
   Chapter
673   Going-Out-Of-Business Sales
   Chapter
674   Handgun Possession and Sale
   Chapter
674A   Late Night Retail Establishments
   Chapter
675   Street Vendors
   Chapter
675A   Street Performers
   Chapter
676   Junk and Secondhand Dealers
   Chapter
676A   Motor Vehicle Repair Garages
   Chapter
676B   Garage and Residential Personal Property Sales
   Chapter
677   Meter Readers
   Chapter
677A   Tow Trucks
   Chapter
678   Motor Vehicles and Parts
   Chapter
679   Movers
   Chapter
679A   Donation Boxes
   Chapter
680   Newspaper Dispensing Devices
   Chapter
680A   Cigarette Advertising on Publicly Visible Locations
   Chapter
680B   Alcoholic Beverage Advertising on Publicly Visible Locations
   Chapter
681   Pawnbrokers
   Chapter
681A   Precious Metals Dealers
   Chapter
682   Itinerant Vendors and Wholesale Produce Dealers
   Chapter
682A   Rental Agencies
   Chapter
683   Sound Devices
   Chapter
683A   Massage Establishments
   Chapter
684   Street Action Pictures
   Chapter
685   Trailer Rental Agencies
   Chapter
686   Hospitals
   Chapter
686A   Hotels
   Chapter
686C   Used Motor Vehicle Storage Places
   Chapter
687A   Surety Bail Bond Agents
   Chapter
687B   Third-Party Food Delivery Services
Title IX: Amusements
   Chapter
687   Amusement Parks
   Chapter
688   Billiard Rooms
   Chapter
689   Bowling Alleys
   Chapter
690   Dance Halls and Dances
   Chapter
691   Karting Parks and Saucer Tracks
   Chapter
692   Music Entertainment
   Chapter
692A   Coin Operated Amusement Devices
   Chapter
693   Picture Machines and Theaters
   Chapter
694   Roller Rinks
   Chapter
695   Shooting Galleries
   Chapter
696   Teen Clubs
   Chapter
697   Temporary Shows
   Chapter
697A   Major Qualifying Events
   Chapter
698   Ticket Brokers
   Chapter
698A   Outdoor Sales of Tickets of Admission to Sporting Events and Other
Events
   Chapter
699   Picture Arcades and Live Viewing Booths
   Chapter
699A   Community Entertainment Districts
   Chapter
699B   Designated Outdoor Refreshment Areas
TITLE I: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
601   General Provisions and Penalty
   Chapter
602   Facial Coverings and Social Distancing During the COVID-19 Pandemic
   Chapter
603   Animals and Fowl
   Chapter
603A   Exotic Animals
   Chapter
604   Dogs That Pose a Threat to Public Safety
   Chapter
605   Disorderly Conduct and Activity
   Chapter
607   Drug Abuse Control
   Chapter
609   Family Offenses
   Chapter
611   Gambling
   Chapter
613   Littering
   Chapter
615   Law Enforcement and Public Office
   Chapter
617   Liquor Control
   Chapter
618   Liquor Permit Manager Registry
   Chapter
619   Obscenity and Sex Offenses
   Chapter
621   Offenses Against Persons
   Chapter
623   Property Offenses
   Chapter
625   Theft and Fraud
   Chapter
627   Weapons
   Chapter
627A   Possession of Firearms by Children
   Chapter
628   Gun Offender Registry
   Chapter
629   Safety and Sanitation
   Chapter
630   Criminal Activity Nuisances
   Chapter
631   Railroads
   Chapter
633   Obstruction Marking and Lighting
CHAPTER 601: GENERAL PROVISIONS AND PENALTY
601.01   Definitions
601.02   Classification of Offenses
601.03   Common Law Offenses Abrogated
601.04   Rules of Construction
601.05   Limitation of Criminal Prosecution
601.06   Requirements for Criminal Liability
601.061   Strict Criminal Liability in Building Code, Housing Code, Health
Code, and Fire Prevention Code Offenses
601.07   Culpable Mental States
601.08   Attempt
601.09   Complicity
601.10   Organizational Criminal Liability
601.11   Personal Accountability for Organizational Conduct
601.12   Repeat and Dangerous Offenders
601.13   Considerations for Imposing Penalties
601.14   Disposition of Property Held by the Division of Police
601.15   Inspection of Vehicles for the Purpose of Locating Stolen Motor
Vehicles and/or Stolen Parts
601.99   Penalties for Misdemeanors
Cross-reference:
   Obstructing justice, CO
615.07
Statutory reference:
   See sectional histories for similar State law
   Judicial dissolution of corporation for criminal practices, RC 1701.91
   Limitations of prosecution for income tax violations, RC 718.12
   Modification of sentence, RC 2929.20
§ 601.01 Definitions
   As used in the Codified Ordinances:
   (a)   “Force” means any violence, compulsion or constraint physically
exerted by any means upon or against a person or thing.
   (b)   “Deadly force” means any force which carries a substantial risk that
it will proximately result in the death of any person.
   (c)   “Physical harm to persons” means any injury, illness or other
physiological impairment, regardless of its gravity or duration.
   (d)   “Physical harm to property” means any tangible or intangible damage to
property which, in any degree, results in loss to its value or interferes with
its use or enjoyment. “Physical harm to property” does not include wear and
tear occasioned by normal use.
   (e)   “Serious physical harm to persons” means any of the following:
      (1)   Any mental illness or condition of such gravity as would normally
require hospitalization or prolonged psychiatric treatment;
      (2)   Any physical harm which carries a substantial risk of death;
      (3)   Any physical harm which involves some permanent incapacity, whether
partial or total, or which involves some temporary, substantial incapacity;
      (4)   Any physical harm which involves some permanent disfigurement, or
which involves some temporary, serious disfigurement;
      (5)   Any physical harm which involves acute pain of such duration as to
result in substantial suffering, or which involves any degree of prolonged or
intractable pain.
   (f)   “Serious physical harm to property” means any physical harm to
property which does either of the following:
      (1)   Results in substantial loss to the value of the property, or
requires a substantial amount of time, effort or money to repair or replace;
      (2)   Temporarily prevents the use or enjoyment of the property, or
substantially interferes with its use and enjoyment for an extended period of
time.
   (g)   “Risk” means a significant possibility, as contrasted with a remote
possibility, that a certain result may occur or that certain circumstances may
exist.
   (h)   “Substantial risk” means a strong possibility, as contrasted with a
remote or significant possibility, that a certain result may occur or that
certain circumstances may exist.
   (i)   “Offense of violence” means any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of Sections
605.01,
605.06,
621.03,
621.06,
621.07,
609.07,
623.01 and
627.02 of this General Offenses Code.
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of
this or any other state or the United States, substantially equivalent to any
section listed in division (i)(1) of this section;
      (3)   An offense, other than a traffic offense, under an existing or
former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state or the United
States, committed, purposely or knowingly, and involving physical harm to
persons or a risk of serious physical harm to persons;
      (4)   A conspiracy or attempt to commit, or complicity in committing any
offense under division (i)(1), (2) or (3) of this section.
   (j)   (1)   “Property” means any property, real or personal, tangible or
intangible, and any interest or license in such property. “Property” includes,
but is not limited to, cable television service, computer data, computer
software, financial instruments associated with computers, and other documents
associated with computers, or copies of the documents, whether in machine or
human readable form. “Financial instruments associated with computers” include,
but are not limited to, checks, drafts, warrants, money orders, notes of
indebtedness, certificates of deposit, letters of credit, bills of credit or
debit cards, financial transaction authorization mechanisms, marketable
securities or any computer system representations of any of them.
      (2)   As used in this division and division (m) of this section, “cable
television service,” “computer,” “computer software,” “computer system,”
“computer network” and “data” have the same meaning as in Section
625.01.
   (k)   “Law enforcement officer” means any of the following:
      (1)   A sheriff, deputy sheriff, constable, marshal, deputy marshal,
municipal police officer, member of a police force employed by a metropolitan
housing authority under RC 3735.31(D) or State highway patrolman;
      (2)   An officer, agent or employee of the State or any of its agencies,
instrumentalities or political subdivisions, upon whom, by statute, charter or
ordinance, a duty to conserve the peace or to enforce all or certain laws is
imposed and the authority to arrest violators is conferred, within the limits
of such statutory duty and authority;
      (3)   A mayor in his or her capacity as chief conservator of the peace
within his or her municipal corporation;
      (4)   A member of an auxiliary police force organized by county, township
or municipal law enforcement authorities, within the scope of such member’s
appointment or commission;
      (5)   A person lawfully called pursuant to RC 311.07 to aid a sheriff in
keeping the peace, for the purposes and during the time when such person is
called;
      (6)   A person appointed by a mayor pursuant to RC 737.01 as a special
patrolman or officer during riot or emergency, for the purposes and during the
time when such person is appointed;
      (7)   A member of the organized militia of this State or the armed forces
of the United States, lawfully called to duty to aid civil authorities in
keeping the peace or protect against domestic violence;
      (8)   A prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, secret
service officer or municipal prosecutor.
      (9)   An Ohio veterans’ home policeman appointed under RC 5907.02.
(RC 2901.01(A) - (K); Ord. No. 2823-89. Passed 3-19-90, eff. 3-22-90)
§ 601.02 Classification of Offenses
   As used in the General Offenses Code:
   (a)   Offenses include misdemeanors of the first, second, third and fourth
degree, minor misdemeanors and offenses not specifically classified.
   (b)   Regardless of the penalty which may be imposed, any offense
specifically classified as a misdemeanor is a misdemeanor.
   (c)   Any offense not specifically classified is a misdemeanor if
imprisonment for not more than one (1) year may be imposed as a penalty.
   (d)   Any offense not specifically classified is a minor misdemeanor if the
only penalty which may be imposed is a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars
($100.00).
(RC 2901.02; Ord. No. 54-74. Passed 3-25-74, eff. 4-1-74)
§ 601.03 Common Law Offenses Abrogated
   (a)   No conduct constitutes a criminal offense against the City unless it
is defined as an offense in the Codified Ordinances.
   (b)   An offense is defined when one (1) or more sections of the Codified
Ordinances state a positive prohibition or enjoin a specific duty, and provide
a penalty for violation of such prohibition or failure to meet such duty.
(RC 2901.03; Ord. No. 54-74. Passed 3-25-74, eff. 4-1-74)
§ 601.04 Rules of Construction
   Sections of the General Offenses Code defining offenses or penalties shall
be strictly construed against the City and liberally construed in favor of the
accused.
(RC 2901.04; Ord. No. 54-74. Passed 3-25-74, eff. 4-1-74)
§ 601.05 Limitation of Criminal Prosecution
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, a prosecution shall be
barred unless it is commenced within the following periods after an offense is
committed:
      (1)   For a misdemeanor other than a minor misdemeanor, two (2) years;
      (2)   For a minor misdemeanor, six (6) months.
   (b)   If the period of limitation provided in subsection (a) hereof has
expired, prosecution shall be commenced for an offense of which an element is
fraud or breach of a fiduciary duty, within one (1) year after discovery of the
offense either by an aggrieved person, or by his or her legal representative
who is not himself or herself a party to the offense.
   (c)   If the period of limitation provided in subsection (a) hereof has
expired, prosecution shall be commenced for an offense involving misconduct in
office by a public servant as defined in Section
615.01, at any time while the accused remains a public servant, or within two
(2) years thereafter.
   (d)   An offense is committed when every element of the offense occurs. In
the case of an offense of which an element is a continuing course of conduct,
the period of limitation does not begin to run until such course of conduct or
the accused’s accountability for it terminates, whichever occurs first.
   (e)   A prosecution is commenced on the date an indictment is returned or an
information filed, or on the date a lawful arrest without a warrant is made, or
on the date a warrant, summons, citation or other process is issued, whichever
occurs first. A prosecution is not commenced by the return of an indictment or
the filing of an information unless reasonable diligence is exercised to issue
and execute process on the same. A prosecution is not commenced upon issuance
of a warrant, summons, citation or other process, unless reasonable diligence
is exercised to execute the same.
   (f)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time when the corpus
delicti remains undiscovered.
   (g)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time when the
accused purposely avoids prosecution. Proof that the accused absented himself
or herself from this State or concealed his or her identity or whereabouts is
prima facie evidence of his or her purpose to avoid prosecution.
   (h)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time a prosecution
against the accused based on the same conduct is pending in this State, even
though the indictment, information, or process which commenced the prosecution
is quashed or the proceedings thereon are set aside or reversed on appeal.
(RC 2901.13; Ord. No. 54-74. Passed 3-25-74, eff. 4-1-74)
§ 601.06 Requirements for Criminal Liability
   (a)   Except as provided in subsection (b) hereof, a person is not guilty of
an offense unless both of the following apply:
      (1)   His or her liability is based on conduct which includes either a
voluntary act, or an omission to perform an act or duty which he or she is
capable of performing;
      (2)   He or she has the requisite degree of culpability for each element
as to which a culpable mental state is specified by the section defining the
offense.
   (b)   When the section defining an offense does not specify any degree of
culpability, and plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict criminal
liability for the conduct described in such section, then culpability is not
required for a person to be guilty of the offense. When the section neither
specifies culpability nor plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict
liability, recklessness is sufficient culpability to commit the offense.
   (c)   As used in this section:
      (1)   Possession is a voluntary act if the possessor knowingly procured
or received the thing possessed, or was aware of his or her control thereof for
a sufficient time to have ended his or her possession.
      (2)   Reflexes, convulsions, body movements during unconsciousness or
sleep, and body movements that are not otherwise a product of the actor’s
volition, are involuntary acts.
      (3)   “Culpability” means purpose, knowledge, recklessness or negligence,
as defined in Section
601.07, or any other specific mental state required by any section of this
Code.
(RC 2901.21; Ord. No. 90-96. Passed 3-18-96, eff. 3-26-96)
§ 601.061 Strict Criminal Liability in Building Code, Housing Code, Health
Code, and Fire Prevention Code Offenses
   Notwithstanding any other section of the Codified Ordinances, when any
section of the Building Code, Housing Code, Health Code, or Fire Prevention
Code defining an offense does not specify any degree of culpability, then
strict criminal liability shall apply and culpability is not required for the
person to be guilty of the offense.
(Ord. No. 1039-2023. Passed 2-5-24, eff. 2-6-24)
§ 601.07 Culpable Mental States
   (a)   A person acts purposely when it is his or her specific intention to
cause a certain result, or when the gist of the offense is a prohibition
against conduct of a certain nature, regardless of what the offender intends to
accomplish thereby, it is his or her specific intention to engage in conduct of
that nature.
   (b)   A person acts knowingly, regardless of his or her purpose, when he or
she is aware that his or her conduct will probably cause a certain result or
will probably be of a certain nature. A person has knowledge of circumstances
when he or she is aware that such circumstances probably exist.
   (c)   A person acts recklessly when, with heedless indifference to the
consequences, he or she perversely disregards a known risk that his or her
conduct is likely to cause a certain result or is likely to be of a certain
nature. A person is reckless with respect to circumstances when, with heedless
indifference to the consequences, he or she perversely disregards a known risk
that such circumstances are likely to exist.
   (d)   A person acts negligently when, because of a substantial lapse from
due care, he or she fails to perceive or avoid a risk that his or her conduct
may cause a certain result or may be of a certain nature. A person is negligent
with respect to circumstances when, because of a substantial lapse from due
care, he or she fails to perceive or avoid a risk that such circumstances may
exist.
   (e)   When the section defining an offense provides that negligence suffices
to establish an element thereof, then recklessness, knowledge or purpose is
also sufficient culpability for such element. When recklessness suffices to
establish an element of an offense, then knowledge or purpose is also
sufficient culpability for such element. When knowledge suffices to establish
an element of an offense, then purpose is also sufficient culpability for such
element.
(RC 2901.22; Ord. No. 54-74. Passed 3-25-74, eff. 4-1-74)
§ 601.08 Attempt
   (a)   No person, purposely or knowingly, and when purpose or knowledge is
sufficient culpability for the commission of an offense, shall engage in
conduct which, if successful, would constitute or result in the offense.
   (b)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that, in retrospect,
commission of the offense which was the object of the attempt was either
factually or legally impossible under the attendant circumstances, if that
offense could have been committed had the attendant circumstances been as the
actor believed them to be.
   (c)   No person who is convicted of committing a specific offense, of
complicity in the commission of an offense, or of conspiracy to commit an
offense shall be convicted of an attempt to commit the same offense in
violation of this section.
   (d)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that the
actor abandoned his or her effort to commit the offense or otherwise prevented
its commission, under circumstances manifesting a complete and voluntary
renunciation of his or her criminal purpose.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of an attempt to commit an
offense. An attempt to commit any misdemeanor is a misdemeanor of the next
lesser degree than the misdemeanor attempted. In the case of an attempt to
commit an offense other than a violation of RC Chapter 3734 that is not
specifically classified, an attempt is a misdemeanor of the first degree if the
offense attempted is a felony under the Ohio Revised Code, and a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree if the offense attempted is a misdemeanor. An attempt to
commit a minor misdemeanor, or to engage in conspiracy, is not an offense under
this section.
(RC 2923.02; Ord. No. 90-96. Passed 3-18-96, eff. 3-26-96)
§ 601.09 Complicity
   (a)   No person, acting with the kind of culpability required for the
commission of an offense, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Solicit or procure another to commit the offense;
      (2)   Aid or abet another in committing the offense;
      (3)   Conspire with another to commit the offense in violation of RC
2923.01;
      (4)   Cause an innocent or irresponsible person to commit the offense.
   (b)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that no person with
whom the accused was in complicity has been convicted as a principal offender.
   (c)   No person shall be convicted of complicity under this section unless
an offense is actually committed, but a person may be convicted of complicity
in an attempt to commit an offense in violation of Section
601.08.
   (d)   If an alleged accomplice of the defendant testifies against the
defendant in a case in which the defendant is charged with complicity in the
commission of or an attempt to commit an offense, an attempt to commit an
offense, or an offense, the court, when it charges the jury, shall state
substantially the following:
      “The testimony of an accomplice does not become inadmissible because of
his or her complicity, moral turpitude, or self-interest, but the admitted or
claimed complicity of a witness may affect his or her credibility and make his
or her testimony subject to grave suspicion, and require that it be weighed
with great caution.”
      “It is for you, as jurors, in the light of all the facts presented to you
from the witness stand, to evaluate such testimony and to determine its quality
and worth or its lack of quality and worth.”
   (e)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that,
prior to the commission of or attempt to commit the offense, the actor
terminated his or her complicity, under circumstances manifesting a complete
and voluntary renunciation of his or her criminal purpose.
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of complicity in the
commission of an offense, and shall be prosecuted and punished as if he or she
were a principal offender. A charge of complicity may be stated in terms of
this section, or in terms of the principal offense.
(RC 2923.03; Ord. No. 90-96. Passed 3-18-96, eff. 3-26-96)
§ 601.10 Organizational Criminal Liability
   (a)   An organization may be convicted of an offense under any of the
following circumstances:
      (1)   The offense is a minor misdemeanor committed by an officer, agent
or employee of the organization acting in its behalf and within the scope of
his or her office or employment, except that if the section defining the
offense designates the officers, agents or employees for whose conduct the
organization is accountable or the circumstances under which it is accountable,
such provisions shall apply;
      (2)   A purpose to impose organizational liability plainly appears in the
section defining the offense, and the offense is committed by an officer, agent
or employee of the organization acting in its behalf and within the scope of
his or her office or employment, except that if the section defining the
offense designates the officers, agents or employees for whose conduct the
organization is accountable or the circumstances under which it is accountable,
such provisions shall apply;
      (3)   The offense consists of an omission to discharge a specific duty
imposed by law on the organization;
      (4)   If, acting with the kind of culpability otherwise required for the
commission of the offense, its commission was authorized, requested, commanded,
tolerated or performed by the board of directors, trustees, partners or by a
high managerial officer, agent, or employee acting in behalf of the
organization and within the scope of his or her office or employment.
   (b)   When strict liability is imposed for the commission of an offense, a
purpose to impose organizational liability shall be presumed, unless the
contrary plainly appears.
   (c)   In a prosecution of an organization for an offense other than one for
which strict liability is imposed, it is a defense that the high managerial
officer, agent or employee having supervisory responsibility over the subject
matter of the offense exercised due diligence to prevent its commission. This
defense is not available if it plainly appears inconsistent with the purpose of
the section defining the offense.
   (d)   As used in this section, “organization” means a corporation for profit
or not for profit, partnership, limited partnership, joint venture,
unincorporated association, estate, trust or other commercial or legal entity.
“Organization” does not include an entity organized as or by a governmental
agency for the execution of a governmental program.
(RC 2901.23; Ord. No. 54-74. Passed 3-25-74, eff. 4-1-74)
§ 601.11 Personal Accountability for Organizational Conduct
   (a)   An officer, agent or employee of an organization as defined in Section
601.10 may be prosecuted for an offense committed by such organization, if he
or she acts with the kind of culpability required for the commission of the
offense, and any of the following apply:
      (1)   In the name of the organization or in its behalf, he or she engages
in conduct constituting the offense, or causes another to engage in such
conduct, or tolerates such conduct when it is of a type for which he or she has
direct responsibility;
      (2)   He or she has primary responsibility to discharge a duty imposed on
the organization by law, and such duty is not discharged.
   (b)   When a person is convicted of an offense by reason of this section, he
or she is subject to the same penalty as if he or she had acted in his or her
own behalf.
(RC 2901.24; Ord. No. 54-74. Passed 3-25-74, eff. 4-1-74)
§ 601.12 Repeat and Dangerous Offenders
   As used in Section
601.13:
   (a)   “Repeat offender” means a person who has a history of persistent
criminal activity, and whose character and condition reveal a substantial risk
that he or she will commit another offense. It is prima facie evidence that a
person is a repeat offender if any of the following apply:
      (1)   Having been convicted of one (1) or more offenses of violence, as
defined in RC 2901.01 and Section
601.01(i), and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for any such
offense, he or she commits a subsequent offense of violence;
      (2)   Having been convicted of one (1) or more sex offenses as defined in
RC 2950.01 or Section
619.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for any such offense,
he or she commits a subsequent sex offense;
      (3)   Having been convicted of one (1) or more theft offenses as defined
in RC 2913.01 or Section
625.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for any such offense,
he or she commits a subsequent theft offense;
      (4)   Having been convicted of one (1) or more felony drug abuse offenses
as defined in RC Chapter 2925, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence
for any such offense, he or she commits a subsequent felony drug abuse offense;
      (5)   Having been convicted of two (2) or more felonies, and having been
imprisoned pursuant to sentence for any such offense, he or she commits a
subsequent offense;
      (6)   Having been convicted of three (3) or more offenses of any type or
degree other than traffic offenses, alcoholic intoxication offenses or minor
misdemeanors, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for any such
offense, he or she commits a subsequent offense.
   (b)   “Dangerous offender” means a person who has committed an offense,
whose history, character, and condition reveal a substantial risk that he or
she will be a danger to others, and whose conduct has been characterized by a
pattern of repetitive, compulsive, or aggressive behavior with heedless
indifference to the consequences.
   (c)   “Actual incarceration” means that an offender is required to be
imprisoned for the stated period of time to which he or she is sentenced that
is specified as a term of actual incarceration. If a person is sentenced to a
term of actual incarceration, the court shall not suspend his or her term of
actual incarceration, and shall not grant him or her probation or shock
probation, pursuant to RC 2929.51, 2947.061, 2951.02, or 2951.04, and the
department of rehabilitation and correction or the adult parole authority shall
not, pursuant to RC Chapter 2967 its rules adopted pursuant to RC Chapter 2967,
5120, or 5149, grant him or her a furlough for employment or education, a
furlough for being a trustworthy prisoner other than a furlough pursuant to
division (A)(1)(a) or (b) of RC 2967.27, parole, emergency parole, or shock
parole until after the expiration of his or her term of actual incarceration,
diminished as provided in RC 2967.19, 2967.193, and 5145.11.
   An offender who is sentenced to a term of actual incarceration may be
transferred from an institution operated by the department of rehabilitation
and correction to the custody of the department of mental health or the
department of mental retardation and developmental disabilities, as provided in
RC 5120.17, and shall be credited with all time served in the custody of the
department of mental health or the department of mental retardation and
developmental disabilities against the term of actual incarceration.
   (d)   “Deadly weapon” has the same meaning as in Section
627.01.
(RC 2929.01; Ord. No. 90-96. Passed 3-18-96, eff. 3-26-96)
§ 601.13 Considerations for Imposing Penalties
   (a)   In determining whether to impose imprisonment or a fine, or both, for
a misdemeanor, and in determining the term of imprisonment and the amount and
method of payment of a fine, the court shall consider the risk that the
offender will commit another offense and the need for protecting the public
from the risk; the nature and circumstances of the offense; the history,
character, and condition of the offender and his or her need for correctional
or rehabilitative treatment; any statement made by the victim, if the offense
is a misdemeanor specified in division (A) of RC 2930.01; and the ability and
resources of the offender and the nature of the burden that payment of a fine
will impose on him or her.
   (b)   The following do not control the court’s discretion, but shall be
considered in favor of imposing imprisonment for a misdemeanor:
      (1)   The offender is a repeat or dangerous offender;
      (2)   Regardless of whether or not the offender knew the age of the
victim, the victim of the offense was sixty-five (65) years of age or older,
permanently and totally disabled, or less than eighteen (18) years of age at
the time of the commission of the offense.
   (c)   The following do not control the court’s discretion, but shall be
considered against imposing imprisonment for a misdemeanor:
      (1)   The offense neither caused nor threatened serious physical harm to
persons or property, or the offender did not contemplate that it would so do;
      (2)   The offense was the result of circumstances unlikely to recur;
      (3)   The victim of the offense induced or facilitated it;
      (4)   There are substantial grounds tending to excuse or justify the
offense, though failing to establish a defense;
      (5)   The offender acted under strong provocation;
      (6)   The offender has no history of prior delinquency or criminal
activity, or has led a law- abiding life for a substantial time before
commission of the present offense;
      (7)   The offender is likely to respond quickly to correctional or
rehabilitative treatment.
   (d)   The criteria listed in subsections (b) and (c) hereof shall not be
construed to limit the matters which may be considered in determining whether
to impose imprisonment for a misdemeanor.
   (e)   The court shall not impose a fine in addition to imprisonment for a
misdemeanor, unless a fine is specially adapted to deterrence of the offense or
the correction of the offender, the offense has proximately resulted in
physical harm to the person or property of another, or the offense was
committed for hire or for purpose of gain.
   (f)   The court shall not impose a fine or fines which, in the aggregate and
to the extent not suspended by the court, exceeds the amount which the offender
is or will be able to pay by the method and within the time allowed without
undue hardship to himself or herself or his or her dependents, or will prevent
him or her from making restitution or reparation to the victim of his or her
offense.
   (g)   At the time of sentencing or as soon as possible after sentencing, the
court shall notify the victim of the offense of his or her right to file an
application for an award of reparations pursuant to RC 2743.51 to 2743.72.
(RC 2929.22; Ord. No. 90-96. Passed 3-18-96, eff. 3-26-96)
§ 601.14 Disposition of Property Held by the Division of Police
   (a)   Any property, other than contraband that is subject to the provisions
of RC 2933.43 and other than property that has been lawfully seized in relation
to a violation of RC 2933.42 or forfeited pursuant to federal law and required
to be used for law enforcement purposes, that has been lost, abandoned, stolen
or lawfully seized or forfeited, and that is in the custody of the Division of
Police, shall be safely kept pending the time it is no longer needed as
evidence, and disposed of pursuant to this section.
   (b)   The Division shall make a reasonable effort to locate the persons
entitled to possession of property in its custody, and to notify them when and
where it may be claimed. In the absence of evidence identifying persons
entitled to custody, it is sufficient notice to advertise in a newspaper of
general circulation in the County, briefly describing the nature of the
property in custody and inviting persons to view and establish their right to
view and establish their right to it.
   (c)   A person loses any right he or she may have to possession of property
if either of the following apply:
      (1)   Which was the subject, or was used in a conspiracy or attempt to
commit, or the commission of an offense other than a traffic offense, and such
person is a conspirator, accomplice or offender with respect to the offense;
      (2)   When a court determines that the property should be forfeited
because, in light of the nature of the property or the circumstances of such
person, it is unlawful for him or her to acquire or possess it.
   (d)   Unclaimed and forfeited property in the custody of the Division, other
than contraband that is subject to the provisions of RC 2933.43 and other
property that has been lawfully seized in relation to a violation of RC
2923.32, shall be disposed of as follows:
      (1)   Drugs shall be destroyed, or placed in custody of the Secretary of
the Treasury of the United States, for disposal or use for medical or
scientific purposes under applicable Federal law;
      (2)   Firearms and dangerous ordinances so seized and remaining unclaimed
shall be destroyed after ninety (90) days from date of notice given pursuant to
division (b) of this section. Proper records shall be kept listing type, serial
number and date of destruction. Records shall be open to public inspection;
      (3)   Obscene materials shall be destroyed;
      (4)   Other unclaimed or forfeited property shall be sold at public
auction, subject to the provisions of division (a) of this section, held no
less than thirty (30) days from the date of the newspaper notice provided for
in division (b) of this section, except that forfeited property, excluding
money but including motor vehicles, notwithstanding division (f) of this
section, may be retained by the Division of Police, if the Chief of Police
determines that it is suitable for use in the work of the Division of Police.
   (e)   The proceeds from property disposed of pursuant to this section shall
be placed in the General Fund of the City.
   (f)   This section does not apply to the collection, storage or disposal of
abandoned junk motor vehicles.
(Ord. No. 970-88. Passed 6-6-88, eff. 6-9-88)
§ 601.15 Inspection of Vehicles for the Purpose of Locating Stolen Motor
Vehicles and/or Stolen Parts
   (a)   For the purpose of locating stolen motor vehicles and/or stolen motor
vehicle parts, the Chief of Police, or his or her authorized representative,
may inspect any motor vehicle, as defined in RC 4501.01 and may inspect any
motor vehicle part that has been marked with an identifying number by the
manufacturer, situated in the City of Cleveland in any public garage, community
garage, storage garage, service garage, repair shop, parking lot, auto sales
lot, vehicle leasing or rental lot, motor vehicle salvage facility, scrap metal
processing facility, auto wrecking yard, junk yard, or other similar
establishment, and may inspect the title, registration, vehicle identification
number, or license plates of the vehicle in order to establish the rightful
ownership or possession of the vehicle or vehicle part.
   (b)   For the purpose of locating a stolen vehicle, the Chief of Police, or
his or her authorized representative, may inspect implements of husbandry and
construction equipment in places described in division (a) of this section.
   (c)   Whenever possible, inspections conducted pursuant to division (a) or
(b) of this section shall be conducted at a time and in a manner so as to
minimize any interference with, or delay of, business operations.
   (d)   No person, without privilege to do so and with purpose to prevent,
obstruct, or delay the performance of a police officer from inspecting any
place described in division (a), shall do any act which hampers or impedes a
police officer from making an inspection pursuant to this section.
   Whoever violates this section is guilty of obstructing vehicle inspections,
a misdemeanor of the second degree.
(Ord. No. 137-86. Passed 1-13-86, eff. 1-16-86)
§ 601.99 Penalties for Misdemeanors
   (a)   Whoever is convicted of or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor as
classified in the Codified Ordinances (the “offender”), other than a minor
misdemeanor, shall be imprisoned for a definite term or fined, or both, which
term of imprisonment and fine shall be fixed by the court as provided in this
section.
   Whoever is convicted of or pleads guilty to committing, attempting to
commit, or complicity in committing a violation of Section
623.01 that is a misdemeanor, or a violation of division (a)(2) of Section
623.02 when the means used are fire or explosion, shall be required to
reimburse agencies for their investigation or prosecution costs in accordance
with RC 2929.28.
 
Misdemeanor Classification Maximum Imprisonment Term Maximum Fine
1st degree                 6 months                  $1,000.00
2nd degree                 90 days                   $750.00
3rd degree                 60 days                   $500.00
4th degree                 30 days                   $250.00
Minor                      No imprisonment           $150.00
 
(RC 2929.21)
   (b)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (a) of this section, if the
sentencing court determines that the victim of an offense set forth in Section
619.04,
621.03,
621.06,
621.07,
621.09,
621.10,
621.11,
623.01,
623.02,
623.03,
623.04,
625.05,
625.07,
625.12,
625.17,
625.20 or
625.26 of these Codified Ordinances was sixty (60) years of age or older at the
time of the commission of the offense:
      (1)   In the case of offenses which are classified misdemeanors of the
first degree, the court shall set the offender’s fine at one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) and in addition to said fine, shall sentence the offender to not
less than sixty (60) days’ and not more than six (6) months’ imprisonment;
      (2)   In the case of offenses which are classified minor misdemeanors or
misdemeanors of the second, third or fourth degree, the penalty for the offense
shall be the next greater degree of misdemeanor than that which is set forth in
the section defining the offense.
         A.   In the case of offenses which become misdemeanors of the first
degree pursuant to this division, the court shall set the offender’s fine at
not less than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) and, in addition to said
fine, shall sentence the offender to not less than sixty (60) days
imprisonment.
         B.   In the case of offenses which become misdemeanors of the second
degree pursuant to this division, the court shall set the offender’s fine at
not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and, in addition to said fine,
shall sentence the offender to not less than thirty (30) days’ imprisonment.
         C.   In the cases of offenses which become misdemeanors of the third
degree pursuant to this division, the court shall set the offender’s fine at
not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and, in addition to said
fine, shall sentence the offender to not less than fifteen (15) days’
imprisonment.
         D.   In the case of offenses which become misdemeanors of the fourth
degree pursuant to this division, the court shall set the offender’s fine at
not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and, in addition to said fine,
shall sentence the offender to not less than ten (10) days’ imprisonment.
      (3)   Where applicable, the court may require the offender to make
restitution for all or part of the property damage that is caused by his or her
offense and for all or part of the value of the property that is the subject of
any theft offense;
      (4)   The minimum fines and imprisonment to be imposed by the court
pursuant to divisions (b)(1) and (b)(2) of this section are mandatory. The
court shall not suspend all or any portion of said minimum fines and
imprisonment.
   (c)   Regardless of the penalties provided in division (a) of this section,
an organization convicted of an offense pursuant to Section
601.10 shall be fined, which fine shall be fixed by the court as follows:
Type of Misdemeanor Maximum Fine
Type of Misdemeanor                           Maximum Fine
1st degree                                    $5,000.00
2nd degree                                    $4,000.00
3rd degree                                    $3,000.00
4th degree                                    $2,000.00
Minor                                         $1,000.00
Misdemeanor not specifically classified       $2,000.00
Minor misdemeanor not specifically classified $1,000.00
 
      (1)   When an organization is convicted of an offense not specifically
classified, and the section defining the offense or penalty plainly indicates a
purpose to impose the penalty provided for violation upon organizations, then
such penalty shall be imposed in lieu of the penalty provided in this division
(c);
      (2)   When an organization is convicted of an offense not specifically
classified, and the penalty provided includes a higher fine than that provided
in this division (c), then the penalty imposed shall be pursuant to the penalty
provided for violation of the section defining the offense;
      (3)   This division (c) does not prevent the imposition of available
civil sanctions against an organization convicted of an offense pursuant to
Section
601.10, either in addition to or in lieu of a fine imposed pursuant to this
division (c).
(RC 2929.31; Ord. No. 486-04. Passed 10-11-04, eff. 10-13-04)
CHAPTER 602 – FACIAL COVERINGS AND SOCIAL DISTANCING DURING THE COVID-19
PANDEMIC
602.01   Definitions
602.02   Facial Coverings
602.03   Civil Penalties and Enforcement
602.04   Appeals
603.05   Severability
603.06   Expiration
Cross-reference:
   Passenger facial coverings in vehicles for hire during the COVID-19
pandemic, CO
437.30
   Requirements to implement Dine Safe Ohio order, CO
Ch. 236
   Sanitization after COVID-19 positive employee, CO Ch.
238
§ 602.01 Definitions
   As used in this Chapter:
   (a)   "Facial covering" means any material covering an individual's nose,
mouth and chin.
   (b)   "Household" means those persons who reside in the same home and
includes family members, foster children and legal wards even if they do not
live in the household and does not include persons sharing the same general
house, when the living style is primarily that of a dormitory or commune.
   (c)   "Covered businesses" include any for-profit, non-profit, educational
entities, or government entities (other than federal) regardless of the nature
of service, the function it performs, or its corporate or entity structure and
does not include schools, as defined in division (e) of this section, or jails
or prison facilities.
   (d)   "Family" means one (1) or more persons related by blood, adoption or
marriage, or a family foster home, living and cooking together as a single
housekeeping unit, exclusive of house-hold servants. A number of persons, but
not exceeding three (3) living and cooking together as a single housekeeping
unit though not related by blood, adoption or marriage shall be deemed to
constitute a family. A family foster home shall mean a family related by blood,
adoption or marriage as defined above with no more than five (5) foster
children.
   (e)   "Schools" mean any public, private, or charter school or institution
that offer kindergarten through grade twelve instruction that should follow the
guidelines set forth by the Ohio Department of Education and the Ohio
Department of Health.
(Ord. No. 556-2020. Passed 7-15-20, eff. 7-15-20)
§ 602.02 Facial Coverings
   (a)   Unless otherwise exempted under division (c) of this section, no
person in the City of Cleveland shall fail to wear a facial covering at all
times when doing any of the following:
      (1)   Being in any indoor location that is not a residence;
      (2)   Being outdoors and unable to consistently maintain a distance of
six (6) feet or more from individuals who are not members of their household;
or
      (3)   Waiting for, riding, driving, or operating a taxicab or public
hack, as defined in Section
443.011, a private car service, a ride sharing, vehicle, or any other motor
vehicle for hire, as defined in Section
401.30.
   (b)   Division (a)(3) of this section does not apply to either private or
rental vehicles where members of a family are sharing a vehicle or vehicles
engaged in direct travel through the City of Cleveland that do not stop in the
city.
   (c)   The facial covering requirements set forth in division (a) above shall
not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   The individual is under ten (10) years of age;
      (2)   The individual states he or she has a medical condition, including
those with respiratory conditions that restrict breathing, mental health
conditions, or a disability that contraindicates the wearing of a facial
covering;
      (3)   The individual is communicating or seeking to communicate with
someone who is hearing-impaired or has another disability, where the ability to
see the mouth is essential for communication;
      (4)   The individual is alone in an enclosed space, such as an office,
and which space is not intended for use or access by the public;
      (5)   The individual is actively engaged in exercise in a gym or indoor
facility so long as six (6) or more feet of separation between individuals
exists;
      (6)   The individual is actively participating in athletic practice,
scrimmage, or competition that is permitted under a separate Ohio Department of
Health order;
      (7)   The individual is actively engaged in a public safety capacity,
including but not limited to law enforcement, firefighters, or emergency
medical personnel;
      (8)   The individual is seated and actively consuming food or beverage in
a restaurant or bar;
      (9)   The individual is actively participating in broadcast
communications;
      (10)   The individual is an officiant of a religious service;
      (11)   When facial coverings are prohibited by law or regulation;
      (12)   When facial coverings are in violation of documented industry
standards; or
      (13)   When facial coverings are in violation of a business's documented
safety policies.
(Ord. No. 556-2020. Passed 7-15-20, eff. 7-15-20)
§ 602.03 Civil Penalties and Enforcement
   (a)   Any person who violates any provision of Section
602.02 shall be issued a warning, and, if a person fails to comply with the
warning shall be subject to a civil penalty of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for
each offense.
   (b)   The civil penalties prescribed in this section are in addition to any
rights, remedies, or other penalties provided by law.
   (c)   In addition to Cleveland Police Officers, this chapter may be enforced
by the Director of Public Health, the Director of Public Safety, or the
Commissioner of Environmental Health, and any other officer or employee
designated by them.
(Ord. No. 556-2020. Passed 7-15-20, eff. 7-15-20)
§ 602.04 Appeals
   A civil penalty imposed under Section
602.03 may be appealed to the Directors of Public Safety and Public Health
("Directors"), or their designees, within ten (10) days after receipt of the
civil penalty. The Directors shall grant the appeal or conduct a hearing, which
may be virtual, within thirty (30) days. The Directors shall have jurisdiction
to affirm or reverse the civil penalty. A person aggrieved by a final decision
of the Directors may further appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals within
thirty (30) days after the Directors' written decision.
(Ord. No. 556-2020. Passed 7-15-20, eff. 7-15-20)
§ 602.05 Severability
   If any portion of this chapter, or any section or part of a section is
declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the declaration
must be limited solely to that portion, section, or part of a section that was
directly involved in the controversy before the court on which judgment was
rendered and may not affect or impair the validity of the remainder of this
chapter.
(Ord. No. 556-2020. Passed 7-15-20, eff. 7-15-20)
§ 602.06 Expiration
   This Chapter
602 shall expire upon the termination of the Mayor's Proclamation of Civil
Emergency in the City of Cleveland dated March 11, 2020, as amended.
(Ord. No. 556-2020. Passed 7-15-20, eff. 7-15-20)
CHAPTER 603 – ANIMALS AND FOWL
603.01   Animals or Fowl at Large
603.02   Unmuzzled Dogs at Large; Duty to Report
603.03   Impounding Dogs, Cats, and Domestic Animals
603.031   Adoption of Dogs and Cats from the City Kennel
603.032   Seizure and Impoundment of Animals for Fights, Poisoning, Cruelty,
Neglect or Tethering; Hearing
603.04   Dog Nuisances
603.041   Disposal of Dog Waste
603.05   Annual Registration of Dogs; Tags Required
603.06   Abandoning Animals
603.07   Killing or Injuring Animals
603.071   Assault Upon Police Dogs Prohibited
603.072   Illegal Fights Between Animals
603.08   Poisoning Animals
603.09   Cruelty to Animals
603.091   Neglect of Animals
603.092   Tethering Animals
603.10   Coloring Rabbits or Baby Poultry; Sale or Display of Poultry
603.11   Large Cats
603.12   Report of Escape of Exotic or Dangerous Animal
Cross-reference:
   Animal bites: reports and quarantine, CO
205.01
   Animal enclosure restrictions, CO
347.02
   Animals injuring trees, CO
509.12
   Animals prohibited at airports, CO
571.12
   Animals prohibited from food handling premises, CO
241.10
   Carrier pigeon regulations, CO
205.03
   Control of dogs and other animals in parks, CO
559.33
   Deposit of dead animals, CO
551.14
   Disturbing animal noises, CO
605.10
   Disturbing animals or wildlife in parks, CO
559.41
   Nuisance conditions, CO
205.02
   Removal of dead animals; notice, CO
551.15
Statutory reference:
   See sectional histories for similar State law
   Dog registration, RC 955.01
   Owner or keeper liable for damages, RC 951.10
§ 603.01 Animals or Fowl at Large
   (a)   No person being the owner or having charge of any horses, cattle,
sheep, goats, geese, ducks, turkeys, chicken or other fowl or animals shall
permit them to run at large upon any public place, unenclosed lands or the
premises of another.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of permitting animals at
large, a minor misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 1020-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
§ 603.02 Unmuzzled Dogs at Large; Duty to Report
   (a)   No person shall permit an unmuzzled dog at any time to be on a public
street, highway, park, building or other public place except when held securely
in leash by the owner or another responsible person except when the dog is
legally engaged in training for the purpose of hunting, herding, ability or dog
competition events, accompanied by the owner, keeper, harborer, or a handler.
   (b)   Every City employee, while in the performance of his or her official
duties, who has in his or her possession or under this or her control any radio
transmitter and receiver, telephone or other device ordinarily used for two (2)
way communication, shall immediately report to police officers or dog wardens
of the City the sighting of any unmuzzled dogs found to be in a public place in
violation of this section. The employee shall report the time, place, date and
description of the dog, together with the employee's name.
   (c)   If a violation of division (a) of this section involves a dog as
defined in Section
604.01, the dog shall be impounded under Chapter
603. Impoundment of dog because it was found to be in violation of this section
shall not exempt the owner of the dog from being prosecuted under Section
604.99.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section guilty of a minor misdemeanor on the
first offense, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on the second offense, and a
misdemeanor of the third degree on the third and any subsequent offense, which
fine shall be mandatory, and shall not be suspended or remitted.
   (e)   An amount equal to the amount of fines and penalties imposed under
this section shall annually be contributed to and used for the benefit of the
Division of Animal Care and Control.
(Ord. No. 1572-14. Passed 12-8-14, eff. 12-10-14)
§ 603.03 Impounding Dogs, Cats, and Domestic Animals
   (a)   When any unmuzzled dog, cat, or domestic animal is found at large in
violation of Section
603.02, or abandoned in violation of Section
603.06, or when any dog's owner or the person in charge of control of any dog,
or owner or person in charge of the premises upon which a dog is located, has
violated the provisions of Section
603.04 more than three (3) times within a four (4) month period, a police
officer or animal control officer shall take up and impound the dog, cat, or
domestic animal in a City pound. No dog, cat, or domestic animal shall be
returned from the pound until a fee of forty dollars ($40.00) is paid to the
City, and the dog has both a valid County registration tag as prescribed by
Section
603.05 and a microchip embedded for identification purposes. If a dog did not
already have an embedded microchip at the time that it was impounded, then the
animal control officer shall cause a microchip to be embedded in the dog before
its return, and shall assess the person claiming the dog an additional fee of
ten dollars ($10.00) for that cost.
   (b)   If a police officer or animal control officer impounds a domestic
animal, cat, or dog which is wearing a valid County license registration tag,
the police officer or animal control officer shall immediately give the owner
notice that the dog, cat or domestic animal has been impounded and that unless
the dog, cat, or domestic animal is redeemed within fourteen (14) days of the
date of the notice it may thereafter be euthanized, transferred, sold, or
adopted according to law.
   (c)   If a police officer or animal control officer impounds a dog that is
not wearing a valid County license registration tag or cat or other domestic
animal, and the owner is unknown, the animal control officer shall list the
animal in a record management system for purpose of assistance in
identification of the dog, cat, or domestic animal by a person that can prove
ownership. Any impounded domestic animal, cat, or dog that is not wearing a
valid registration tag and is unredeemed after three (3) days from the later of
date of impoundment or the date on which notice was given may be euthanized,
transferred, made available for fostering or adoption, on order of the Director
of Public Safety or the Chief Animal Control Officer.
   (d)   The owner, upon redeeming a dog, cat, or other domestic animal being
held at the kennel and cared for under this section shall pay a fee of twenty
dollars ($20.00) per day for each day the animal was boarded at the kennel.
This charge shall be in addition to any other repayments that may be owed under
this chapter.
   (e)   Payment of charges for redeeming a dog, cat or domestic animal, which
was impounded because it was found in violation of Section
603.02,
603.04 or
603.06 shall not exempt the owner of the dog, cat, or domestic animal from
prosecution under any of those sections.
   (f)   Any fee established under this section may be waived by the Director
of Public Safety or the Chief Animal Control Officer if the owner of the
impounded animal is determined by the Director or Chief Animal Control Officer
to be indigent using the federal poverty guidelines, and the owner has never
before received the waiver.
(Ord. No. 1572-14. Passed 12-8-14, eff. 12-10-14)
§ 603.031 Adoption of Dogs and Cats from the City Kennel
   (a)   Every dog or cat over six (6) months of age adopted from the City
Kennel shall be spayed or neutered at the Spay and Neuter Clinic before
release. The cost of the operation shall be borne by the person adopting the
animal and is in addition to any adoption fee imposed by the Chief Animal
Control Officer.
   (b)   A person wishing to adopt a dog or cat under the age of six (6) months
shall sign an agreement stating the dog or cat shall be spayed or neutered at
the Spay and Neuter Clinic or at an appropriate outside animal hospital within
seven (7) days of a date specified on the agreement, when the animal reaches
between six (6) and nine (9) months of age. In addition to any adoption fee
imposed by the Chief Animal Control Officer, a thirty dollar ($30.00) fee shall
be paid at the time of the adoption, to be held until the animal is brought
back to be spayed or neutered, or until proof of the operation is established
with the Chief Animal Control Officer. The thirty dollar ($30.00) fee shall
either: (1) be used to cover the cost of the operation when the animal is
brought back to the Spay and Neuter Clinic for the operation; or (2) be
returned to the pet owner upon production of proof of the operation at an
outside facility. If the animal is not spayed or neutered within the set time
period, or within the date specified in the agreement, the owner of the animal
shall forfeit the thirty dollar ($30.00) fee.
   (c)   Any fee established under this section may be waived by the Director
of Public Safety if the person adopting the animal is determined by the
Director to be indigent in accordance with federal poverty guidelines, the
person adopting has never before received the waiver, and, including the
adopted animal, there is only one (1) animal in the adopting person's
household.
(Ord. No. 1572-14. Passed 12-8-14, eff. 12-10-14)
§ 603.032 Seizure and Impoundment of Animals for Fights, Poisoning, Cruelty,
Neglect or Tethering; Hearing
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   "Impounding Agency" means the City of Cleveland Division of Animal
Care and Control or County Humane Society organized under RC 1717.05.
      (2)   "Offense" means a violation of any of the following sections:
603.072 "Illegal Fights between Animals";
603.08 "Poisoning Animals";
603.09 "Cruelty to Animals";
603.091 "Neglect of Animals"; or
603.092 "Tethering Animals".
      (3)   "Officer" means any law enforcement, County humane agent, or Animal
Control Officer in the City of Cleveland.
   (b)   An officer may immediately seize and cause to be impounded at an
impounding agency an animal that the officer has probable cause to believe is
the subject of an offense.
   (c)   The officer shall give written notice of the seizure and impoundment
to the owner, keeper, or harborer of the animal that was seized and impounded
within three (3) days of seizure if they can be found. If the officer is unable
to give the notice to the owner, keeper, or harborer of the animal, the officer
shall post the notice on the door of the residence or in another conspicuous
place on the premises at which the animal was seized.
      (1)   If the seizure is for a violation of Sections
603.072,
603.08,
603.091, or
603.092 the notice shall include a statement that, upon written request by the
owner, keeper, or harborer of the animal to the impounding agency, which is
received by the impounding agency within five (5) calendar days of the notice
of seizure and impoundment, a hearing will be held at the next available court
date, or no later than three (3) days from the date the notice of a request for
a hearing was received, whichever is earlier. If a hearing is not timely
requested, the animal is deemed forfeited without hearing and the impounding
agency may determine the disposition of the animal.
      (2)   If the seizure is for a violation of Sections
603.09 the notice shall include a statement that, upon written request by the
owner, keeper, or harborer of the animal to the impounding agency, which is
received by the impounding agency within ten (10) calendar days of the notice
of seizure and impoundment, a hearing will be held at the next available court
date, or no later than three (3) days from the date the notice of a request for
a hearing was received, whichever is earlier. If a hearing is not timely
requested, the animal is deemed forfeited without hearing and the impounding
agency may determine the disposition of the animal.
      (3)   In either case, the notice shall also state that the hearing will
be held to determine whether the officer had probable cause to seize the animal
and, if applicable, to determine the amount of a bond or cash deposit that is
needed to provide for the animal's care and keeping for not less than thirty
(30) days beginning on the date on which the animal was seized and impounded.
   (d)   An animal that is seized under this section may be humanely destroyed
immediately or at any time during impoundment or otherwise provided with
veterinary care if a licensed veterinarian determines it to be necessary
because the animal is suffering.
   (e)   (1)   If the owner, keeper, or harborer of the animal has requested a
hearing in writing, the court shall hold a hearing to determine whether the
officer impounding an animal had probable cause to seize the animal. If the
court determines that probable cause exists, the court shall determine the
amount of a bond or cash deposit that is needed to provide for the animal's
care and keeping for not less than thirty (30) days beginning on the date on
which the animal was impounded. If a hearing is not timely requested, the
animal is deemed forfeited without hearing and the impounding agency may
determine the disposition of the animal.
      (2)   If the court determines that probable cause does not exist, the
court immediately shall order the impounding agency to return the animal to its
owner if possible.
      (3)   If the court determines that probable cause exists and determines
the amount of a bond or cash deposit, the case shall continue and the owner
shall post a bond or cash deposit to provide for the animal's care and keeping
for not less than thirty (30) days beginning on the date on which the animal
was impounded. The owner may renew a bond or cash deposit by posting, not later
than ten (10) days following the expiration of the period for which a previous
bond or cash deposit was posted, a new bond or cash deposit in an amount that
the court, in consultation with the impounding agency, determines is sufficient
to provide for the animal's care and keeping for not less than thirty (30) days
beginning on the date on which the previous period expired. If no bond or cash
deposit is posted or if a bond or cash deposit expires and is not renewed, the
impounding agency may determine the disposition of the animal unless the court
issues an order that specifies otherwise. The notice provided in this section
shall include notice that if no bond or cash deposit is posted or if the bond
or cash deposit expires and is not renewed and the owner or person in control
of the animal fails to appear for the hearing, the impounding agency may
determine the disposition of the animal.
   (f)   If a person is convicted of committing an offense, the court may
impose the following additional penalties against the person:
      (1)   A requirement that the person pay for the costs incurred by the
impounding agency in caring for an animal involved in the applicable offense,
provided that the costs were incurred during the animal's seizure or
impoundment. A bond or cash deposit posted under this section may be applied to
the costs.
      (2)   An order permanently terminating the person's right to possession,
title, custody, or care of the animal that was involved in the offense. If the
court issues such an order, the court shall order the disposition of the
animal.
   (g)   If a person is found not guilty of committing an offense, the court
immediately shall order the impounding agency to return the animal to its owner
if possible and to return the entire amount of any bond or cash deposit posted
under division (e) of this section. If the animal cannot be returned because it
has been adopted or euthanized the impounding agency shall pay the fair market
value of the animal at the time that it was impounded plus statutory interest
as defined in RC 1343.03 from the date of the impoundment or an amount
determined by the court to be equal to the cost of treatment of the injury to
the animal, as applicable. The requirements established in this division
regarding the return of a bond or cash deposit and the payment of the
reasonable market value of the companion animal shall not apply in the case of
a dog that was not registered, in accordance with applicable registration laws,
at the time it was seized and impounded.
   (h)   If charges are filed for an offense described in this section against
the custodian or caretaker of an animal, but the animal that is the subject of
the charges is not impounded, the court in which the charges are pending may
order the owner or person having custody of the animal to provide to the animal
the necessities described in division (C)(5), (D)(2), and (E)(5) of RC 959.131
until the final disposition of the charges. If the court issues an order of
that nature, the court also may authorize an officer or another person to visit
the place where the animal is being kept, at the times and under the conditions
that the court may set, to determine whether the animal is receiving those
necessities and to remove and impound the animal if the animal is not receiving
those necessities.
   (i)   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to apply to an animal
impounded under Section
603.03.
(Ord. No. 1572-14. Passed 12-8-14, eff. 12-10-14)
§ 603.04 Dog Nuisances
   (a)   No owner or person in charge or control of a dog, or owner or person
in charge of a premises on which a dog is located, shall permit a dog nuisance
to occur or continue within the City.
   (b)   For the purposes of this section, each of the following constitutes a
dog nuisance:
      (1)   Permitting any dog unreasonably to cause annoyance, alarm or noise
disturbance to any person or neighborhood by barking, whining, screeching,
howling, or other like sounds which may be heard beyond the boundary of the
owner, keeper or harborer's property under conditions where the animal sounds
are shown to have occurred either as an episode of continuous noise lasting for
a minimum period of fifteen (15) minutes, or repeated episodes of intermittent
noise lasting for a minimum period of thirty (30) minutes. It shall be an
affirmative defense under this division that the animal was intentionally
provoked by a party other than the owner to make such noise;
      (2)   A dog which scratches or digs in, or defecates upon any lawn, tree,
shrub, plant, or any other public or private property other than the property
of the dog's owner or the property of a person in charge or control of the dog;
      (3)   A dog which damages or causes damage to any public or private
property other than the property of a person in charge or control of the dog;
      (4)   A dog, without provocation, that jumps on the fence of the dog's
owner or person in charge or control of the dog, in a way that scares and
intimidates any person;
      (5)   Permitting a dog, without provocation, to bite or otherwise inflict
serious injury to a person or companion animal.
   (c)   On complaint of any person to the police that a dog nuisance has
occurred or is continuing, a police officer or animal control officer shall
issue notice of the complaint to the owner or person in charge or control of
the dog which constitutes the nuisance complained of, or to the owner or person
in charge of the premises on which the dog nuisance complained of occurs.
   (d)   Any person who fails to abate a dog nuisance after having received a
notice under division (c) of this section shall be guilty of creating a dog
nuisance. Each day upon which the dog nuisance occurs or continues shall
constitute a separate offense, and the offender shall be subject to the
following penalties:
      (1)   For a first offense, a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00);
      (2)   For a second offense occurring within four (4) months of the first
offense, a fine of seventy- five dollars ($75.00);
      (3)   For a third offense occurring within four (4) months of the first
offense, a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00);
      (4)   For a fourth and any later offense occurring within four (4) months
of the first offense, the dog which constitutes the nuisance shall be impounded
under Section
603.03.
      (5)   Whoever violates division (b)(5) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree, and such owner's dog will be considered a
level two (2) threat under Section
604.01.
   (e)   In addition to any other method of enforcement provided in this
section, the offense created in this section may be enforced upon a first,
second, or third offense by the issuance of a citation in compliance with Rule
4.1 of the Ohio Rules of Criminal Procedure.
(Ord. No. 1572-14. Passed 12-8-14, eff. 12-10-14)
§ 603.041 Disposal of Dog Waste
   (a)   No person who has the charge or control of a dog on any public street,
sidewalk, pathway, park, pedestrian way or any public facility or on any
private property not owned or possessed by the owner or person having control
of such dog shall fail to maintain in his or her possession sufficient and
readily usable wrappers, materials or implements to remove and properly dispose
of any fecal matter that may be deposited on the ground by the dog.
   (b)   No person who has the charge or control of a dog on any public street,
sidewalk, pathway, park, pedestrian way or any public facility or on any
private property not owned or possessed by the owner or person having control
of such dog shall fail to remove and properly dispose of any fecal matter that
may be deposited on the ground by the dog.
   (c)   A disabled person who has the charge or control of a guide dog or an
officer who has the charge of a police dog in the performance of law
enforcement duties shall be exempt from the provisions of this section.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. In
addition to any other method of enforcement provided for in this chapter, the
provisions of this section may be enforced by the issuance of a citation in
compliance with Rule 4.1 of the Ohio Rules of Criminal Procedure.
(Ord No. 728-02. Passed 6-10-02, eff. 6-14-02)
§ 603.05 Annual Registration of Dogs; Tags Required
   (a)   Except for guide dogs registered under RC 955.011 and dogs kept by an
institution or organization for teaching and research purposes under RC 955.16,
no person shall own, keep or harbor a dog more than three (3) months of age
without annually registering such dog with the County Auditor. Failure of any
dog at any time to wear a valid registration tag shall be prima facie evidence
of lack of registration and subject such dog to impounding and disposition as
provided by RC 955.16.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of keeping an unregistered
dog, a minor misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 1020-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
§ 603.06 Abandoning Animals
   (a)   No owner or keeper of a dog, cat or other domestic animal shall
abandon such animal.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of abandoning animals, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(Ord. No. 214-01. Passed 12-10-01, eff. 12-19-01)
§ 603.07 Killing or Injuring Animals
   (a)   No person shall maliciously, or willfully, and without the consent of
the owner, kill or injure a farm animal, dog, cat or other domestic animal that
is the property of another. This section does not apply to a licensed
veterinarian acting in an official capacity.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of killing or injuring
animals, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(Ord. No. 214-01. Passed 12-10-01, eff. 12-19-01)
§ 603.071 Assault Upon Police Dogs Prohibited
   (a)   No person shall knowingly cause or attempt to cause physical harm to
any dog which is owned, harbored or under the control of the City’s Division of
Police.
   (b)   No person shall recklessly cause serious physical harm to any dog
which is owned, harbored or under the control of the City’s Division of Police.
   (c)   This section does not apply to a licensed veterinarian acting in an
official capacity.
   (d)   Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(Ord. No. 2638-90. Passed 4-8-91, eff. 4-15-91)
§ 603.072 Illegal Fights Between Animals
   (a)   No person shall cause, allow or permit any animal to fight another
animal for gambling, entertainment or any other purpose, for profit or
otherwise. The term "animal", as used in this section shall include, but not be
limited to, fowl. This section does not regulate fighting between dogs as
prohibited under RC Chapter 959.
   (b)   No person shall:
      (1)   Own, train, use, possess, buy, sell, offer to buy or sell,
transport, receive or deliver any animal intended for use in fighting, seizing,
detaining, or mistreating an animal.
      (2)   Own, use, possess, buy, sell, offer to buy or sell, transport,
receive or deliver any equipment, including, but not limited to, gaffs, spurs,
sparring equipment, performance-enhancing substances or syringes, intended for
use in training, fighting, seizing, detaining or mistreating another animal.
      (3)   Knowingly permit any place under his or her control or possession
to be kept, or used, for any of the purposes described in this section.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegally causing,
allowing, or permitting fighting between animals, a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
   (d)   Any person who knowingly purchases a ticket of admission to an animal
fighting venue, or is present at an animal fighting venue to witness an animal
fight or for any of the purposes described in this section or to aid and abet
the animal fight, is an aider and abettor, and shall be prosecuted and punished
as if he were a principal offender.
(Ord. No. 1572-14. Passed 12-8-14, eff. 12-10-14)
§ 603.08 Poisoning Animals
   (a)   No person shall maliciously, or willfully and without the consent of
the owner, administer poison, except a licensed veterinarian acting in such
capacity, to a farm animal, dog, cat, poultry, or any other domestic animal
that is the property of another; and no person shall, willfully and without the
consent of the owner, place any poisonous or hazardous food, drink or other
substance where it may be easily found and ingested by any of such animals,
either upon his or her own lands or the lands of another.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of poisoning animals, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(Ord. No. 214-01. Passed 12-10-01, eff. 12-19-01)
§ 603.09 Cruelty to Animals
   (a)   No person shall:
      (1)   Torture an animal, deprive one of necessary sustenance,
unnecessarily or cruelly beat, needlessly mutilate or kill, or impound or
confine an animal without supplying it during confinement with a sufficient
quantity of good wholesome food and water.
      (2)   Impound or confine an animal without affording it, during such
confinement, access to shelter from heat, cold, wind, rain, snow or excessive
direct sunlight if it can reasonably be expected that the animal would
otherwise become sick or in some other way suffer. This division (a)(2) does
not apply to animals impounded or confined prior to slaughter. For the purpose
of this section, "shelter" means a man-made enclosure, windbreak, sunshade, or
natural earth's contour, tree development or vegetation and must provide for
the safety and health of the animal in accordance with good animal husbandry
standards for each specific animal.
      (3)   Carry or convey an animal in a cruel or inhumane manner.
      (4)   Keep animals without wholesome exercise and change of air, nor feed
cows on food that produces impure or unwholesome milk.
      (5)   Detain livestock in railroad cars or compartments longer than
twenty-eight (28) hours after they are so placed without supplying them with
necessary food, water, and attention, nor permit such stock to be so crowded as
to overlie, crush, wound, or kill each other.
   (b)   All fines collected for violations of this section shall be paid to
the society or association for the prevention of cruelty to animals, if there
is one in the county, township, or municipal corporation where the violation
occurred.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree. In addition, the court may order the offender to forfeit the animal or
livestock and may provide for its disposition including, but not limited to,
the sale of the animal or livestock. If an animal or livestock is forfeited and
sold under this division, the proceeds from the sale first shall be applied to
pay the expenses incurred with regard to the care of the animal from the time
it was taken from the custody of the former owner. The balance of the proceeds
from the sale, if any, shall be paid to the former owner of the animal.
(Ord. No. 1572-14. Passed 12-8-14, eff. 12-10-14)
§ 603.091 Neglect of Animals
   (a)   No owner or keeper of a dog, cat, or other domestic animal shall cause
any condition that may lead to permanent injury, death, or harm to such animal,
including confining an animal in a motor vehicle under any conditions that may
endanger the well being of the domestic animal.
   (b)   No person shall keep any animal in a place that is unsanitary,
including any place where there is an accumulation of feces or other waste, or
foul odor, or insect or rodent infestation.
   (c)   No person who owns or keeps an animal shall fail to provide the animal
all of the following needs:
      (1)   Clean, potable drinking water at all times, and suitable food, of
sufficient quality and quantity as to ensure normal growth and the maintenance
of normal body weight;
      (2)   Food and water receptacles that are kept clean and disinfected, and
located so as to avoid contamination by feces or other wastes;
      (3)   Regular exercise sufficient to maintain the animal's good health;
      (4)   Necessary veterinary care;
      (5)   Shelter from the elements, including heat, cold, wind, rain, snow
or excessive direct sunlight. If the animal is housed outside, a structure for
shelter and protection must be provided that is suitable for the species, age,
condition, size, and type of that animal. The structure must be completely
enclosed and insulated, having a single entrance/exit secured with a flap or
door or similar device. The structure shall be moisture-resistant, wind-
resistant, and of suitable size and type to allow the animal to stand, turn
about freely, lie in a normal position, and regulate proper body temperature.
The structure shall be made of a durable material with a solid, moisture-proof
floor and a floor raised at least two (2) inches from the ground. Suitable
drainage shall be provided so that water cannot be reasonably expected to
gather and stand within ten (10) feet of the structure, and so the animal has
access to a dry area at all times. Proper bedding of straw or similar material,
that remains dry, must be utilized inside the structure. All structures
required by this section shall be subject to all building and zoning
regulations.
   (d)   No person who shelters an animal from the elements by means of an
animal shelter, a cage, or a pen shall fail to conform it to the following
requirements:
      (1)   The shelter, cage or pen shall be appropriate to the animal's size,
weight, and other characteristics, with sufficient space to allow the animal to
turn about freely and lie in a normal position;
      (2)   The shelter, case or pen shall provide sufficient shade to allow
the animal to escape the direct rays of the sun at all times;
      (3)   The shelter, cage or pen shall be regularly cleaned and sanitized.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of neglect of animals, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(Ord. No. 1572-14. Passed 12-8-14, eff. 12-10-14)
§ 603.092 Tethering Animals
   (a)   No person shall tether an animal in any of the following
circumstances:
      (1)   For more than six (6) hours total in a twenty-four (24) hour period
and not more than two (2) consecutive hours with no less than a one (1) hour
period between tetherings;
      (2)   Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.;
      (3)   If a heat or cold advisory has been issued by a local or state
authority or the National Weather Service;
      (4)   If a severe weather warning has been issued by a local or state
authority or the National Weather Service;
      (5)   If the tether is less than twenty (20) feet in length;
      (6)   If the tether allows the animal to touch the fence or cross the
property line or cross onto public property;
      (7)   If the tether is attached by means of a pinch-type, prong-type, or
choke-type collar or if the collar is unsafe or is not properly fitted;
      (8)   If the tether may cause injury or entanglement;
      (9)   If the animal is not provided with its needs as identified in
division (b) of Section
603.091;
      (10)   If the tether is made of a material that is unsuitable for the
animal's size and weight or that causes any unnecessary discomfort to the
animal;
      (11)   If no owner or occupant is present at the premises.
   (b)   As used in this section, "tether" means a rope, chain, cord, dog run
or pulley, or similar restraint for holding an animal in place, allowing a
radius in which it can move about.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on the
first offense, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on the second offense, and a
misdemeanor of the first degree on the third or any subsequent offense.
Notwithstanding the foregoing penalties, if an animal becomes sick or injured
as a result of a violation of this section, then whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(Ord. No. 12-12. Passed 5-21-12, eff. 5-25-12)
§ 603.10 Coloring Rabbits or Baby Poultry; Sale or Display of Poultry
   (a)   No person, firm, or corporation shall dye or otherwise color any
rabbit or baby poultry, including, but not limited to, chicks and ducklings. No
person, firm, or corporation shall sell, offer for sale, expose for sale,
raffle, or give away any rabbit or baby poultry which has been dyed or
otherwise colored. No poultry younger than four (4) weeks of age may be sold,
given away, or otherwise distributed to any person in lots of less than six
(6). Stores, shops, vendors, and others offering young poultry for sale or
other distribution shall provide and operate brooders or other heating devices
that may be necessary to maintain poultry in good health, and shall keep
adequate food and water available to the poultry at all times.
(RC 925.62)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful poultry sale or
keeping, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense and a
misdemeanor of the third degree on each subsequent offense.
(Ord. No. 834-03. Passed 6-10-03, eff. 6-12-03)
§ 603.11 Large Cats
   (a)   Prohibited. Except as provided in subsection (b) hereof, no person
shall own, keep or harbor any member of the large cat family, known as felidae,
including, but not limited to, lions and all other cats listed as endangered or
threatened species in 50 C.F.R. 17.11, in the City, unless such person has
obtained a license under the provisions of Section 2.1(b) of 9 C.F.R. Part 2
and strictly follows and meets the applicable standards, rules and regulations
of the United States Department of Agriculture as contained in 9 C.F.R. Part 3,
Subpart F, and all other Federal, State and local laws applicable to the
taking, transporting and keeping of members of the family felidae.
   Except as provided in subsection (b) hereof, no person shall own, keep or
harbor any member of the large cat family, as aforesaid, on any lot or premises
in a Residential District, as set forth in Chapter
337 of these Codified Ordinances, on a lot less than two hundred (200) feet by
two hundred (200) feet, or keep or harbor any such cat in any dwelling unit as
set forth in Section
325.20 of these Codified Ordinances, or take such a cat upon any public street,
sidewalk or other public place, except to transport such a cat in a motorized
vehicle in accordance with the transportation requirements contained in
Federal, State and local law.
   (b)   Exceptions. The provisions of subsection (a) hereof do not apply to
any circus, carnival, zoo or other event for entertainment, which is authorized
by law by the proper and responsible City official, or to a research facility,
as defined in 9 C.F.R. Part 1, provided that proper bond or insurance is posted
to indemnify those who may be injured or killed by the keeping of such cats.
The type and amount of such bond or insurance shall be determined by the
Director of Law, except where otherwise provided by ordinance.
   The provisions of this subsection do not apply to the Cleveland Metroparks
Zoo.
   (c)   Notice to Remove. Upon complaint of any person that another person
owns or is keeping or harboring a large cat on premises in the City in
violation of subsection (a) hereof, the Director of Public Safety shall
forthwith cause the matter to be investigated. If, after investigation, the
facts indicate that such person named in the complaint is in fact the owner of,
or is keeping or harboring, any such large cat in the City in violation of
subsection (a) hereof, the Director shall forthwith send written notice to such
person, requiring such person to safely remove such cat from the City within
five (5) days of the date of such notice. However, such notice is not required
where such large cat has previously caused serious physical harm, as set forth
in Section
601.01 of these Codified Ordinances, or death, to any person, or has escaped
and is at large. In such case the Director shall cause such cat to be
immediately seized and impounded, if seizure and impoundment are possible
without risk of serious physical harm or death to any person.
   (d)   Seizing and Impounding. The Director of Public Safety shall forthwith
cause to be seized and impounded any large cat when the person owning, keeping
or harboring such cat has failed to comply with the notice sent pursuant to
subsection (c) hereof. Upon such seizure and impoundment, such cat shall be
delivered to a place of confinement which may be with any organization which is
authorized by law to accept, own, keep or harbor such animals, including, but
not limited to, the Cleveland Metroparks Zoo, the Chief of the Division of
Wildlife of the State or any other governmental body or unit consenting to take
such animal into custody.
   If, during the course of seizing and impounding any such large cat, the cat
poses a risk of serious physical harm or death to any person, a person
authorized by the Director may render such cat immobile by means of
tranquilizers or other safe drugs, or if that is not safely possible, then such
cat may be killed.
   (e)   Costs. Any reasonable cost incurred by the Director of Public Safety
in seizing, impounding and confining any large cat, pursuant to subsection (d)
hereof, shall be charged against the owner, keeper or harborer of such cat and
shall be collected by the Director of Law.
   (f)   Penalty. Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree for the first offense, and for
each subsequent offense is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed each day a person fails to abide by
the notice sent pursuant to subsection (c) hereof after the expiration date
stated therein.
(Ord. No. 1002-A-82. Passed 5-24-82, eff. 5-28-82)
§ 603.12 Report of Escape of Exotic or Dangerous Animal
   (a)   The owner or keeper of any member of a species of the animal kingdom
that escapes from his or her custody or control and that is not indigenous to
this State or presents a risk of serious physical harm to persons or property,
or both, shall, within one (1) hour after he or she discovers or reasonably
should have discovered the escape, report it to:
      (1)   A law enforcement officer of the Municipality and the sheriff of
the county where the escape occurred; and
      (2)   The Clerk of the Municipal Legislative Authority where the escape
occurred.
   (b)   If the office of the Clerk of the Legislative Authority is closed to
the public at the time a report is required by division (a) of this section,
then it is sufficient compliance with division (a)(2) of this section if the
owner or keeper makes the report within one (1) hour after the office is next
open to the public.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(RC 2927.21; Ord. No. 90-96. Passed 3-18-96, eff. 3-26-96)
CHAPTER 603A – EXOTIC ANIMALS
603A.01   Findings
603A.02   Exotic Animal Defined
603A.03   Keeping an Exotic Animal Without a Permit Prohibited
603A.04   Exemptions
603A.05   Personal Possession Permit; Fee
603A.06   Referral of Application
603A.07   Identification Number
603A.08   Care and Treatment of Exotic Animal Held Under Permit
603A.09   Insurance; Signs; Notification
603A.10   Inspections
603A.11   Rabies
603A.12   Appeal from Denial or Revocation of a Permit
603A.13   Violation Notices; Seizure of Exotic Animals Kept in Violation of
this Chapter
603A.14   Facilities Housing Reptiles
603A.15   Public Contact with Exotic Animals Restricted
603A.16   Disposition of Exotic Animals
603A.17   Snakes in Multi-Family Residences Prohibited
603A.18   Severability
603A.99   Penalties
§ 603A.01 Findings
   It is hereby found that the animals listed in Section
603A.02, “Exotic Animal Defined”, are by their very nature wild and potentially
dangerous. Exotic animals do not thrive in the care of untrained individuals or
in substandard captive environments. Exotic animals are generally unsuitable as
household pets. Exotic animals are often acquired without the owner being fully
cognizant of the animal’s potential for dangerousness, or of its proper and
humane care. It is further found that exotic animals have sometimes escaped in
residential neighborhoods and constituted a threat to the safety, health and
welfare of the general public. In consideration of the interests of exotic
animal owners, the community at large, and the animals themselves, it is here
by found that exotic animals, where permitted, should be regulated. In view of
these interests, it is further found that persons that currently own exotic
animals should be permitted to obtain personal possession permits for the
animals if they are in compliance with the requirements of this chapter, but
that no exotic animals other than those already lawfully kept in the City
should be permitted.
   Documents that this Council considered in the adoption of this legislation
are contained in File No. 536-01-A are hereby made a part of the legislative
record of this ordinance.
(Ord. No. 536-01. Passed 6-3-02, eff. 6-10-02)
§ 603A.02 Exotic Animal Defined
   As used in this chapter, “exotic animal” means each of the following
animals:
   (a)   Class Mammalia.
      (1)   Order Artiodactyla. All species, including by way of example and
not by way of limitation, all antelopes, bison, camels, deer, giraffes, and
hippopotamuses.
      (2)   Order Carnivora.
         A.   Family Felidae. All species of pantera, and all felis except
felis catus.
         B.   Family Canidae. Coyotes, foxes, jackals, wolves.
         C.   Family Ursidae. All species, including by way of example and not
by way of limitation, all species of bear.
         D.   Family Mustelidare. Badgers, martins, minks, skunks, and weasels.
         E.   Family Procyonidae. Coatis and racoons.
         F.   Family Hyaenidae. All species, including by way of example and
not by way of limitation, all hyenas.
      (3)   Order Edentatia. All species, including by way of example and not
by way of limitation, anteaters, armadillos, and sloths.
      (4)   Order Marsupialia. Kangaroos, opossums, and wallabies.
      (5)   Order Perissodactyla. Rhinoceroses and tapirs.
      (6)   Order Primates. All species, including by way of example and not by
way of limitation, all chimpanzees, gorillas, lemurs, and monkeys.
      (7)   Order Proboscidae. All species, including by way of example and not
by way of limitation, all elephants.
      (8)   Order Rodentia. Beavers, porcupines, and squirrels.
   (b)   Class Reptilia.
      (1)   Order Squamata.
         A.   Family Colubridae. African twig snakes, brown tree snakes,
boomslangs, and mangrove snakes.
         B.   Family Elapidae. All species, including by way of example and not
by way of limitation, all cobras, coral snakes, mambas, kraits, adders, sea
snakes, and all other species of the Family Elapidae as listed in Living Snakes
of the World in Color by John M. Mehrtens, Sterling Publishing Co., Inc., 1987.
         C.   Family Helodermatidae. Gila monsters and Mexican beaded lizards.
         D.   Family Viperidae and Family Crotalidae. All species, including by
way of example and not by way of limitation, all vipers, adders, asps,
moccasins, rattlesnakes, copperheads, and all other vipers and pit vipers as
listed in Living Snakes of the World in Color by John M. Mehrtens, Sterling
Publishing Co., Inc., 1987.
         E.   Family Boidae. Green anacondas and yellow anacondas; Jamaican
boas; African rock pythons, amethystine pythons, Boelen’s pythons, Burmese
pythons, Indian pythons, olive pythons, and reticulated python.
         F.   Family Varanidae. Salvator monitor, salvadoran monitors.
      (2)   Order Crocodilia. All species, including by way of example and not
by way of limitation, all crocodiles, alligators, caimans, and gavials.
   (c)   Class Aves.
      (1)   Order Cainwarae. All species, including by way of example and not
by way of limitation, all eagles, hawks, and vultures.
      (2)   Order Rheiformes. All species, including by way of example and not
by way of limitation, all rheas.
      (3)   Order Struthioniformes. All species, including by way of example
and not by way of limitation, all ostriches.
      (4)   Order Casuariiformes. All species, including by way of example and
not by way of limitation, all cassowaries and emus.
      (5)   Order Strigiformes. All species, including by way of example and
not by way of limitation, all owls.
   Phylum Arthropoda.
   (d)   Class Arachnida.
      (1)   Order Scorpiones.
         A.   Family Buthidae. 
      Arabian fat-tailed scorpion – Androctonus crassicauda.
      Arizona centruroides scorpion – Centruroides exilicauda.
      Death stalker – Leiurus quinquestriatus.
      Egyptian yellow scorpion – Androctonus amoreuxi.
      Israeli black scorpion – Hottentotta judaicus.
      S.A. giant fat-tailed scorpion – Parabuthus transvaalicus.
      Sinai desert scorpion – Androctonus bicolor.
      Yellow desert scorpion – Androctonus australis.
      (2)   Order Araneae.
         A.   Family Therididae.
      Argentina red widow spider – Latrodectus coralinus.
      Brown widow spider – Latrodectus geometricus.
      Red-black widow – Latrodectus hasselti.
      Red widow spider – Latrodectus bishopi.
      Southern black widow spider – Latrodectus mactans.
      Western widow – Latrodectus hesperus.
         B.   Family Loxoscelidae.
      Brown recluse spider – Loxosceles reclusa.
   (e)   Class Chilopoda.
      (1)   Order Scolopendromorpha.
         A.   Family Scolopendridae.
      Amazon giant banded centipede – Scolopendra gigantea.
      Arizona Tiger Centipede – Scolopendra viridis.
      Florida keys centipede – Scolopendra alternans.
   (f)   Class Chiroperta. Bats.
   (g)   Green Iguanas.
   As used in this chapter, “exotic animal” also means all species listed under
the Endangered Species Act as threatened or endangered, and shall also mean any
snake, regardless of species, that is twelve (12) feet in length or longer.
(Ord. No. 536-01. Passed 6-3-02, eff. 6-10-02)
§ 603A.03 Keeping an Exotic Animal Without a Permit Prohibited
   (a)   No person shall keep or possess or bring into the City, any exotic
animal unless the person has first obtained a personal possession permit for
the animal from the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses in accordance with
the requirements of this chapter.
   (b)   No person who owns or has lawful possession of any real property,
premises or structure shall keep or possess or allow any other person to keep
or possess any exotic animal on the property, premises or structure except in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (c)   No person shall breed an exotic animal, except in compliance with this
chapter.
(Ord. No. 536-01. Passed 6-3-02, eff. 6-10-02)
§ 603A.04 Exemptions
   Except for Sections
603A.14,
603A.15,
603A.16 and
603A.17, the provisions of which shall apply to all persons, this chapter shall
not apply to any of the following:
   (a)   A person who keeps an exotic animal under a permit issued by the
United States or the State of Ohio;
   (b)   A person whose duties include the keeping or handling of exotic
animals, while the person is engaged in that duty, and who is employed by any
of the following:
      (1)   The Division of Animal Care and Control, Department of Public
Safety, City of Cleveland;
      (2)   The County kennels;
      (3)   The Cleveland Metroparks Zoo;
      (4)   The Animal Protective League;
      (5)   A licensed veterinary hospital or clinic;
      (6)   A licensed or accredited research or medical institution;
      (7)   A facility licensed as an exhibitor or breeder by the United States
Department of Agriculture under the Animal Welfare Act;
      (8)   A licensed or accredited educational institution, including
museums.
   (c)   A person licensed as a wildlife rehabilitator under OAC 1501:31-25-03;
   (d)   A person temporarily transporting an exotic animal through the City if
the transit time is not more than twenty-four (24) hours and the animal is at
all times maintained within a confinement sufficient to prevent the exotic
animal from escaping.
   (e)   A person who holds a license under RC 1533.08 and corresponding
regulations.
(Ord. No. 1572-14. Passed 12-8-14, eff. 12-10-14)
§ 603A.05 Personal Possession Permit; Fee
   (a)   A person may possess an exotic animal only if all the following are
met:
      (1)   The person is the legal owner of the exotic animal and was in legal
possession of the animal prior to the effective date of this chapter.
      (2)   The person applies for and is granted a personal possession permit
from the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses for each exotic animal in the
person's possession within sixty (60) days of the effective date of this
chapter.
   (b)   Any person who meets the requirements in division (a) of this section
shall annually obtain a personal possession permit. The initial term of all
Personal Possession Permits shall be for a duration of one (1) year, commencing
on June 1 of each year. From and after the effective date of this chapter, no
new exotic animals shall be brought into the City under the authority of a
personal possession permit.
   (c)   An applicant must file an application with the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses on forms provided by the Commissioner. The application
must include the following:
      (1)   An annual permit fee of ten dollars ($10.00) per animal;
      (2)   A written statement which sets forth the following information:
         A.   The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant;
         B.   A description of the exotic animal, including the scientific
name, name, sex, age, color, weight, and any distinguishing marks or coloration
that would aid in the identification of the animal;
         C.   A photograph of the exotic animal;
         D.   The exact location where each animal is to be kept;
         E.   The names, addresses, and telephone number of the person from
whom the applicant obtained the exotic animal, if known;
         F.   The living environment in which the exotic animal will spend its
time. Specifically, the type and size of cage, the physical and psychological
enrichment the animal will receive daily (if applicable), type of exercise the
animal will receive (if applicable), diet, and veterinary care the exotic
animal will receive;
         G.   The identification number of the exotic animal, excluding exotic
animals excepted under division (c) of Section
603A.07;
         H.   The name, address, and phone number of the veterinarian who is
expected to provide veterinary care to the exotic animal.
   (d)   A permit shall not be granted unless the Commissioner finds that all
of the following apply:
      (1)   All of the requirements set forth in divisions (a)(1) and (a)(2) of
this section are met;
      (2)   The applicant is eighteen (18) years of age or older;
      (3)   The applicant has not been convicted of violating a local or state
law prohibiting cruelty, neglect, or mistreatment of an animal or has not
within the past ten (10) years been convicted of or found responsible for
possession, sale, or use of illegal narcotics;
      (4)   The facility and the conditions in which each exotic animal will be
kept are in compliance with this chapter;
      (5)   The applicant has obtained the requisite insurance liability
coverage or surety bond for each exotic animal under the applicant's control as
set forth in Section
603A.09;
      (6)   The applicant has regularly provided veterinary care to the exotic
animal(s) when needed and intends to provide such care in the future.
   (e)   The personal possession permit shall set forth all of the following
information:
      (1)   The name, address, and phone number of the permit holder;
      (2)   The address if different than above, where the exotic animal or
animals will be kept;
      (3)   The name, number, species, age of the exotic animal, and any
distinguishing marks or coloration that would aid in the identification of the
animal;
      (4)   The identification number of each exotic animal as required under
Section
603A.07, if applicable;
      (5)   The name, address, and phone number of the veterinarian who is
expected to provide veterinary care to the exotic animal named on the permit;
      (6)   Any other relevant information the city may deem necessary.
   (f)   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses shall keep records of who
is carrying a valid permit, and provide a copy of the same to the Chief Animal
Control Officer. The Chief Animal Control Officer shall, in turn, notify the
appropriate personnel in the Division of Police, as determined by the Director
of Public Safety.
   (g)   No person who holds a personal possession permit under this chapter
shall fail to notify the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses of any
changes in the information stated on the permit, which must include the death
of the exotic animal.
(Ord. No. 1572-14. Passed 12-8-14, eff. 12-10-14)
§ 603A.06 Referral of Application
   On receipt of a completed application for a personal possession permit, the
Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses shall refer the application to the
Division of Police to determine whether the applicant has committed any of the
offenses identified in division (d)(3) of Section
603A.05. The Division of Police shall report its findings back to the
Commissioner.
   In addition, If the applicant is seeking a permit for five (5) or more
exotic animals, the application shall be referred to the Chief Animal Control
Officer, who shall inspect the premises at which the exotic animals are
proposed to be kept. The Chief Animal Control Officer shall report back to the
Commissioner as to whether or not the premises comport to the requirements of
this chapter.
(Ord. No. 1572-14. Passed 12-8-14, eff. 12-10-14)
§ 603A.07 Identification Number
   (a)   No person who owns an exotic animal shall fail to have an
identification number placed in the exotic animal via subcutaneous microchip at
the expense of the person, by or under the supervision of a veterinarian.
   (b)   The Chief Animal Control Officer shall specify the exact type of
subcutaneous chip to be placed in exotic animals, which shall be the same type
as used for vicious dogs under division (d) of Section
604.03 of these Codified Ordinances.
   (c)   It shall be an affirmative defense to division (a) of this section
that the person has had the animal examined by a veterinarian for the purpose
of complying with division (a) and the veterinarian has determined that the
placement of a microchip would be harmful to the animal.
(Ord. No. 1572-14. Passed 12-8-14, eff. 12-10-14)
§ 603A.08 Care and Treatment of Exotic Animal Held Under Permit
   (a)   For each exotic animal, including reptiles, birds and insects only
where applicable, the possessor shall comply with all applicable standards of
the Animal Welfare Act (7 U.S.C. 2131 et seq.) and its subsequent amendments,
regulations and standards adopted under that Act relating to:
      (1)   Facilities and operations.
      (2)   Animal health and husbandry.
      (3)   Veterinary care.
   (b)   The cage or facility where an exotic animal is primarily housed shall
be secured at all times. If the exotic animal is caged or housed outdoors, the
animal shall be secured and kept inaccessible to the public, and shall not be
visible from any public right-of-way.
   (c)   The exotic animal shall not be tethered, leashed, or chained outdoors,
or allowed to run at-large.
   (d)   An exotic animal shall not be mistreated, neglected, abandoned, or
deprived of necessary food, water, and sustenance.
   (e)   A person transporting an exotic animal in a vehicle shall keep the
animal securely caged in the vehicle at all times.
   (f)   Each permittee shall have a plan for the quick and safe recapture of
the exotic animal if the animal escapes.
   (g)   If a person who holds a personal possession permit can no longer care
for an exotic animal, that person shall comply with Section
603A.16 in the disposition of the animal.
   (h)   No person shall fail to comply with the requirements of this section.
Any person who violates this section is subject to the penalties provided in
Section
603A.99.
(Ord. No. 536-01. Passed 6-3-02, eff. 6-10-02)
§ 603A.09 Insurance; Signs; Notification
   (a)   Any person who holds a personal possession permit under this chapter
shall obtain a policy of liability insurance or surety bond written by an
insurer or a surety authorized to conduct business in the state of Ohio, in an
amount not less than two hundred and fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00), to
cover damage or injury to persons or property caused by the exotic animal and
shall maintain such coverage during the entire term of the personal possession
permit. Each applicant for a personal possession shall submit to the
Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses as part of the application a
certificate of liability insurance, or proof of a surety bond, that complies
with this section.
   (b)   No person who owns, possesses or keeps an exotic animal or animals
shall fail to have posted and displayed at each possible entrance onto the
premises where the animal or animals are kept a conspicuous sign that contains
at least the words “permit issued under C.O. Section
603A.05" and a phone number at which the permittee may be contacted twenty-four
(24) hours a day. The exact content and size of the sign shall be prescribed by
the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses
   (c)   No person who owns, possesses or keeps an exotic animal shall fail to
immediately contact the Division of Police in the event that the exotic animal
escapes or is for any reason at large. The possessor is liable for all expenses
associated with efforts to recapture the exotic animal.
(Ord. No. 536-01. Passed 6-3-02, eff. 6-10-02)
§ 603A.10 Inspections
   (a)   Any facility where the exotic animal is housed may be inspected by the
Chief Animal Control Officer, a sanitarian of the Health Department, a police
officer, or any other person designated by the Director of Public Safety for
that purpose, at all reasonable times to ensure compliance with this chapter.
   (b)   Any facility housing five (5) or more exotic animals shall be
inspected annually by the Chief Animal Control Officer to certify that the
exotic animals are properly confined and cared for in compliance with this
chapter.
(Ord. No. 1572-14. Passed 12-8-14, eff. 12-10-14)
§ 603A.11 Rabies
   (a)   If an exotic animal potentially exposes a human, companion animal, or
livestock to rabies by any penetration of the skin by teeth, any scratch that
causes penetration of the skin, any abrasion that causes penetration of the
skin, or contamination of open wounds or mucous membranes with saliva or other
infectious matter, the possessor of the exotic animal shall report the
potential exposure to the local health department within twenty-four (24)
hours.
   (b)   If an exotic animal potentially exposes a human, companion animal, or
livestock to rabies, the exotic animal shall be examined for rabies in the
manner set forth under the public health code of the state. However, if a
rabies vaccination is approved by the federal government for use on a species
of exotic animal that potentially exposed the human, companion animal, or
livestock to rabies and the exotic animal has been vaccinated then the exotic
animal shall not be euthanized.
   (c)   If a rabies vaccination is or becomes approved by the federal
government for use on a species of exotic animal, the possessor of the exotic
animal shall have the exotic animal vaccinated for rabies by a veterinarian.
   (d)   No person shall fail to comply with the requirements of this section.
Any person who violates this division is subject to the penalties provided in
Section
603A.99.
(Ord. No. 536-01. Passed 6-3-02, eff. 6-10-02)
§ 603A.12 Appeal from Denial or Revocation of a Permit
   Any person who is denied a personal possession permit, or who has had a
permit suspended or revoked, may appeal the decision of the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses to the Board of Zoning Appeals, in writing, within ten
(10) days of the Commissioner’s decision, in the manner provided in Section
403.09.
(Ord. No. 536-01. Passed 6-3-02, eff. 6-10-02)
§ 603A.13 Violation Notices; Seizure of Exotic Animals Kept in Violation of
this Chapter
   (a)   Violation Notices. The Director of Public Safety shall investigate any
alleged violation of this chapter on his or her own initiative or upon the
complaint of any person. If, after investigation, there is probable cause to
believe that there is a violation of this chapter, then the Director of Public
Safety may send a violation notice to the offender, as described in division
(b). Enforcement of this chapter by means of violation notice is in addition to
and not in lieu of any other means of enforcement provided for in these
Codified Ordinances including, without limitation, Section
603A.99.
   (b)   Form of Notice. Any violation notice sent under division (a) shall be
in writing, and shall specify the action that is required of the violator, and
the time frame for compliance. The Director shall limit the time for compliance
to five (5) days unless he or she determines that there is good cause to
specify a longer period. The notice shall require the offender to come into
compliance with all provisions of this chapter, to dispose of the animal under
Section 603A.16, or to safely remove the exotic animal from the City.
   (c)   Seizing and Impounding. If the owner, keeper or possessor of an exotic
animal fails to comply with a violation notice sent under division (b) of this
section, the Director of Public Safety shall cause the exotic animal to be
seized and impounded. In addition, without the necessity of advance notice, the
Director shall cause the seizure and impoundment of any exotic animal that has
previously caused serious physical harm to any person, as set forth in Section
601.01, or in any instance in which the exotic animal has escaped or is at
large.
   If an animal is being seized or impounded under this section poses a risk of
serious physical harm or death to any person, the Chief Animal Control Officer
or other person authorized by the Director of Public Safety may render the
exotic animal immobile by means of tranquilizers or other safe drugs, or if
that is not possible, the animal may be euthanized.
   (d)   Costs. All reasonable costs incurred by the Director of Public Safety
in seizing, impounding or confining any exotic animal under division (c) of
this section shall be charged against the owner, keeper or possessor of the
animal.
(Ord. No. 1572-14. Passed 12-8-14, eff. 12-10-14)
§ 603A.14 Facilities Housing Reptiles
   (a)   No person who conducts a pet store business, or whose business
includes the sale, breeding or keeping of reptiles, shall sell or offer to
sell, or give, or offer as a promotion, any reptile unless such person gives to
each prospective purchaser or acquirer of the reptile a notice substantially In
the form set forth in division (c) of this section.
   (b)   No person who conducts a pet store business, or whose business
includes the sale, breeding or keeping of reptiles shall fail to prominently
post, at each place where reptiles are kept, displayed or housed, a notice of
safe reptile handling practices substantially in the form set forth in division
(c) of this section.
   (c)   The notice of safe reptile handling practices required by divisions
(a) and (b) of this section shall be in substantially the following form:
   “SAFE REPTILE HANDLING PRACTICES
   (1)   Reptiles carry salmonella bacteria, which can make people sick.
   (2)   Persons should always wash their hands thoroughly with soap and water
after handling reptiles or reptile cages.
   (3)   Persons at increased risk for infection or serious complications for
salmonellosis (e.g. children, elderly, and immunocompromised persons) should
avoid contact with reptiles.
   (4)   Pet reptiles should be kept out of households where children aged less
than five (5) years, the elderly, and immunocompromised persons live. Families
expecting a new child should remove the pet reptile from the home before the
infant arrives.
   (5)   Pet reptiles should be kept out of kitchens and other food preparation
areas to prevent contamination. Kitchen sinks should not be used to bathe
reptiles or wash reptile dishes, cages, or aquariums. If bathtubs are used for
the above purposes then they should be cleaned thoroughly and disinfected.
   (6)   Pet reptiles should not be kept in child care centers.
   (7)   Pet reptiles should not be allowed to roam freely throughout the home
or living area.”
(Ord. No. 536-01. Passed 6-3-02, eff. 6-10-02)
§ 603A.15 Public Contact with Exotic Animals Restricted
   (a)   No person who owns or possesses an exotic animal shall bring the
animal into any commercial or retail premises unless the person is bringing the
animal to a veterinarian or a veterinarian clinic or other establishment for
the care of the animal.
   (b)   No person who owns or possesses an exotic animal shall walk the exotic
animal on a leash on any public sidewalk or right-of-way, or in any public
place.
   (c)   No person who owns or possesses an exotic animal shall carry the
animal on his or her person, or wear the animal as if it were an article of
clothing, or wrap the animal around his or her person, on any public sidewalk,
public right-of-way or in any public place.
(Ord. No. 536-01. Passed 6-3-02, eff. 6-10-02)
§ 603A.16 Disposition of Exotic Animals
   (a)   If a person who holds a personal possession permit can no longer care
for an exotic animal, the person may contact the Animal Protective League, the
Chief Animal Control Officer, the Cleveland MetroParks Zoo, or the Cleveland
Museum of Natural History for possible placement of the animal.
   (b)   No person shall dispose of an exotic animal down a toilet, or in a
sewer, waterway, or in any public place.
   (c)   No person shall set an exotic animal free in any place in the City.
(Ord. No. 1572-14. Passed 12-8-14, eff. 12-10-14)
§ 603A.17 Snakes in Multi-Family Residences Prohibited
   No person shall possess or keep any snake that is an exotic animal as
defined in Section
603A.02 in a place used as a multifamily residence.
(Ord. No. 536-01. Passed 6-3-02, eff. 6-10-02)
§ 603A.18 Severability
   If any part of this chapter is found to be unconstitutional or unenforceable
it shall not affect the constitutionality or enforceability of any other part
of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 536-01. Passed 6-3-02, eff. 6-10-02)
§ 603A.99 Penalties
   (a)   Whoever violates Section
603A.09(c) or Section
603A.16(b) or (c) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (b)   Whoever violates any section of this chapter for which no other
penalty is provided is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on the first offense; a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree on the second offense, and a misdemeanor of
the first degree on the third offense. In addition to any other means of
enforcement provided for in these Codified Ordinances, each minor misdemeanor
offense established by this chapter may be enforced by the issuance of a minor
misdemeanor citation in accordance with Criminal Rule 4.1 without the necessity
of first issuing a violation notice as described in Section
603A.13.
(Ord. No. 536-01. Passed 6-3-02, eff. 6-10-02)
CHAPTER 604 – DOGS THAT POSE A THREAT TO PUBLIC SAFETY
604.01   Definitions
604.02   Exemptions
604.03   Control of Dogs that Pose a Threat to Public Safety
604.04   Insurance; Signs; Notification
604.05   Miscellaneous
604.06   Hearing and Appeals Process and Declassification of Dog as Threat to
Public Safety; Fee
604.07   Severability
604.99   Penalties
§ 604.01 Definitions
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply,
unless the context shall indicate another or different meaning or intent:
   (a)   “Animal Control Officer” means the chief animal control officer of the
City of Cleveland or his or her duly authorized representatives.
   (b)   “Level-One (1) Threat” dog means the following:
      (1)   A dog designated as a Level-One (1) threat is one that, without
provocation, and subject to division (c) of this section, has chased or
approached a person, including a person on a bicycle, upon the streets,
sidewalks or any public or private property, other than the dog owner, keeper,
or harborer’s property in either a menacing fashion or an apparent attitude of
attack, or has attempted to bite or otherwise endanger any person, while that
dog is off the premises of its owner, keeper, or harborer, or some other
responsible person, or not physically restrained or confined in a locked pen
which has a top, locked fenced yard, or other locked enclosure, which has a
top. A level-one (1) threat dog may also be one who has repeatedly exhibited a
propensity, tendency or disposition to attack, without provocation, or
otherwise threatens the safety of humans or domestic animals.
      (2)   Any dog that on three (3) separate occasions within a twelve (12)
month period has been impounded by the City Animal Control Officer for being
unrestrained or uncontrolled off its owner’s, keeper’s, or harborer’s premises
is a level-one (1) threat.
   (c)   A Level-One (1) threat dog does not include a police dog that has
chased or approached in either a menacing fashion or an apparent attitude of
attack, or has attempted to bite or otherwise endanger any person while the
police dog is being used to assist law enforcement officers in the performance
of their official duties.
   (d)   A Level-Two (2) Threat dog is one that, without provocation, and
subject to division (b) of this section, has killed or caused serious injury to
any person, or has killed or caused serious injury to another domestic animal.
   (e)   A Level-Two (2) Threat dog does not include either of the following;
(1) a police dog while being used to assist law enforcement officers in the
performance of their official duties, or (2) a dog that has killed or caused
serious injury to any person, or domestic animal, while that person, or
domestic animal, was committing or attempting to commit a criminal trespass or
other criminal offense on the property of the owner, keeper or harborer of the
dog.
   (f)   “Domestic animal” means any animal that is kept inside a residential
dwelling and any dog or cat regardless of where it is kept. “Domestic animal”
does not include livestock or any wild animal.
   (g)   “Impounded” means taken into the custody of the public pound in the
City of Cleveland.
   (h)   “Law Enforcement Officer” has the same meaning as division (k) of
Section
601.01 of these Codified Ordinances.
   (i)   “Menacing fashion” means that a dog would cause any person being
chased or approached to reasonably believe that the dog will cause physical
injury to that person.
   (j)   “Owner” means any person, firm, corporation, organization, or
department possessing, harboring, keeping, having an interest in, or having
control or custody of an animal.
   (k)   “Person” means a natural person or any legal entity, including but not
limited to, a corporation, firm, partnership, or trust.
   (l)   “Police dog” means a dog that has been trained, certified and/or
approved by the state and may be used, to assist one (1) or more law
enforcement officers in the performance of their official duties.
   (m)   “Serious injury” means any physical injury that results in broken
bones or lacerations or punctures that require immediate medical treatment.
   (n)   “Wild animal” has the same meaning as in RC 1531.01.
   (o)   “Without provocation” means that a dog was not teased, tormented or
abused by a person, or that the dog was not coming to the aid or the defense of
a person who was not engaged in illegal or criminal activity and who was not
using the dog as a means of carrying out such activity.
(Ord. No. 712-11. Passed 6-6-11, eff. 6-13-11)
§ 604.02 Exemptions
   (a)   The provisions of this chapter shall not include a police dog.
   (b)   Notwithstanding the definition of a level-one (1) threat dog or a
level-two (2) threat dog in Section
604.01, no dog may be declared a threat to public safety if:
      (1)   An injury or damage is sustained by a person who: at the time such
injury or damage was sustained, was committing a willful trespass or other tort
upon premises occupied by the owner or keeper of the dog, or was teasing,
tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog or was committing or attempting to
commit a crime;
      (2)   An injury or damage was sustained by a domestic animal which at the
time such injury or damage was sustained was teasing, tormenting, abusing or
assaulting the dog or was trespassing upon premises occupied by the owner or
keeper of the dog; or
      (3)   The dog was protecting or defending a human being or domestic
animal within the immediate vicinity of the dog from an unjustified attack or
assault.
   (c)   The owner, keeper or harborer of any level- one (1) or level-two (2)
threat dog is not liable in damages for any injury, death or loss to person or
property caused by such dog, if such injury, death or loss was caused to the
person or property of an individual who, at the time, was committing or
attempting to commit a trespass or other criminal offense on the property of
the owner, keeper or harborer or was committing or attempting to commit a
criminal offense against any person, or was teasing, tormenting, or abusing the
dog or the owner, keeper or harborer’s property.
(Ord. No. 712-11. Passed 6-6-11, eff. 6-13-11)
§ 604.03 Control of Dogs that Pose a Threat to Public Safety
   No owner, keeper or harborer of any level-one (1) threat or level-two (2)
threat dog shall fail to do either of the following, except when the dog is
legally engaged in training for the purpose of hunting, accompanied by a
licensed hunter or trainer for the purpose of hunting:
   (a)   While the dog is on the premises of the owner, keeper, harborer or
handler, it must be securely confined indoors, or in a locked pen which has a
top, the dimensions of which should be at least five (5) feet by ten (10) feet,
and must have secure sides and a secure top. If such structure should have no
bottom secured to the sides, the sides must be imbedded into the ground no less
than two (2) feet. Such structure must be suitable to prevent the entry of
young children and designed to prevent the dog from escaping, or in a locked
fenced yard which fence is at least six (6) feet high. Any enclosure must
provide protection from the elements for the dog.
   (b)   While the dog is off the premises of the owner, keeper or harborer,
keep it on a substantial collar and leash or tether not exceeding six (6) feet
in length and additionally shall do the following:
      (1)   Keep the dog in a locked pen which has a top, locked fenced yard of
at least six (6) feet high, or other locked enclosure which has a top; or
      (2)   Have the leash or tether controlled by a person who is at least
eighteen (18) years of age or securely attach, tie, or affix the leash or
tether to the ground or a stationary object or fixture so that the dog is
adequately restrained and station such person in close enough proximity to the
dog so as to prevent it from causing injury to any person; and
      (3)   Muzzle the dog. The muzzle must be made in a manner that will not
cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration but must
prevent it from biting any person or animal.
   (c)   No owner, keeper or harborer of the dog shall permit the unmuzzled dog
at anytime to be on a public street, highway, park, building, or other public
place.
   (d)   A dog declared to be a level-one (1) threat or level-two (2) threat as
defined in Section
604.01 or “vicious” under the Ohio Revised Code shall, at the expense of such
owner, keeper, or harborer, (1) be tattooed or microchipped to secure positive
identification and (2) be spayed or neutered unless exempted by a licensed
veterinarian for health reasons.
   (e)   The penalties in Section
604.99 shall not apply whenever the conduct proscribed in this section
constitutes a felony under RC 955.99.
(Ord. No. 712-11. Passed 6-6-11, eff. 6-13-11)
§ 604.04 Insurance; Signs; Notification
   (a)   All owners, keepers or harborers of level-one (1) and level-two (2)
threat dogs shall obtain a policy of liability insurance with an insurer
authorized to write liability insurance in this state providing coverage in
each occurrence, subject to a limit, exclusive of interest and costs. of not
less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) because of damage or
bodily injury to or death of a person caused by the level-one (1) and level-
two (2) threat dog. All owners, keepers or harborers of level-one (1) and
level-two (2) threat dogs shall provide a copy of the policy for liability
insurance to the Animal Control Officer on a yearly basis.
   (b)   All persons who presently own, keep or harbor a level-two (2) threat
dog must obtain a policy of liability insurance within thirty (30) days of the
effective date of this section.
   (c)   Upon request of the Animal Control Officer or Police Officer, the
owner of a level-two (2) threat dog shall produce proof of liability insurance
forthwith. Failure to furnish proof of liability insurance may result in the
impounding of the dog by the Animal Control Officer until such proof is
furnished.
   (d)   All owners, keepers or harborers of any level- one (1) threat or
level-two (2) threat dogs shall have posted and displayed at each possible
entrance onto the premises where the level-one (1) threat or level-two (2)
threat dog is kept a conspicuous sign, clearly legible, and easily readable by
the public warning that there is a level-one (1) threat or level-two (2) threat
dog on the premises. Such sign shall be at least eight (8) inches by ten (10)
inches in rectangular dimensions and shall contain only the words “LEVEL-ONE
THREAT DOG” or “LEVEL-TWO THREAT DOG” in lettering not less than two (2) inches
in height. Such sign should also include a visual symbol for any children or
people who cannot read words.
   (e)   (1)   The owner of any level-one (1) threat or level-two (2) threat
dog shall notify the animal control officer within twenty-four (24) hours if
the level-one (1) threat or level-two (2) threat dog is on the loose, is
unconfined, has attacked another animal, has attacked any person, has died, or
transfer of ownership or possession of the dog has occurred.
      (2)   If there has been a transfer of possession or ownership of any
level-one (1) threat or level-two (2) threat dog, within ten (10) days after
such transfer of ownership or possession, the seller, transferor, owner, keeper
or harborer shall provide a completed and notarized copy of a written form to
the animal control officer on which the seller, transferor, owner, keeper or
harborer shall furnish the following information:
         A.   The name and address of the buyer or other transferee of the dog:
         B.   The age, sex, color, breed, and registration number of the dog.
         C.   In addition. the seller, transferor, owner, keeper or harborer
shall answer the following questions which shall be specifically stated on the
form as follows:
   “Has the dog ever chased or attempted to attack or bite a person? If yes,
describe the incident(s) in which the behavior occurred.”
   “Has the dog ever bitten a person? If yes, describe the incident(s) in which
the behavior occurred.”
   “Has the dog ever seriously injured or killed a person or other animal? If
yes, describe the incident(s) in which the behavior occurred.”
   The animal control officer shall furnish the form to the seller or
transferor at no cost.
(Ord. No. 712-11. Passed 6-6-11, eff. 6-13-11)
§ 604.05 Miscellaneous
   (a)   The animal control officer is hereby empowered to make whatever
inquiry is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this
section, and to seize and impound any level-one (1) threat or level-two (2)
threat dog whose owner, keeper or harborer fails to comply with the provisions
hereof. In the event that the owner of the dog refuses to surrender the animal
to the animal control officer, the animal control officer may request a law
enforcement officer to obtain a search or arrest warrant to seize the dog.
   (b)   In the event that a law enforcement officer has probable cause to
believe that any level-one (1) threat or level-two (2) threat dog is being
harbored, housed or cared for in violation of this section, the law enforcement
officer may petition a court of competent jurisdiction to order the seizure and
impoundment of the dog pending trial.
   (c)   In the event that the owner of any level-one (1) threat or level-two
(2) threat dog is a minor, the parent or guardian of such minor shall be liable
for all injuries and property damage sustained by any person or domestic animal
caused by an unprovoked attack by said level-one (1) threat or level-two (2)
threat dog,
   (d)   For purposes of division (a) of Section
604.03, testimony that any level-one (1) threat or level- two (2) threat dog
was unconfined on the premises of its owner, or that any level-one (1) threat
or level-two (2) threat dog was beyond the premises of its owner and was not
secured in accordance with division (b) of Section
604.03, shall be prima facie evidence that such owner suffered or permitted
such dog to go unconfined on the premises of such owner or suffered or
permitted such dog to go beyond the premises of such owner when not securely
leashed according to Section
604.03.
(Ord. No. 712-11. Passed 6-6-11, eff. 6-13-11)
§ 604.06 Hearing and Appeals Process and Declassification of Dog as Threat to
Public Safety; Fee
   (a)   If an owner, keeper, or harborer of a dog is convicted in Cleveland
Municipal Court of any offense which qualifies the dog as a level-one (1) or
level-two (2) threat, the conviction shall evidence the fact that said dog is a
level-one (1) or level-two (2) threat. On such conviction, the owner, keeper or
harborer shall be on notice that the dog is a level-one (1) or level-two (2)
threat and must comply with all restrictions specified in Sections
604.03 and
604.04.
   (b)   Regardless of whether the owner, keeper, or harborer of a dog has been
convicted of any offense which qualifies the dog as a level-one (1) or level-
two (2) threat, the Animal Control Officer, Director of Public Health or Chief
of Police may designate a dog as a level-one (1) or level-two (2) threat. The
owner, keeper, or harborer shall receive written notice that the dog has been
designated a level-one (1) or level-two (2) threat by one (1) of the
aforementioned designating authorities. The written notice shall specify the
appeal rights of the owner, keeper, or harborer of the designated dog.
      (1)   If a dog is designated a level-one (1) or level-two (2) threat, the
owner, keeper, or harborer of the dog shall have the right to a hearing to
appeal the designation.
      (2)   Appeals shall be heard by the Director of Public Safety or his or
her designee. An owner, keeper, or harborer of a dog designated a level-one (1)
or level-two (2) threat has ten (10) days from the date listed on the written
notice of such designation to inform the Director in writing that a hearing
date is requested. The Director will schedule the hearing and notify the party
requesting the hearing in writing of the time, date, and location of the
hearing.
      (3)   The designating authority must show, by a preponderance of the
evidence, that the designated dog is a level-one (1) or level-two (2) threat.
      (4)   Following the hearing, if the Director finds the dog a level-one
(1) or level-two (2) threat dog, the owner, keeper, or harborer shall be on
notice that the dog must be kept under the restrictions specified in this
chapter. If the Director finds the dog is not a level-one (1) or level-two (2)
threat dog, the Director shall grant the appeal.
      (5)   Any person subject to an adverse decision of the Director may
appeal that decision to the Board of Zoning Appeals. The notice of appeal shall
be in writing and shall be filed with the Board of Zoning Appeals within ten
(10) days of the decision of the Director. The Board shall approve, modify or
annul the finding from which the appeal is taken.
   (c)   The following conditions for declassification must be met:
      (1)   Level-one (1) threat dogs have been classified for two (2) years
without further incident, level-two (2) threat dogs for five (5) years without
incident; and
      (2)   There have been no violations of the specified regulations; and
      (3)   Any other condition ordered by the Animal Control Officer, Director
of Public Health and/or Chief of Police at the time of classification have been
met; and
      (4)   The owner, keeper or harborer provides the Animal Control Officer,
Director of Public Health and/or Chief of Police with written certification of
satisfactory completion of obedience training for the dog classified, with the
owner, keeper or harborer; and
      (5)   The dog owner, keeper or harborer shall provide written
verification that the classified dog has been spayed or neutered.
   (d)   When the owner, keeper or harborer of a dog meets all of the
conditions in this division, the restrictions for dogs classified as a level-
one (1) threat to public safety shall be removed; restrictions on dogs
classified as a level-two (2) threat to public safety may be removed, with the
exception of the secure enclosure and insurance requirement.
   (e)   A declassification fee in an amount to be set by Council will be
assessed when the classification period begins.
(Ord. No. 1572-14. Passed 12-8-14, eff. 12-10-14)
§ 604.07 Severability
   The provisions of Sections
604.01 to
604.06 are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, or provision is
declared to be invalid or is preempted by federal or state law or regulation,
the validity of the remaining provisions of this chapter shall not be affected
thereby. If any provision of these Sections are declared inapplicable in any
specific way, the remaining provisions shall nonetheless continue to apply and
be in full force and effect.
(Ord. No. 712-11. Passed 6-6-11, eff. 6-13-11)
§ 604.99 Penalties
   (a)   If a violation of division (a), (b) or (c) of Section
604.03 involved a level-one (1) threat, whoever violates that Section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the second degree on a first offense and of a misdemeanor
of the first degree on each subsequent offense and shall be fined one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) which fine shall be mandatory, and shall not be suspended
or remitted. Additionally, the Court may order the offender: (i) to personally
supervise the level-one (1) threat that he or she owns, keeps or harbors, (ii)
to cause that dog to complete dog obedience training, (iii) to attend a class
on responsible pet ownership and dog behavior, or (iv) to do all three (3). The
Court, in the alternative, may order the level- one (1) threat dog to be
humanely destroyed by a licensed veterinarian, the Chief Animal Control
Officer, the County Dog Warden, or the County Humane Society. For repeat
offenders of animal control laws under Sections
603.01,
603.02 and
603.04, the Court may require the owner to attend a class on responsible pet
ownership and dog behavior.
   (b)   If a violation of division (a), (b), or (c) of Section
604.03 involved a level-two (2) threat dog, whoever violates that section may
be found guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree on a first offense. When
any person is found guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree such person
shall be fined one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) which fine shall be mandatory,
and shall not be suspended or remitted. The Court may order the dog to be
spayed or neutered at the owner's, keeper's or harborer's expense.
Additionally, the Court may order the level-two (2) threat dog to be humanely
destroyed by a licensed veterinarian, Chief Animal Control Officer, the County
Dog Warden, or the County Humane Society.
   (c)   Any owner who does not obtain the liability insurance coverage
required under divisions (a) or (b) of Section
604.04 shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (d)   Any owner that is found to be in violation of division (d) of Section
604.03 shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (e)   Any owner who is found guilty of violating divisions (c) or (d) of
Section
604.04 shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be
fined one hundred dollars ($100.00) on each later offense which fine shall be
mandatory and shall not be suspended or remitted.
   (f)   Any owner found guilty of violating this chapter shall pay all
expenses, including shelter, food, veterinary expenses for identification or
certification of the breed of the animal or boarding and veterinary expenses
necessitated by the seizure of the level-one (1) or level two (2) dog for the
protection of the public, and other expenses as may be required for the
euthanization, transfer, sale or adoption of any such dog.
   (g)   An amount equal to the amount of fines and penalties imposed under
this section shall annually be contributed to and used for the benefit of the
Division of Animal Care and Control.
   (h)   This Section shall not apply whenever the conduct proscribed in this
chapter constitutes a felony under RC 955.99.
(Ord. No. 1572-14. Passed 12-8-14, eff. 12-10-14)
CHAPTER 605 – DISORDERLY CONDUCT AND ACTIVITY
605.01   Riot
605.011   Inciting to Riot
605.02   Failure to Disperse
605.03   Disorderly Conduct; Intoxication
605.031   Aggressive Solicitation – Repealed
605.04   Disturbing a Lawful Meeting
605.05   Misconduct at an Emergency
605.06   Inducing Panic
605.07   Making False Alarms
605.071   Improper Use of 9-1-1 Telephone System
605.08   Criminal Activity on School Property
605.09   Unlawful Congregation
605.10   Unnecessary Noise
605.11   Misconduct Involving a Public Transportation System
605.12   Mufflers on Engines
605.13   Public Intoxication
605.14   Minor’s Curfew
605.141   Children of Compulsory School Age to be in Attendance at School;
Parental Duty Imposed
605.142   Children Suspended or Expelled from School to Remain Under
Supervision; Parental Duties Imposed
605.143   Parental Education Neglect
605.15   Employment of Strikebreakers
605.16   Prohibited Use of Mounted Police in Labor Dispute
605.17   Prohibiting Use of Police Dogs in Labor Disputes
605.18   Harassment of Election Officials
605.19   Loitering or Congregating Near Polling Places Prohibited
Cross-reference:
   Amusement park noise, CO
687.05
   Criminal trespass, CO
623.04
   Disorderly behavior prohibited in parks, CO
559.45
   Disorderly conduct at airports, CO
571.18
   Disorderly conduct in dance halls, CO
690.09
   Loitering near taxicabs, CO
443.30
   Muffler noise, CO
437.20
   Pictures inciting race violence, CO
667.02
   Public dances causing excessive noise, CO
690.12
   Regulations for behavior at markets, CO
553.08
   Unfair labor practice defined, CO
661.01
Statutory reference:
   See sectional histories for similar State law
   Cordoning off riot areas, prohibiting sales of firearms and explosives, RC
3761.16
   Emergency suspension of permits and sales by Director of Liquor Control, RC
4301.251
   Use of force to suppress riot, RC 2917.05
§ 605.01 Riot
   (a)   No person shall participate with four (4) or more others in a course
of disorderly conduct in violation of Section
605.03, including but not limited to at a community event, place of business,
or any City of Cleveland property, facility, or recreation area:
      (1)   With purpose to commit or facilitate the commission of a
misdemeanor, other than disorderly conduct;
      (2)   With purpose to intimidate a public official or employee into
taking or refraining from official action, or with purpose to hinder, impede or
obstruct a function of government; or
      (3)   With purpose to hinder, impede or obstruct the orderly process of
administration or instruction at an educational institution, or to interfere
with or disrupt lawful activities carried on at such institution.
   (b)   No person shall participate with four (4) or more others with purpose
to do an act with unlawful force or violence, even though such act might
otherwise be lawful.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of riot, a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(RC 2917.03; Ord. No. 1392-11. Passed 12-5-11, eff. 12-9-11 without the
signature of the Mayor)
§ 605.011 Inciting to Riot
   (a)   No person shall knowingly engage in conduct designed to incite another
to commit the offense described in Section
605.01, Riot, when the following apply:
      (1)   The conduct takes place under circumstances that create a clear and
present danger that the offense of riot will be committed;
      (2)    The conduct proximately results in the commission of the offense
of riot.
   (b)   This section may apply by means, including but not limited, use of
criminal tools as defined in Section
625.08.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of inciting to riot, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(Ord. No. 1394-11. Passed 12-5-11, eff. 12-9-11 without the signature of the
Mayor)
§ 605.02 Failure to Disperse
   (a)   Where five (5) or more persons are participating in a course of
disorderly conduct in violation of Section
605.03, and there are other persons in the vicinity whose presence creates the
likelihood of physical harm to persons or property or of serious public
inconvenience, annoyance or alarm, a law enforcement officer or other public
official may order the participants and such other persons to disperse. No
person shall knowingly fail to obey such order.
   (b)   Nothing in this section requires persons to disperse who are peaceably
assembled for a lawful purpose.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to disperse, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(RC 2917.04; Ord. No. 1631-05. Passed 3-20-06, eff. 3-24-06)
§ 605.03 Disorderly Conduct; Intoxication
   (a)   No person shall recklessly cause inconvenience, annoyance or alarm to
another, by doing any of the following:
      (1)   Engaging in fighting, in threatening harm to persons or property,
or in violent or turbulent behavior;
      (2)   Making unreasonable noise or offensively coarse utterance, gesture
or display, or communicating unwarranted and grossly abusive language to any
person, which by its very utterance or usage inflicts injury or tends to incite
an immediate breach of the peace;
      (3)   Insulting, taunting, or challenging another under circumstances in
which such conduct is likely to provoke a violent response;
      (4)   Hindering or preventing the movement of persons on a public street,
road, highway or right-of- way, or to, from, within or upon public or private
property, so as to interfere with the rights of others, and by any act which
serves no lawful and reasonable purpose of the offender;
      (5)   Creating a condition which is physically offensive to persons or
which presents a risk of physical harm to persons or property, by any act which
serves no lawful and reasonable purpose of the offender.
   (b)   No person, while voluntarily intoxicated shall do either of the
following:
      (1)   In a public place or in the presence of two (2) or more persons,
engage in conduct likely to be offensive or to cause inconvenience, annoyance
or alarm to persons of ordinary sensibilities, which conduct the offender, if
he or she were not intoxicated, should know is likely to have such effect on
others;
      (2)   Engage in conduct or create a condition which presents a risk of
physical harm to himself or herself or another, or to the property of another.
   (c)   Violation of any statute or ordinance of which an element is operating
a motor vehicle, locomotive, watercraft, aircraft, or other vehicle while under
the influence of alcohol or any drug of abuse, is not a violation of division
(b) hereof.
   (d)   When to an ordinary observer a person appears to be intoxicated, it is
probable cause to believe such person is voluntarily intoxicated for purposes
of division (b) of this section.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disorderly conduct, a minor
misdemeanor. If the offender persists in disorderly conduct after reasonable
warning or request to desist, disorderly conduct is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(RC 2917.11; Ord. No. 1631-05. Passed 3-20-06, eff. 3-24-06)
§ 605.031 Aggressive Solicitation – Repealed
(Ord. No. 593-17. Passed 6-5-17, eff. 6-7-17)
§ 605.04 Disturbing a Lawful Meeting
   (a)   No person, with purpose to prevent or disrupt a lawful meeting,
procession or gathering, shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Do any act which obstructs or interferes with the due conduct of
such meeting, procession or gathering;
      (2)   Make any utterance, gesture or display which outrages the
sensibilities of the group.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disturbing a lawful
meeting, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(RC 2917.12; Ord. No. 54-74. Passed 3-25-74, eff. 4-1-74)
§ 605.05 Misconduct at an Emergency
   (a)   No person shall knowingly:
      (1)   Hamper the lawful operations of any law enforcement officer,
firefighter, rescuer, medical person, emergency medical services person, or
other authorized person, engaged in the person’s duties at the scene of a fire,
accident, disaster, riot or emergency of any kind;
      (2)   Hamper the lawful activities of any emergency facility person who
is engaged in the person’s duties in an emergency facility.
      (3)   Fail to obey the lawful order of any law enforcement officer
engaged in the law enforcement officer’s duties at the scene of or in
connection with a fire, accident, disaster, riot or emergency of any kind.
   (b)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit access or deny
information to any news media representative in the lawful exercise of his or
her duties.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of misconduct at an emergency.
Except as otherwise provided in this section, misconduct at an emergency is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If violation of this section creates a risk
of physical harm to persons or property, misconduct at an emergency is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (d)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Emergency medical services person” is the singular of “emergency
medical services personnel” as defined in RC 2133.21.
      (2)   “Emergency facility person” is the singular of “emergency facility
personnel” as defined in RC 2909.04.
      (3)   “Emergency facility” has the same meaning as in RC 2909.04.
(RC 2917.13; Ord. No. 1631-05. Passed 3-20-06, eff. 3-24-06)
§ 605.06 Inducing Panic
   (a)   No person shall cause the evacuation of any public place, or otherwise
cause serious public inconvenience or alarm, by doing any of the following:
      (1)   Initiating or circulating a report or warning of an alleged or
impending fire, explosion, crime or other catastrophe, knowing that such report
or warning is false;
      (2)   Threatening to commit any offense of violence;
      (3)   Committing any offense, with reckless disregard of the likelihood
that its commission will cause serious public inconvenience or alarm.
   (b)   This section does not apply if:
      (1)   Physical harm is caused to any person; or
      (2)   The offense results in economic harm of five hundred dollars
($500.00) or more; or
      (3)   The public place involved is a school; or
      (4)   The violation pertains to a purported, threatened, or actual use of
a weapon of mass destruction.
   (c)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to any person conducting
an authorized fire or emergency drill.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of inducing panic, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(RC 2917.31; Ord. No. 1631-05. Passed 3-20-06, eff. 3-24-06)
§ 605.07 Making False Alarms
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Initiate or circulate a report or warning of an alleged or
impending fire, explosion, crime or other catastrophe, knowing that the report
or warning is false and likely to cause public inconvenience or alarm;
      (2)   Knowingly cause a false alarm of fire or other emergency to be
transmitted to or within any organization, public or private, for dealing with
emergencies involving a risk of physical harm to persons or property;
      (3)   Report to any law enforcement agency an alleged offense or other
incident within its concern, knowing that such offense did not occur;
      (4)   Report a medical emergency, injury or condition knowing that none
exists.
   (b)   This section does not apply:
      (1)   To any person conducting an authorized fire or emergency drill; or
      (2)   If the violation results in economic harm of five hundred dollars
($500.00) or more; or
      (3)   If a violation of this section pertains to a purported, threatened
or actual use of a weapon of mass destruction.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making false alarms, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(RC 2917.32; Ord. No. 204-10. Passed 5-10-10, eff. 5-20-10)
§ 605.071 Improper Use of 9-1-1 Telephone System
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Initiate a call to 9-1-1 regarding an alleged or impending fire,
explosion, crime, or other emergency, knowing that such report is false, and
likely to cause inconvenience or alarm;
      (2)   Knowingly cause a false alarm of fire or other emergency to be
transmitted to or within any safety service in the City of Cleveland, for
dealing with emergencies involving a risk of physical harm to persons or
property;
      (3)   Report to 9-1-1 that an alleged offense or other incident within
the respective areas of concern for the safety divisions occurred, knowing that
such offense did not occur;
      (4)   Knowingly use the 9-1-1 system, knowing that no major critical or
life threatening emergency exists and knowing that such report is likely to
result in unnecessary consumption of safety services; or
   (b)   This section does not apply:
      (1)   To any person conducting an authorized fire or emergency drill; or
      (2)   If the violation results in economic harm of five hundred dollars
($500.00) or more; or
      (3)   If a violation of this section pertains to a purported, threatened
or actual use of a weapon of mass destruction.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of improper use of 9-1-
1 telephone system, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(Ord. No. 1631-05. Passed 3-20-06, eff. 3-24-06)
§ 605.08 Criminal Activity on School Property
   (a)   No person shall threaten, menace or use improper, indecent or obscene
language toward a teacher, instructor, professor, person in charge of a class
of students or employee of any school, college or university while in the
performance of his or her duties.
   (b)   No person shall disrupt, disturb or interfere with the teaching of any
class of students, or any other activity conducted in a school, college or
university building, or upon the campus or grounds thereof.
   (c)   No person shall assault, strike, threaten, menace, follow, pursue or
use profane, indecent or obscene language toward a student or other person in a
school, college or university building, or upon the campus or grounds thereof,
or upon the way to or from any school, college or university sponsored
activity.
   (d)   This section does not apply if the violation is an assault and the
victim of the offense is a school teacher or administration or a school bus
operator, and the offense occurs in a school, on school premises, in a school
building, on a school bus, or while the victims outside of school premises or a
school bus and is engaged in duties or official responsibilities associated
with the victim’s employment or position as a school teacher or administrator
or a school bus operator, including, but not limited to, driving, accompanying,
or chaperoning students at or on class or filed trips, athletic events, or
other school extracurricular activities or functions outside of school
premises.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal activity on school
property, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(Ord. No. 1631-05. Passed 3-20-06, eff. 3-24-06)
§ 605.09 Unlawful Congregation
   (a)   No person shall congregate with others on the sidewalk, street corner
or within the parks or public grounds, with intent to provoke a breach of the
peace, or whereby a breach of the peace may be occasioned by the serious
annoyance to pedestrians or by threatening, insulting or abusive conduct, and
refuse to move on when ordered by a police officer.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful congregation, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(Ord. No. 1015-91. Passed 7-24-91, eff. 7-31-91)
§ 605.10 Unnecessary Noise
   (a)   No person shall make, or cause, suffer, allow, or permit to be made
within the City any unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise, or
noises of such character, intensity or duration as to be detrimental to the
life and health of any individual, or unreasonably disturb the quiet, comfort,
or repose of neighboring inhabitants.
   (b)   Loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this section
shall include without limitation the following:
      (1)   The sounding of any horn, bell, or other signal or warning device
on any motor vehicle, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle, except as a danger or
warning signal;
      (2)   The keeping of any animal or bird which, by causing frequent or
long continued noise disturbs the comfort and repose of any person in the
vicinity, where such noise can be distinctly heard outside the property line of
the premises at which the animal or bird is kept;
      (3)   The use of any motorcycle, or vehicle so out of repair or so loaded
as to create loud or unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise;
      (4)   The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler,
except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of
danger, or the use of steam under pressure for cleaning purposes in any
establishment between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., when the windows of
such establishment are open;
      (5)   The unreasonable discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any
steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor vehicle or motor
boat engine;
      (6)   The use of any mechanical device operated by compressed air
(excluding a jackhammer operated on weekdays between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
7:00 p.m.) unless the noise created thereby is effectively muffled and reduced;
      (7)   The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with the
loading or unloading of any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales,
boxes, crates and containers;
      (8)   The making of any unnecessary noise by a person or by his or her
operation of any instrument, device, agency or vehicle, and/or the performance
of any construction or demolition activity or the operation of any mechanical,
electrical, pneumatically, hydraulically powered or battery operated apparatus
used in connection with any construction or demolition activity between the
hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. within five hundred (500) feet of places of
residence and one hundred fifty (150) feet of any portion of the grounds and
premises on which is located a hospital or other institution reserved for the
sick, aged or infirm, or within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any school,
courthouse, church or building in which religious services are held, during
school hours, hours of holding court or hours of public worship, respectively.
The area within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a hospital, school, courthouse
or church shall be a “zone of quiet” and the Director of Public Safety shall
place signs within such zones of quiet calling attention to the prohibition
against unnecessary noise;
      (9)   The making of any loud or unnecessary noise in violation of Chapter
683 of these Codified Ordinances;
      (10)   The discharge, ignition, or explosion of any fireworks, except
novelty or trick fireworks as defined in RC 3743.01, and except for licensed
exhibitors of fireworks authorized to conduct a fireworks exhibition pursuant
to RC 3743.50 through 3743.55.
   (c)   Emergency utility or other repair work, such as restoring electric
power lines or a water or sewer main, shall be exempted from this ordinance. If
there is a need to do any construction or demolition activity other than
emergency repairs the construction contractor in charge of the project shall
submit to the Director of Public Safety a request to perform construction work
outside of the time allowed under this ordinance. The Director of Public Safety
may grant an exemption to this ordinance if such an exemption is justified and
necessary.
   (d)   Whoever violates any of divisions (b)(1) through (b)(8) of this
section is guilty of making unnecessary noise, a minor misdemeanor, and shall
be fined pursuant to Section
601.99, which fine shall not be suspended, waived or otherwise reduced. Whoever
violates this section within twelve (12) hours of having been charged with the
minor misdemeanor of making unnecessary noise or of having been warned by a
police officer to desist from making unnecessary noise is guilty of making
unnecessary noise, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, and shall be fined
pursuant to Section
601.99 which fine shall not be suspended, waived, or otherwise reduced.
   (e)   Whoever violates divisions (b)(9) or (b)(10) of this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree and shall be fined pursuant to
Section
601.99 upon a first offense, which fine shall not be suspended, waived, or
otherwise reduced, and subject to up to thirty (30) days in jail.
Notwithstanding this division, the penalties contained in Section
683.99 shall apply to violations of division (b)(9) of this section.
   (f)   Whoever violates division (b)(9) or (b)(10) of this section, upon any
subsequent offense, or within thirty-six (36) hours of having been warned by a
police officer to desist from violating one (1) of these sections, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree and shall be fined pursuant to
Section
601.99, which fine shall not be suspended, waived, or otherwise reduced, and
subject to up to sixty (60) days in jail. Each day upon which a violation
occurs or continues shall be a separate and punishable offense.
   (g)   Whoever violates division (b)(10) of this section, during any of the
dates of Memorial Day through Labor Day, inclusive, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree and shall be fined pursuant to Section
601.99, which fine shall not be suspended, waived, or otherwise reduced, and
subject to up to sixty (60) days in jail. Each day upon which a violation
occurs or continues shall be a separate and punishable offense.
(Ord. No. 899-08. Passed 6-9-08, eff. 6-16-08)
§ 605.11 Misconduct Involving a Public Transportation System
   (a)   No person shall evade the payment of the known fares of a public
transportation system.
   (b)   No person shall alter any transfer, pass, ticket, or token of a public
transportation system with the purpose of evading the payment of fares or of
defrauding the system.
   (c)   No person shall do any of the following while in any facility or on
any vehicle of a public transportation system:
      (1)   Play sound equipment without the proper use of a private earphone;
      (2)   Smoke, eat, or drink in any area where the activity is clearly
marked as being prohibited; and
      (3)   Expectorate upon a person, facility or vehicle.
   (d)   No person shall fail to comply with a lawful order of a public
transportation system police officer, and no person shall resist, obstruct, or
abuse a public transportation system police officer in the performance of the
officer's duties.
   (e)   No person, without privilege to do so, and while on a public
transportation system vehicle, shall negligently fail or refuse to leave such
vehicle upon being notified to do so by the operator, driver, or an authorized
agent of the public transportation system.
   (f)   No person shall throw a rock, stone, bottle, missile, projectile,
snowball or other hard substance at, within or from a public transportation
system vehicle.
   (g)   Whoever violates division (f) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the second degree. If violation of division (f) of this section
creates a risk of physical harm to any person, such violation is a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
   (h)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor on the first offense and a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on the
second and any subsequent offense.
   (i)   Whoever violates division (a), (b), (d), or (e) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(Ord. No. 167-13. Passed 4-15-13, eff. 4-19-13)
Statutory reference:
   Similar State law, see RC 2917.41
§ 605.12 Mufflers on Engines
   (a)   No person shall, as the owner, agent, employee, operator or person in
charge, use or operate any gas or gasoline engine within the City unless such
gas or gasoline engine is equipped with a muffler.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful engine operation,
a minor misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 1020-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
§ 605.13 Public Intoxication
   (a)   No person shall be in a state of public intoxication or, being
intoxicated, disturb the peace, good order and quiet of the City.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of public intoxication, a
minor misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 1020-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
§ 605.14 Minor’s Curfew
   (a)   No child twelve (12) years of age or under shall be upon the streets
or sidewalks or in a park or any other public place during the period from
darkness to dawn, nor shall any child between the ages of thirteen (13) and
fourteen (14), inclusive, be upon the streets or sidewalks or in any park or
other public place between 9:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. nor shall any child between
the ages of fifteen (15) and sixteen (16), inclusive, be upon the streets or
sidewalks or in any park or other public place between the hours of 11:00 p.m.
and 6:00 a.m., nor shall any child seventeen (17) years of age be upon the
streets or sidewalks between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m., unless the
child is accompanied by a parent or legal guardian, or a responsible adult
selected by the parent or legal guardian to supervise the child.
   (b)   Each parent or legal guardian of a child seventeen (17) years of age
or under shall have a duty to prohibit the child from behaving contrary to
division (a) of this section. No person shall negligently fail to fulfill the
duty imposed by this division.
   (c)   It shall be an affirmative defense to division (b) of this section
that the parent or legal guardian:
      (1)   Initiated the jurisdiction of the Juvenile Court against the child
prior to the time that the child was found violating division (a) of this
section;
      (2)   Can demonstrate based on the records of the employer, that it can
be reasonably presumed that the child was en route to home from work in the
evening or en route to work from home in the morning.
   (d)   Any child who violates division (a) of this section is an unruly child
and is subject to the jurisdiction of the Juvenile Court.
   (e)   Any person who violates division (b) of this section is guilty of
negligently failing to supervise a child, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree
for a first offense, will be required to undergo a root cause analysis, and
will be required to participate in family support programs as directed and
guided by the Court, and may be required to perform supervised community
service work pursuant to of RC 2951.02 in the ward in which the child was
arrested or detained, the value of such service work not to exceed Two Hundred
Fifty Dollars ($250.00). In addition to any other method of enforcement
provided for in these Codified Ordinances or by statute, this offense may be
enforced by the issuance of a citation in compliance with Rule 4.1 of the Ohio
Rules of Criminal Procedure. Any person who is convicted of a second or
subsequent offense for violating division (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   As used in this section:
      “Family Support programs” means a broad array of supports and services,
including formal supports (such as paid respite care) and informal supports
(such as parent-to-parent connections) and a community system of services that
promote the well being of families.
      “Root Cause Analysis” means the process of discovering the root causes of
juvenile delinquency that include: realizing the program; gathering data;
determining possible causal factors, identifying root causes and recommending
and implementing appropriate solutions.
(Ord. No. 860-2023. Passed 10-2-23, eff. 10-3-23)
§ 605.141 Children of Compulsory School Age to be in Attendance at School;
Parental Duty Imposed
   (a)   No child between the ages of six (6) and seventeen (17), inclusive,
other than a child that has been suspended or expelled from school, shall be at
any place within the City except in attendance at school between the hours of
10:00 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. during any school day, unless the child has written
proof from school authorities excusing him or her from attending school at that
particular time, or unless the child is accompanied by a parent or legal
guardian, or a responsible adult selected by the parent or legal guardian to
supervise the child.
   (b)   Each parent or legal guardian of a child between the ages of six (6)
and seventeen (17), inclusive, shall have a duty to prohibit the child from
behaving contrary to division (a) of this section. No person shall negligently
fail to fulfill the duty imposed by this division.
   (c)   It shall be an affirmative defense to divisions (a) and (b) of this
section that the child, at the time he or she was found at a place other than
in school, was not required by law to be in attendance at school.
   (d)   It shall be an affirmative defense to division (b) of this section
that the parent or legal guardian:
      (1)   Initiated the jurisdiction of the Juvenile Court against the child
prior to the time that the child was found violating division (a) of this
section; or
      (2)   Can demonstrate based upon the records of the Cleveland City School
District that the parent or legal guardian has been actively working with
officials of the Cleveland City School District regarding the behavior of the
child prior to the time that the child was found violating division (a) of this
section.
   (e)   A police officer or school attendance officer may transport any child
found violating division (a) of this section to the child’s residence and may
release the child into the care of a parent or legal guardian, to the school
the child usually attends, or to any location designated by the school
authorities as a receiving center for such children, the choice of destination
to be made at the discretion of the police officer or school attendance officer
based on proximity of the destination and other relevant factors, and subject
to the need to respond to emergency or priority calls.
   (f)   Any child who violates division (a) of this section is an unruly child
and is subject to the jurisdiction of the Juvenile Court.
   (g)   Any person who violates division (b) of this section is guilty of
negligently failing to supervise a child of compulsory school age, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree for a first offense. Any person who is
convicted of a second or subsequent offense for violating division (b) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(Ord. No. 864-05. Passed 7-13-05, eff. 7-20-05)
§ 605.142 Children Suspended or Expelled from School to Remain Under
Supervision; Parental Duties Imposed
   (a)   If a child is suspended or expelled from school, then each parent or
legal guardian of the child shall have the following duties for the duration of
the suspension or expulsion:
      (1)   The duty to personally supervise the child, or to arrange for a
responsible adult to supervise the child, at the times that the child would
have been required to be in attendance at school had he or she not been
suspended or expelled; and
      (2)   The duty to prohibit the child from being at any public place at
the times that the child would have been required to be in attendance at school
had he or she not been suspended or expelled, except in the following
circumstances:
         A.   When the child is accompanied by the parent or legal guardian, or
a responsible adult selected by the parent or legal guardian to supervise the
child; or
         B.   When the child is employed pursuant to an age and schooling
certificate issued by the school authorities, during the times that the child
is actually on the job or traveling directly to or from the job site; or
         C.   When the child is on an emergency errand; or
         D.   When the child has been directed by the parent or legal guardian
to engage in a specific activity or to carry out express instructions, during
the times that the child is actually engaged in fulfilling those directions or
instructions.
   No person shall negligently fail to fulfill the duties imposed by this
division.
   (b)   No child that has been suspended or expelled from school shall fail to
comply with supervision provided or arranged by a parent or legal guardian
pursuant to division (a)(1) of this section.
   (c)   No child that has been suspended or expelled from school shall be in
any public place at the times that he or she would have been required to be in
attendance at school had he or she not been suspended or expelled, except in
the circumstances described in divisions (a)(2)A, (a)(2)B, (a)(2)C or (a)(2)D.
   (d)   As used in this section, “public place” includes any street, sidewalk,
park, cemetery, school yard, body of water or watercourse, public conveyance,
or any other place for the sale of merchandise, public accommodation or
amusement.
   (e)   A police officer or school attendance officer may transport any child
found violating division (a) of this section to the child’s residence and may
release the child into the care of a parent or legal guardian, to the school
the child usually attends, or to any location designated by the school
authorities as a receiving center for such children, the choice of destination
to be made at the discretion of the police officer or school attendance officer
based on proximity of the destination and other relevant factors, and subject
to the need to respond to emergency or priority calls.
   (f)   Any child that violates divisions (b) or (c) of this section is an
unruly child and is subject to the jurisdiction of the Juvenile Court.
   (g)   Any person that negligently fails to fulfill the duty imposed by
division (a) of this section is guilty of negligently failing to supervise a
suspended or expelled child, a misdemeanor of the second degree for a first
offense. Any person who is convicted of a second or subsequent offense for
violating division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(Ord. No. 864-05. Passed 7-13-05, eff. 7-20-05)
§ 605.143 Parental Education Neglect
   No person required to attend parental education or training program pursuant
to a policy adopted under division (A) or (B) of RC 3313.663 shall fail to
attend the program. Whoever violates this section is guilty of parental
education neglect, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(Ord. No. 864-05, § 3. Passed 7-13-05, eff. 7-20-05)
§ 605.15 Employment of Strikebreakers
   (a)   No person, firm or corporation directly involved in a labor dispute
shall wilfully and knowingly employ, or contract or arrange for the recruitment
or procuring for employment, any person who customarily and repeatedly offers
himself or herself for employment for the duration of a strike or lockout in
place of employees involved in a strike or lockout.
   (b)   No person who customarily and repeatedly offers himself or herself for
employment in place of employees involved in a labor dispute shall accept or
offer to accept employment in place of an employee involved in a labor dispute.
   (c)   No person, firm or corporation, not directly involved in a labor
strike or lockout, shall recruit any person for employment, or secure or offer
to secure for any person any employment, when the purpose of such recruiting,
securing or offering to secure employment is to have such person take the place
in employment of employees in an industry where a labor strike or lockout
exists.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful strikebreaker
employment, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(Ord. No. 1020-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
§ 605.16 Prohibited Use of Mounted Police in Labor Dispute
   (a)   No City official or officer of the Department of Public Safety or the
Division of Police shall order or authorize the use of mounted police officers
for any law enforcement activity in connection with or related to a labor
dispute, nor shall any mounted police officer while on duty as a mounted police
officer use his or her mount for any law enforcement activity connected with or
related to a labor dispute.
   (b)   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be subject
to departmental disciplinary action.
(Ord. No. 1020-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
§ 605.17 Prohibiting Use of Police Dogs in Labor Disputes
   (a)   No official or officer of the Department of Public Safety or the
Division of Police shall order, authorize or direct nor shall any member of the
Division of Police use or employ a dog, owned, harbored or under the control of
the City of Cleveland, in connection with or related to a labor dispute.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section shall be subject to departmental
disciplinary action for violation of the laws of the City of Cleveland.
(Ord. No. 1048-89. Passed 4-24-89, eff. 5-4-89 without the signature of the
Mayor)
§ 605.18 Harassment of Election Officials
   (a)    As used in this section:
      (1)   "Election official" means any of the following: (i) Secretary of
State; (ii) employees of the Secretary of State serving the Division of
Elections in the capacity of attorney, administrative officer, administrative
assistant, elections administrator, office manager, or clerical supervisor;
(iii) director of a board of elections; (iv) deputy director of a board of
elections; (v) member of a board of elections; (vi) employees of a board of
elections; (vii) precinct election officials; (vii) employees appointed by the
boards of elections on a temporary or part-time basis. (RC 3501.01(U))
      (2)   "Family member" includes a spouse, children, parents, grandparents,
grandchildren, and any person living in the household.
      (3)   "Telecommunication" has the same meaning as in RC 2913.01 and
includes, but is not limited to, any email, voicemail, fax, text, instant
message, communication over or through any social media platform, and any other
form of digital, electronic or telephonic communication.
      (4)   "Telecommunications device" has the same meaning as in RC 2913.01.
      (5)   "Communication" means any other communication not defined under
division (3) including, but not limited to, any communication by U.S. mail,
private mail service, private delivery service, in-person conduct, or through
any other method intended to communicate with a precinct election official or
voting location manager.
   (b)   No person shall, directly or indirectly, knowingly make or cause to be
made a telecommunication, or knowingly permit a telecommunication to be made
from a telecommunication device under the person's control, to an election
official, or a family member of an election official, with the intent to
threaten, intimidate, menace, coerce, abuse, or harass the election official,
or a family member of the election official, regarding or in connection with
the election official's duties or responsibilities regarding any past, current,
or future general, primary, or special election.
   (c)   No person shall, directly or indirectly, knowingly engage in conduct
or any form of communication or knowingly encourage another to engage in such
conduct or communication with an election official, or a family member of an
election official, with the intent to threaten, intimidate, menace, coerce,
abuse, or harass the election official, or a family member of the election
official, regarding or in connection with that election official's duties or
responsibilities regarding any past, current, or future general, primary, or
special election.
   (d)    No person shall recklessly attempt to hinder or interfere with an
election official in the execution of the election official's duties.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of harassment of an election
official, a misdemeanor of the first degree. The court shall impose a mandatory
term of imprisonment of at least three (3) days, which term shall not be
suspended.
(Ord. No. 1192-2022. Passed 11-7-22, eff. 11-7-22)
§ 605.19 Loitering or Congregating Near Polling Places Prohibited
   (a)   During an election and the counting of the ballots, no person shall do
any of the following:
      (1)   Loiter, congregate, or engage in any kind of election campaigning
within the area between the polling place and the small flags of the United
States placed on the thoroughfares and walkways leading to the polling place,
and if the line of electors waiting to vote extends beyond those small flags,
within ten feet of any elector in that line;
      (2)   In any manner hinder or delay an elector in reaching or leaving the
place fixed for casting the elector's ballot;
      (3)   Give, tender, or exhibit any ballot or ticket to any person other
than the elector's own ballot to the precinct election officials within the
area between the polling place and the small flags of the United States placed
on the thoroughfares and walkways leading to the polling place, and if the line
of electors waiting to vote extends beyond those small flags, within ten (10)
feet of any elector in that line;
      (4)   Exhibit any ticket or ballot which the elector intends to cast;
      (5)   Solicit or in any manner attempt to influence any elector in
casting the elector's vote.
   (b)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (b)(2) and (b)(3) of
this section, no person who is not an election official, employee, observer, or
police officer shall be allowed to enter the polling place during the election,
except for the purpose of voting or assisting another person to vote as
provided in RC 3505.24.
      (2)   Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, a
journalist shall be allowed reasonable access to a polling place during an
election. As used in this division, "journalist" has the same meaning as in
division (B)(2) of RC 2923.129.
      (3)   Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, any
person may enter the polling place for the sole purpose of reviewing the
official registration list posted in accordance with RC 3503.23, provided that
the person does not engage in conduct that would constitute harassment in
violation of the election law, as defined in RC 3501.90.
   (c)   No more electors shall be allowed to approach the voting shelves at
any time than there are voting shelves provided.
   (d)   The precinct election officials and the police officer shall strictly
enforce the observance of this section. (RC 3501.35)
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of loitering or congregating
near polling places, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Whoever violates
division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), or (a)(5) or division (b) of this section
shall be given a mandatory term of imprisonment of at least three (3) days,
which term shall not be suspended.
(Ord. No. 1192-2022. Passed 11-7-22, eff. 11-7-22)
CHAPTER 607 – DRUG ABUSE CONTROL
607.01   Definitions
607.02   Gift of Marihuana
607.03   Drug Abuse: Controlled Substance Possession or Use
607.04   Possessing Drug Abuse Instruments
607.05   Permitting Drug Abuse
607.06   Deception to Obtain Dangerous Drugs – Repealed
607.07   Possessing or Using Harmful Intoxicants
607.071   Possessing or Using Toluene
607.08   Illegally Dispensing Drug Samples
607.09   Controlled Substance or Prescription Labels
607.091   Toluene Labels
607.10   Hypodermic Possession, Display and Dispensing
607.11   Sale of Harmful Intoxicants to Minors Prohibited
607.111   Sale of Toluene to Minors Prohibited
607.12   Distribution of Nitrous Oxide
607.13   Sale of Marihuana Paraphernalia to Juveniles
607.14   Counterfeit Controlled Substances
607.15   Illegal Distribution of Cigarettes and Other Tobacco Products
607.16   Definitions
607.17   Possession, Manufacture and Sale of Drug Paraphernalia
607.18   Penalty
607.19   Drug-Related Activities Prohibited
607.20   Soliciting Drug Sales
Cross-reference:
   Adulterating food with drug of abuse, CO
629.03
   Taking drug of abuse into hospital, CO
617.10
   Using weapons while under the influence, CO
627.04
Statutory reference:
   See sectional histories for similar State law
   Analysis report and notarized statement as evidence, RC 2925.51
   Criteria for granting probation, RC 3719.70
   Federal prosecution bar to local prosecution, RC 2925.50, 3719.19
§ 607.01 Definitions
   As used in this chapter, certain terms are defined as follows:
   (a)   “Administer” means the direct application of a drug, whether by
injection, inhalation, ingestion, or any other means to a person or an animal.
   (b)   “Controlled substance” means a drug, compound, mixture, preparation,
or substance included in Schedule I, II, III, IV, or V.
   (c)   “Dispense” means sell, leave with, give away, dispose of, or deliver.
   (d)   “Distribute” means to deal in, ship, transport, or deliver but does
not include administering or dispensing a drug.
   (e)   “Hypodermic” means a hypodermic syringe or needle, or other instrument
or device for the subcutaneous injection of medication.
   (f)   “Manufacturer” means a person who plants, cultivates, harvests,
processes, makes, prepares, or otherwise engages in any part of the production
of a controlled substance by propagation, compounding, conversion, or
processing, either directly or indirectly by extraction from substances of
natural origin, or independently by means of chemical synthesis, and includes
any packaging or repackaging of the substance or labeling or relabeling of its
container and other activities incident to production, except that this term
does not include a pharmacist who prepares, compounds, packages, or labels a
controlled substance as an incident to dispensing a controlled substance in
accordance with a prescription and in the usual course of professional
practice.
   (g)   “Marihuana” means all parts of any plant of the genus cannabis,
whether growing or not, the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of
the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or
preparation of the plant, its seeds or resin. It does not include the mature
stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oils or cake made from the
seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture,
or preparation of the mature stalks, except the resin extracted therefrom,
fiber, oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant that is incapable of
germination.
   (h)   “Noxious additive” means any element or compound designated by the
State Board of Pharmacy for use as a safe and effective ingredient in any
product containing the ingredient toluene, the gas, fumes, or vapor of which
when inhaled can induce intoxication, excitement, giddiness, irrational
behavior, depression, stupefaction, paralysis, unconsciousness, asphyxiation,
or other harmful physiological effects, that will discourage the intentional
smelling or inhaling of the fumes of such product. A noxious additive shall not
be added to such a product if such addition would make the product unsuitable
for its intended use or adversely affect the performance of the product. The
addition of a noxious additive to such a product is not required if the Board
determines that the normal chemical composition of the product creates a level
of noxiousness that is sufficient to discourage the intentional smelling or
inhaling of the product’s fumes.
   (i)   “Official written order” means an order written on a form provided for
that purpose by the Director of the United States Drug Enforcement
Administration, under any laws of the United States making provision therefor,
if such order forms are authorized and required by Federal law.
   (j)   “Pharmacist” means a person registered with the State Board of
Pharmacy as a compounder and dispenser of drugs.
   (k)   “Pharmacy” means any area, room, rooms, place of business, department,
or portion of any of the foregoing, where prescriptions are filled or where
drugs, dangerous drugs, or poisons are compounded, sold, offered, or displayed
for sale, dispensed, or distributed to the public.
   (l)   “Practitioner” means the following:
      (1)   A person who is licensed pursuant to RC Chapter 4715, 4731 or 4741
and authorized by law to write prescriptions for drugs or dangerous drugs;
      (2)   An advanced practice nurse authorized under RC 4723.56 to prescribe
drugs and therapeutic devices.
   (m)   “Prescription” means a written or oral order for a controlled
substance for the use of a particular person or a particular animal given by a
practitioner in the course of professional practice and in accordance with the
regulations promulgated by the Director of the United States Drug Enforcement
Administration, pursuant to the Federal drug abuse control law.
   (n)   “Sale” includes delivery, barter, exchange, transfer, or gift, or
offer thereof, and each such transaction made by any person whether, as
principal, proprietor, agent, servant, or employee.
   (o)   “Schedule I”, “Schedule II”, “Schedule III”, “Schedule IV” and
“Schedule V” mean controlled substance Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V
respectively, established pursuant to RC 3719.41, as amended pursuant to RC
3719.43 or 3719.44.
   (p)   “Wholesaler” means a person who, on official written orders other than
prescriptions, supplies controlled substances that he or she himself or herself
has not manufactured, produced, or prepared and includes “wholesale distributor
of dangerous drugs” as this term is defined in RC 4729.02.
(RC 3719.01)
   (q)   “Drug of abuse” means any controlled substance as defined in division
(b) of this section, any harmful intoxicant as defined in division (x) of this
section and any dangerous drug as defined in division (r) of this section.
(RC 3719.011)
   (r)   “Dangerous drug” means any of the following:
      (1)   Any drug which, under the “Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act”,
Federal narcotic law, RC 3715.01 to 3715.22 or RC Chapter 3719, may be
dispensed only upon a prescription;
      (2)   Any drug which contains a Schedule V controlled substance and which
is exempt from RC Chapter 3719 or to which such chapter does not apply;
      (3)   Any drug intended for administration by injection into the human
body other than through a natural orifice of the human body.
(RC 4729.02)
   (s)   “Bulk amount” of a controlled substance has the same meaning as in RC
2925.01, as that section may be amended.
   (t)   “Unit dose” means an amount or unit of a compound, mixture, or
preparation containing a controlled substance, such amount or unit being
separately identifiable and in such form as to indicate that it is the amount
or unit by which the controlled substance is separately administered to or
taken by an individual.
   (u)   “Cultivate” includes planting, watering, fertilizing, or tilling.
   (v)   “Drug abuse offense” means any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of Sections
607.02 to
607.08,
607.12 or
607.14 of this chapter or RC 2925.02, 2925.03, 2925.11, 2925.12, 2925.13,
2925.22, 2925.23, 2925.31, 2925.32, 2925.36, or 2925.37.
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former law of this or any other state
or of the United States that is substantially equivalent to any section listed
in division (v)(1) of this section.
      (3)   An offense under an existing or former law of this or any other
state, or of the United States, of which planting, cultivating, harvesting,
processing, making, manufacturing, producing, shipping, transporting,
delivering, acquiring, possessing, storing, distributing, dispensing, selling,
inducing another to use, administering to another, using, or otherwise dealing
with a controlled substance is an element.
      (4)   A conspiracy or attempt to commit, or complicity in committing or
attempting to commit, any offense under division (v)(1), (2), or (3) of this
section.
   (w)   “Felony drug abuse offense” means any drug abuse offense that would
constitute a felony under the laws of this State, except a violation of RC
2925.11.
   (x)   “Harmful intoxicant” does not include beer or intoxicating liquor, but
means any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance the gas, fumes, or vapor
of which when inhaled can induce intoxication, excitement, giddiness,
irrational behavior, depression, stupefaction, paralysis, unconsciousness,
asphyxiation, or other harmful physiological effects, and includes, but is not
limited to, any of the following:
      (1)   Any volatile organic solvent, plastic cement, model cement,
fingernail polish remover, lacquer thinner, cleaning fluid, gasoline, and any
other preparation containing a volatile organic solvent;
      (2)   Any aerosol propellant;
      (3)   Any fluorocarbon refrigerant;
      (4)   Any anesthetic gas.
   (y)   “Manufacture” means to plant, cultivate, harvest, process, make,
prepare, or otherwise engage in any part of the production of a drug, by
propagation, extraction, chemical synthesis, or compounding, or any combination
of the same, and includes packaging, repackaging, labeling, and other
activities incident to production.
   (z)   “Possess” or “possession” means having control over a thing or
substance but may not be inferred solely from mere access to the thing or
substance through ownership or occupation of the premises upon which the thing
or substance is found.
   (aa)   “Sample drug” means a drug or pharmaceutical preparation that would
be hazardous to health or safety if used without the supervision of a
practitioner, or a drug of abuse, and that, at one time, had been placed in a
container plainly marked as a sample by a manufacturer.
   (bb)   “Standard pharmaceutical reference manual” means the current edition,
with cumulative changes if any, of any of the following reference works:
      (1)   The National Formulary;
      (2)   The United States Pharmacopeia, prepared by authority of the United
States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc.;
      (3)   Other standard references that are approved by the State Board of
Pharmacy.
   (cc)   “Juvenile” means a person under eighteen (18) years of age.
(RC 2925.01; Ord. No. 834-03. Passed 6-10-03, eff. 6-12-03)
§ 607.02 Gift of Marihuana
   (a)   No person shall knowingly give or offer to make a gift of twenty (20)
grams or less of marihuana.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of trafficking in marihuana, a
minor misdemeanor. If, the offense was committed in the vicinity of a school or
in the vicinity of a juvenile, the violation is a misdemeanor of the third
degree. Persons convicted of violating this section shall not be fined, all
court costs shall be suspended, and no incarceration, probation, nor any other
punitive or rehabilitative measure shall be imposed, except when the offense
was committed in the vicinity of a school or in the vicinity of a juvenile.
(Ord. No. 902-2019. Passed 1-27-20, eff. 1-29-20)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see RC 2925.03
§ 607.03 Drug Abuse: Controlled Substance Possession or Use
   (a)   No person shall knowingly obtain, possess, or use a controlled
substance.
   (b)   This section does not apply to the following:
      (1)   Manufacturers, licensed health professionals authorized to
prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies, and other persons whose
conduct was in accordance with RC Chapters 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4731, and
4741;
      (2)   If the offense involves an anabolic steroid, any person who is
conducting or participating in a research project involving the use of an
anabolic steroid if the project has been approved by the United States food and
drug administration;
      (3)   Any person who sells, offers for sale, prescribes, dispenses, or
administers for livestock or other nonhuman species an anabolic steroid that is
expressly intended for administration through implants to livestock or other
nonhuman species and approved for that purpose under the “Federal Food, Drug,
and Cosmetic Act,” 52 Stat. 1040 (1938), 21 U.S.C. 301, as amended, and is
sold, offered for sale, prescribed, dispensed, or administered for that purpose
in accordance with that act;
      (4)   Any person who obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of drug abuse, and shall be
sentenced as follows:
      (1)   If the drug involved is a compound, mixture, preparation or
substance included in Schedule III, IV or V, and the amount of drug involved is
less than the bulk amount, drug abuse is a misdemeanor of the third degree, and
if the offender has previously been convicted of a drug abuse offense, drug
abuse is a misdemeanor of the second degree;
      (2)   If the drug involved is marihuana or a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance containing marihuana other than hashish, and the
amount is less than two hundred (200) grams, drug abuse is a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree, unless the amount of marihuana involved is less than one hundred
(100) grams, in which case drug abuse is a minor misdemeanor. Persons convicted
of violating this section shall not be fined, all court costs shall be
suspended, and no incarceration, probation, nor any other punitive or
rehabilitative measure shall be imposed;
      (3)   If the drug involved is an anabolic steroid included in Schedule
III, and the amount involved is less than the bulk amount, drug abuse is a
misdemeanor of the third degree and, in lieu of sentencing an offender to a
definite or indefinite term of imprisonment in a detention facility, the court
may place the offender on conditional probation pursuant to division (F) of RC
2951.02, unless the offender previously has been convicted of a drug abuse
offense, in which case drug abuse is a misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (d)   Arrest or conviction for a minor misdemeanor violation of this section
does not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the person so
arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries about the person’s criminal
record, including any inquiries contained in any application for employment,
license or other right or privilege, or made in connection with the person’s
appearance as a witness.
   (e)   Arrest or conviction for a minor misdemeanor violation of this section
does not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the person so
arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries about the person's criminal
record, including any inquiries contained in any application for employment,
license, or other right or privilege, or made in connection with a person's
appearance as a witness.
   (f)   Should the State of Ohio enact lesser penalties than that set forth
above, or entirely repeal penalties for the possession, use, or giving away of
marihuana, then this ordinance, or the relevant portions thereof, shall be null
and void.
(Ord. No. 902-2019. Passed 1-27-20, eff. 1-29-20)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see RC 2925.11
§ 607.04 Possessing Drug Abuse Instruments
   (a)   No person shall knowingly make, obtain, possess, or use any
instrument, article, or thing whose customary and primary purpose is for the
administration or use of a dangerous drug, other than marihuana, when the
instrument involved is a hypodermic or syringe, whether or not of crude or
extemporized manufacture or assembly, and the instrument, article, or thing
involved has been used by the offender to unlawfully administer or use a
dangerous drug, other than marihuana, or to prepare a dangerous drug, other
than marihuana, for unlawful administration or use.
   (b)   This section does not apply to manufacturers, practitioners,
pharmacists, owners of pharmacies, and other persons whose conduct was in
accordance with RC Chapters 3719, 4715, 4729, 4731 and 4741 or RC 4723.56.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possessing drug abuse
instruments, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the offender has previously
been convicted of a drug abuse offense, a violation of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(RC 2925.12; Ord. No. 90-96. Passed 3-18-96, eff. 3-26-96)
§ 607.05 Permitting Drug Abuse
   (a)   No person who is the owner, operator, or person in charge of a
locomotive, watercraft, aircraft, or other vehicle as defined in division (A)
of RC 4501.01, shall knowingly permit the vehicle to be used for the commission
of a felony drug abuse offense.
   (b)   No person who is the owner, lessee, or occupant, or who has custody,
control, or supervision, of premises or real estate, including vacant land,
shall knowingly permit premises or real estate, including vacant land, to be
used for the commission of a felony drug abuse offense by another person.
(RC 2925.13)
   (c)   No person, being the owner, lessee, occupant, or having custody,
control, or supervision of premises, or real estate, including vacant land,
shall recklessly permit the premises to be used for the commission of a drug
trafficking offense under any provision of this chapter or RC Chapter 2925 or
3719 after the receipt of written notice from a law enforcement officer that a
drug trafficking offense under any provision of this chapter or RC Chapter 2925
or 3719 has previously occurred on the premises, or real estate. In multiple
unit dwellings, including hotels or motels, the notice provided for in this
division shall state the names of the parties and the specific unit involved.
   The notice required by this division shall be delivered by certified mail,
restricted delivery and return receipt requested, or, if the certified mailing
fails to result in delivery of the notice, by personal service. The notice
required by this division shall identify the sender, identify the nature of the
drug activity occurring on the premises and bear the date of such notice.
   It shall be prima facie evidence that the owner or lessor did not recklessly
permit the premises to be used for the commission of a drug trafficking offense
on the premises if:
      (1)   The owner or lessor has begun the process of evicting the person or
persons committing the drug offense, including sending a notice of eviction; or
      (2)   The owner or lessor has identified for the police in writing and in
a timely manner after receipt of the notice required by this division of the
steps that the owner or lessor has commenced to prevent the commission of
additional drug trafficking offenses on the premises.
   This division (c) shall not apply to any owner or lessor who has filed an
action for forcible entry and detainer to remove a lessee or occupant from the
premises.
   (d)   Premises or real estate, including vacant land, used in violation of
division (b) or (c) of this section and where a felony violation of RC Chapter
2925 or 3719 occurs constitute a nuisance subject to abatement pursuant to RC
Chapter 3767.
   (e)   Vehicles used in violation of division (a) hereof shall be seized and
forfeited to the City, upon motion to the Common Pleas Court. Forfeiture shall
not apply to common carriers or innocent owners, nor shall they affect the
rights of a holder of a valid lien.
   (f)   Whoever violates divisions (a) or (b) of this section is guilty of
permitting drug abuse, a misdemeanor of the first degree, if the offender has
not previously been convicted of a drug abuse offense. Notwithstanding any
other section of this Code, at least thirty (30) days imprisonment is mandatory
upon conviction of an offense under this division.
   (g)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of recklessly
permitting drug abuse, a misdemeanor of the third degree. Notwithstanding any
other section of this Code, at least ten (10) days imprisonment is mandatory
upon conviction of a second offense under this division and at least thirty
(30) days imprisonment is mandatory upon conviction of a third or subsequent
offense under this division.
(Ord. No. 90-96. Passed 3-18-96, eff. 3-26-96)
§ 607.06 Deception to Obtain Dangerous Drugs – Repealed
(Ord. No. 834-03. Passed 6-10-03, eff. 6-12-03)
§ 607.07 Possessing or Using Harmful Intoxicants
   (a)   Except for lawful research, clinical, medical, dental or veterinary
purposes, no person, with purpose to induce intoxication or similar
physiological effects, shall obtain, possess or use a harmful intoxicant.
   (b)   Whoever has not previously been convicted of a drug abuse offense and
who violates this section is guilty of abusing harmful intoxicants, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (c)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for a
violation of this section, the court shall suspend for not less than six (6)
months or more than five (5) years the offender’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit. If the offender is a professionally licensed
person, in addition to any other sanction imposed for a violation of this
section, the court immediately shall comply with RC 2925.38.
(RC 2925.31; Ord. No. 834-03. Passed 6-10-03, eff. 6-12-03)
§ 607.071 Possessing or Using Toluene
   (a)   Except for lawful research, clinical, medical, dental, veterinary,
industrial or manufacturing purposes, no person, with intent to induce
intoxication or similar physiological effects, shall obtain, possess or use
toluene, also known as tuleol, methylbenzene, phenylmethane or methacide.
   (b)   Except for lawful research, clinical, medical, dental, veterinary,
industrial or manufacturing purposes, no person shall possess toluene, also
known as tuleol, methylbenzene, phenylmethane or methacide, in a portable
container unless the container is constructed of metal, has a tight closure,
and is fitted with a spout or so designed that the contents can be poured
without spilling.
   (c)   No person shall possess toluene in any container not clearly marked
with the name of the product.
   (d)   No person shall possess toluene in any container not the original
container unless the container is clearly labeled.
      (1)   Any product containing ten percent (10%) or more by weight of
toluene shall be labeled with the signal word “Danger”, the statement of hazard
“Harmful or fatal if swallowed”, and the statement “If swallowed, do not induce
vomiting. Call physician immediately.”
      (2)   Any product containing ten percent (10%) or more by weight of
toluene shall bear the statement of hazard “Vapor harmful” in addition to the
statements prescribed in subsection (d)(1) hereof.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of improperly possessing or
using toluene, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the offender has
previously been convicted of a drug abuse offense, improperly possessing or
using toluene is a misdemeanor of the first degree, for which at least three
(3) days’ imprisonment is mandatory.
(Ord. 2440-77. Passed 9-26-77, eff. 9-26-77)
§ 607.08 Illegally Dispensing Drug Samples
   (a)   No person shall knowingly furnish another a sample drug.
   (b)   Subsection (a) hereof does not apply to manufacturers, wholesalers,
pharmacists, owners of pharmacies, dentists, doctors of medicine and surgery,
doctors of osteopathic medicine and surgery, doctors of podiatry,
veterinarians, and other persons whose conduct is in accordance with RC
Chapters 3719, 4715, 4729, 4731 and 4741 or to optometrists whose conduct is in
accordance with a valid therapeutic pharmaceutical agents certificate issued
under RC Chapter 4725.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal dispensing of drug
samples if the drug involved is marihuana or a compound, mixture, preparation
or substance included in Schedule III, IV or V. For a first offense an offender
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree, and if the offender has
previously been convicted of a drug abuse offense, illegal dispensing of drug
samples is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(RC 2925.36; Ord. 90-96. Passed 3-18-96, eff. 3-26-96)
§ 607.09 Controlled Substance or Prescription Labels
   (a)   No person shall alter, deface or remove any label affixed by a
manufacturer, wholesaler, pharmacist or practitioner who dispenses a controlled
substance in a package or container, as long as any of the original contents
remain, except when lawfully filling a prescription.
(RC 3719.08)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree, if the offender has not previously been convicted of a violation of
this section, RC 3719.07 or 3719.08 or a drug abuse offense.
(RC 3719.99(C); Ord. No. 1692-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 607.091 Toluene Labels
   (a)   No person shall alter, deface or remove any label affixed by a
manufacturer, wholesaler, pharmacist or practitioner who dispenses toluene,
also known as tuleol, phenylmethane, methylbenzene or methacide, in a package
or container, as long as any of the original contents remain.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree, if the offender has not previously been convicted of a violation of
this section, RC 3719.07 or 3719.08, or a drug abuse offense.
(Ord. No. 2440-77. Passed 9-26-77, eff. 9-26-77)
§ 607.10 Hypodermic Possession, Display and Dispensing
   (a)   Possession of a hypodermic is authorized for:
      (1)   Any manufacturer or distributor of, or dealer in, hypodermics or
medication packaged in hypodermics, and any authorized agent or employee of
such manufacturer, distributor or dealer, in the regular course of business;
      (2)   Any terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, in the regular course
of business;
      (3)   Any person authorized to administer injections, in the regular
course of the person’s profession or employment;
      (4)   Any person, when the hypodermic in his or her possession was
lawfully obtained and is kept and used for the purpose of self-administration
of insulin or other drug prescribed by a licensed health professional
authorized to prescribe drugs for the treatment of disease;
      (5)   Any person whose use of a hypodermic is for legal research,
clinical, educational or medicinal purposes;
      (6)   Any farmer, for the lawful administration of a drug to an animal;
      (7)   Any person whose use of a hypodermic is for lawful professional,
mechanical, trade or craft purposes.
   (b)   No manufacturer or distributor of, or dealer in, hypodermics or
medication packaged in hypodermics, or their authorized agents or employees,
and no terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall display any hypodermic for
sale. No person authorized to possess a hypodermic pursuant to division (a)
hereof shall negligently fail to take reasonable precautions to prevent any
hypodermic in his or her possession from theft or acquisition by any
unauthorized person.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree. If the offender has previously been convicted of a violation of this
section, RC 3719.05, 3719.06, 3719.13, 3719.172(B), or 3719.31 or a drug abuse
offense, a violation is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(RC 3719.99(D); Ord. No. 834-03. Passed 6-10-03, eff. 6-12-03)
§ 607.11 Sale of Harmful Intoxicants to Minors Prohibited
   (a)   No person shall sell, barter or give away any harmful intoxicant, to a
person under the age of eighteen (18) years or to a mentally or physically
handicapped person under the age of twenty-one (21) years, unless such minor is
accompanied by his or her parent, other adult member of such minor’s family,
legal guardian or person in loco parentis.
   (b)   It is an affirmative defense under this section if the actor was
actively misled or deceived by the presentation of written or printed
information, presented by the minor, relating to the age and identity of such
minor.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(Ord. No. 1692-76. Passed 6-29-76, eff. 7-6-76)
§ 607.111 Sale of Toluene to Minors Prohibited
   (a)   No person shall knowingly sell, barter or give away any toluene, also
known as tuleol, methylbenzene, phenylmethane or methacide, to any person under
the age of eighteen (18) years or to a mentally or physically handicapped
person under the age of twenty-one (21) years unless such minor is accompanied
by his or her parent, other adult member of such minor’s family, legal guardian
or person in loco parentis.
   (b)   It is an affirmative defense under this section if the actor was
actively misled or deceived by the presentation of written or printed
information, presented by the minor, relating to the age and identity of such
minor.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree. At least three (3) days’ imprisonment is mandatory under this section.
   (d)   This section shall not apply to toluene containing a noxious additive
designated by the state board of pharmacy pursuant to RC 2925.32.
(Ord. No. 2440-77. Passed 9-26-77, eff. 9-26-77)
§ 607.12 Distribution of Nitrous Oxide
   (a)   No person who dispenses or distributes nitrous oxide in cartridges
shall fail to comply with either of the following:
      (1)   The record-keeping requirements established under division (F) of
RC 2925.32;
      (2)   The labeling and transaction identification requirements
established under division (G) of RC 2925.32.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of improperly dispensing or
distributing nitrous oxide, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(RC 2925.32; Ord No. 834-03. Passed 6-10-03, eff. 6-12-03)
§ 607.13 Sale of Marihuana Paraphernalia to Juveniles
   (a)   As used in this section, “paraphernalia for the use of marihuana”
means any instrument, device, article or thing, whether or not of crude or
extemporized manufacture or assembly, that is used or intended for use for any
of the following:
      (1)   Preparing marihuana for ingestion, inhalation or other introduction
into the human body;
      (2)   Ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing marihuana into the
human body;
      (3)   Enhancing the effect of marihuana upon the human body;
      (4)   Testing the strength, effectiveness or purity of marihuana.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly sell or offer to sell paraphernalia for the
use of marihuana to any juvenile.
   (c)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under this section:
      (1)   The defendant is the parent, guardian or custodian of the juvenile
involved;
      (2)   The juvenile involved, at the time the paraphernalia for the use of
marihuana was sold or offered for sale to him or her, was accompanied by his or
her parent, guardian or custodian who, with knowledge that the paraphernalia
sold or offered for sale would be used or was intended for use for a purpose
set forth in division (a)(1), (2), (3), or (4) of this section, consented to
the paraphernalia for the use of marihuana being sold or offered for sale to
the juvenile;
      (3)   The juvenile involved exhibited to the defendant or his or her
agent or employee a draft card, driver’s license, birth certificate or other
official or apparently official document purporting to show that the juvenile
was eighteen (18) years of age or older, and the person to whom the document
was exhibited did not otherwise have reasonable cause to believe that the
juvenile was under eighteen (18) years of age.
   (d)   This section does not apply to manufacturers, practitioners,
pharmacists, owners of pharmacies and other persons whose conduct is in
accordance with RC Chapters 3719, 4715, 4729, 4731 or 4741.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of selling paraphernalia for
the use of marihuana to juveniles, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(Ord. No. 1414-86. Passed 11-3-86, eff. 11-5-86)
§ 607.14 Counterfeit Controlled Substances
   (a)   No person shall knowingly possess any counterfeit controlled
substance.
   (b)   As used in this section, “counterfeit controlled substance” means:
      (1)   Any drug that bears, or whose container or label bears, a
trademark, trade name or other identifying mark used without authorization of
the owner of rights to such trademark, trade name or identifying mark; or
      (2)   Any unmarked or unlabeled substance that is represented to be a
controlled substance manufactured, processed, packed or distributed by a person
other than the person that manufactured, processed, packed or distributed it;
or
      (3)   Any substance that is represented to be a controlled substance but
is not a controlled substance or is a different controlled substance; or
      (4)   Any substance other than a controlled substance that a reasonable
person would believe to be a controlled substance because of its similarity in
shape, size and color, or its markings, labeling, packaging, distribution or
the price for which it is sold or offered for sale.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possession of counterfeit
controlled substances, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (d)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to a practitioner,
pharmacist, pharmacy owner or other person whose conduct is in accordance with
RC Chapters 3715, 3719, 4715, 4729, 4731 and 4741. The provisions of this
section also shall not apply to a person who has been previously convicted of
violation of RC 2925.37.
(RC 2925.37; Ord. No. 1414-86. Passed 11-3-86, eff. 11-5-86)
§ 607.15 Illegal Distribution of Cigarettes and Other Tobacco Products
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Distribute” has the same meaning as defined in RC 2927.02.
      (2)   “Electronic smoking device” has the same meaning as defined in RC
2927.02.
      (3)   “Tobacco product” has the same meaning as defined in RC 2927.02 and
includes vapor products as also defined in that section.
      (4)   “Vending machine” has the same meaning as “coin machine” in RC
2913.01.
   (b)   No manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler or retailer of
cigarettes or other tobacco products and no agent, employee or representative
of a manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler or retailer of cigarettes
or other tobacco products, and no other person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Sell or distribute cigarettes or other tobacco products: (A) to any
person under the age of twenty-one (21); or (B) without first verifying proof
of age;
      (2)   Sell or distribute cigarettes or other tobacco products to any
individual who does not demonstrate, through a driver’s license or other
photographic identification card issued by a government entity or educational
institution that the individual is at least twenty-one (21) years of age;
      (3)   Sell or distribute cigarettes or other tobacco products in any
business that does not have posted in a conspicuous place a sign, in accordance
with RC 2927.02 and any rules of the Department of Public Health stating that
giving, selling or otherwise distributing cigarettes or other tobacco products
to a person under twenty-one (21) years of age is prohibited by law;
      (4)   Knowingly furnish any false information regarding the name, age, or
other identification of any person under twenty-one (21) years of age with
purpose to obtain cigarettes or other tobacco products for that person under
the age of twenty-one (21);
      (5)   Manufacture, sell, or distribute in this City any pack or other
container of cigarettes containing fewer than twenty (20) cigarettes or any
package of roll-your-own tobacco containing less than six-tenths (0.6) of one
(1) ounce of tobacco;
      (6)   Sell or distribute cigarettes or other tobacco products in a
smaller quantity than that placed in the pack or other container by the
manufacturer;
      (7)   Sell or distribute other tobacco products in a smaller quantity
than was intended for retail when the product was packaged by the manufacturer;
      (8)   Sell or distribute tobacco products other than cigarettes over the
internet or through remote method without age verification;
      (9)   Allow an employee under eighteen (18) years of age to sell any
tobacco product; or
      (10)   Give away or otherwise distribute free samples of cigarettes or
other tobacco products or coupons redeemable for cigarettes or other tobacco
products: (A) to any person under twenty-one (21) years of age; (B) without
first verifying proof of age; (C) in a manner prohibited under, or in
accordance with RC Chapter 1333 or 1345; or (D) without first paying the taxes
levied on such cigarettes or other tobacco products under, or in accordance
with RC Chapter 5743.
   (c)   No person shall sell or offer to sell cigarettes or other tobacco
products by or from a vending machine except in the following locations:
      (1)   An area either:
         A.   Within a factory, business, office, or other place not open to
the general public; or
         B.   To which persons under the age of twenty-one (21) years are not
generally permitted access;
      (2)   In any other place not identified in division (c)(1) of this
section, upon all of the following conditions:
         A.   The vending machine is located within the immediate vicinity,
plain view, and control of the person who owns or operates the place, or an
employee of such person, so that all cigarettes or other tobacco products sold
from the vending machine will be readily observed by the person who owns or
operates the place or an employee of such person. For the purpose of this
section, a vending machine located in any unmonitored area, including an
unmonitored coatroom, restroom, hallway, or outer waiting area, shall not be
considered located within the immediate vicinity, plain view, and control of
the person who owns or operates the place, or an employee of such person.
         B.   The vending machine is inaccessible to the public when the place
is closed.
         C.   A clearly visible notice is posted in the area where the vending
machine is located that states the following in letters that are legibly
printed and at least one-half inch high: “It is illegal for any person under
the age of 21 to purchase tobacco products or alternative nicotine products”.
   (d)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under division (b)
(1) of this section:
      (1)   The parent, guardian, or legal custodian of a person under the age
of twenty-one (21) has consented in writing to the person under the age of
twenty-one (21) participating in the research protocol, or a person over the
age of eighteen (18), but under the age of twenty-one (21), has consented in
writing, on his or her own behalf, to participate in the research protocol.
      (2)   The person who gave, sold, or distributed cigarettes or other
tobacco products to a person under twenty-one (21) years of age under division
(b)(1) of this section is a parent, spouse who is twenty-one (21) years of age
or older, or legal guardian of the child or young adult.
   (e)   (1)   It is not a violation of division (b)(1) or (b)(2) of this
section for a person to sell or distribute to a person under the age of twenty-
one (21) cigarettes or tobacco products while the person under the age of
twenty-one (21) is participating in a research protocol if all of the following
apply:
         A.   The parent, guardian, or legal custodian of the person under the
age of twenty-one (21) has consented in writing to the person under the age of
twenty-one (21) participating in the research protocol.
         B.   An institutional human subjects protection review board, or
equivalent entity, has approved the research protocol.
         C.    The person under the age of twenty-one (21) is participating in
the research protocol at the facility or location specified in the research
protocol.
      (2)   It is not a violation of division (b)(1) or (b)(2) of this section
for an employer to permit an employee eighteen (18), nineteen (19) or twenty
(20) years of age to sell a tobacco product.
   (f)   (1)   No delivery service shall accept from, transport or deliver to,
or allow pick-up by, a person under twenty-one (21) years of age any tobacco
products other than cigarettes.
      (2)   A delivery service shall require proof of age as a condition of
accepting, transporting, delivering, or allowing pickup of the tobacco products
other than cigarettes.
   (g)   (1)   Whoever violates division (b)(1), (b)(3), (b)(5), (b)(6), (b)
(8), (b)(9) or (b)(10) or divisions (c) or (f) is guilty of illegal
distribution of cigarettes or tobacco products. Except as otherwise provided in
this division, illegal distribution of cigarettes or other tobacco products is
a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If the offender has previously been
convicted of illegal distribution of cigarettes or other tobacco products, then
illegal distribution of cigarettes or other tobacco products is a misdemeanor
of the third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b)(4) of this section is guilty of
permitting a person under twenty-one (21) years of age to use cigarettes or
tobacco products. Except as otherwise provided in this division, permitting a
person under twenty-one (21) years of age to use cigarettes or tobacco products
is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If the offender previously has been
convicted of a violation of division (b)(4) of this section or division (B)(3)
of RC 2927.02, permitting a person under twenty-one (21) years of age to use
cigarettes or other tobacco products is a misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (h)   Any cigarettes or other tobacco products that are given, sold or
distributed to a person under twenty-one (21) years of age in violation of this
section and that are used, possessed, purchased, or received by a person under
twenty-one (21) years of age in violation of RC 2151.87 are subject to seizure
and forfeiture as contraband under RC Chapter 2981.
(Ord. No. 186-2025. Passed 4-14-25, eff. 4-16-25)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see RC 2927.02
§ 607.16 Definitions
   (a)   “Drug paraphernalia” means all equipment, products and materials of
any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use, in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging,
repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or
otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation
of this chapter. It includes, but is not limited to:
      (1)   Kits used, intended for use, or designated for use in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which
is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived;
      (2)   Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing controlled
substances;
      (3)   Isomerization devices used, intended for use, or designed for use
in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled
substance;
      (4)   Testing equipment used, intended for use, or designed for use in
identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled
substances;
      (5)   Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for use in
weighing or measuring controlled substances;
      (6)   Diluents and adulterants such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol,
mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use, or designed for use in
cutting controlled substances;
      (7)   Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use, or designed for
use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining,
marihuana;
      (8)   Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used,
intended for use, or designed for use in compounding controlled substances;
      (9)   Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended
for use, or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled
substances;
      (10)   Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed
for use in storing or concealing controlled substances;
      (11)   Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended for
use, or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances into
the human body;
      (12)   Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting,
inhaling or otherwise introducing marihuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil
into the human body, such as:
         A.   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes
with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or punctured metal
bowls;
         B.   Water pipes;
         C.   Carburetion tubes and devices;
         D.   Smoking and carburetion masks;
         E.   Roach clips: meaning objects used to hold burning material, such
as a marihuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in
the hand;
         F.   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
         G.   Chamber pipes;
         H.   Carburetor pipes;
         I.   Electric pipes;
         J.   Air driver pipes;
         K.   Chillums;
         L.   Bongs;
         M.   Ice pipes or chillers.
   (b)   In determining whether an object is “Drug paraphernalia”, a court or
other authority should consider, in addition to all other logically relevant
factors, the following:
      (1)   Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object
concerning its use;
      (2)   Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone in control of
the object, under any City, State or Federal law relating to any controlled
substance;
      (3)   The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct
violation of this chapter;
      (4)   The proximity of the object to controlled substances;
      (5)   The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the
object;
      (6)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of
anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he or she knows,
or should reasonably know, intend to use the object to facilitate a violation
of this chapter; the innocence of an owner or of anyone in control of the
object as to a direct violation of this chapter shall not prevent a finding
that the object is intended for use or designed for use as “Drug
paraphernalia”;
      (7)   Instruction, oral or written, provided with the object concerning
its use;
      (8)   Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or
depict its use;
      (9)   National and local advertising concerning its use;
      (10)   The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;
      (11)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the
object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise;
      (12)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the
community;
      (13)   Expert testimony concerning its use.
(Ord. No. 90-96. Passed 3-18-96, eff. 3-26-96)
§ 607.17 Possession, Manufacture and Sale of Drug Paraphernalia
   (a)   It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to
use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest,
manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack,
repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce
into the human body a controlled substance in violation of this chapter.
   (b)   It is unlawful for any person to deliver, sell, possess with intent to
deliver or sell, or manufacture with intent to deliver or sell, drug
paraphernalia, knowing that it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate,
grow, harvest, manufacture, compound convert, produce, process, prepare, test,
analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or
otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of
this chapter.
   (c)   It is unlawful for any person to place in any newspaper, magazine,
handbill or other publication any advertisement, knowing, or under
circumstances where one reasonably should know, that the purpose of the
advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects designed
or intended for use as drug paraphernalia.
   (d)   This section does not apply to manufacturers, practitioners,
pharmacists, owners of pharmacies and other persons whose conduct was in
accordance with RC Chapters 3719, 4715, 4729, 4731 and 4741. This section shall
not be construed to prohibit any possession, manufacture or use of hypodermics
made lawful by Section
607.10 of the General Offenses Code of the Codified Ordinances.
   (e)   Any drug paraphernalia used in violation of this section shall be
seized and forfeited to the Municipality.
   (f)   If any provision of this section or the application thereof to any
person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other
provisions or applications of the section which can be given effect without the
invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this
section are severable.
(Ord. No. 2797-88. Passed 5-8-89, eff. 5-9-89)
§ 607.18 Penalty
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of divisions (a), (b) or (c) of
Section
607.17 is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the offender has
previously been convicted of a violation of divisions (a), (b) or (c) of
Section
607.17, any subsequent violation of the same paragraph is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the drug paraphernalia involved is used by a person, intended
by a person for use, or designed for use in storing, containing, concealing or
injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body
marihuana or a compound, mixture, preparation or substance containing marihuana
other than hashish, a person convicted of violating division (a) of Section
607.17 is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall not be fined, all court costs
shall be suspended, and no incarceration, probation, nor any other punitive or
rehabilitative measure shall be imposed.
(Ord. No. 902-2019. Passed 1-27-20, eff. 1-29-20)
§ 607.19 Drug-Related Activities Prohibited
   (a)   Findings. This Council finds that persons selling illegal drugs engage
in behavior that is readily recognizable by citizens and law enforcement
officers as illegal drug activity that the offenders commonly attempt to
frustrate law enforcement efforts by carrying the illegal drugs in their
mouths, and swallowing or attempting to swallow the drugs if approached by a
law enforcement officer. This Council further finds that the drug-related
conduct prohibited by this section constitutes a nuisance, adversely affects
the quality of life in the neighborhoods of the City, and threatens the public
health, safety and welfare.
   (b)   Offense. No person shall engage in the following conduct in, on or
about any street, in or about any place open to the public, or in or about any
public or private place with the specific intent to engage in drug-related
activity contrary to any of the provisions of RC Chapters 2925 or 4729 or
Chapter
607 of these Codified Ordinances:
      (1)   To repeatedly stop, beckon to, attempt to stop, or engage passersby
in conversation; or
      (2)   To repeatedly stop, beckon to, or attempt to stop motor vehicles by
hailing, waving arms or making other bodily gestures; or
      (3)   To act as a look-out; or
      (4)   To transfer small objects or packages for currency or any other
thing of value in a furtive fashion which would lead an observer to believe or
ascertain that a drug sale has or is about to occur; or
      (5)   To carry small objects or packages in one’s mouth and to transfer
such objects or packages to another person for currency or any other thing of
value, or to swallow or attempt to swallow the objects or packages if
approached by a law enforcement officer.
   (c)   Prima Facie Case. A prima facie case may be established by a law
enforcement officer’s observations of the offender’s behavior. The seizure or
recovery of illegal drugs shall not be a prerequisite to establishing a prima
facie case.
   (d)   Rebuttable Presumption. A person shall be rebuttably presumed to have
the specific intent to engage in drug-related activity contrary to any of the
provisions of RC Chapters 2925 or 4729 or Chapter
607 of these Codified Ordinances if the person persists in one (1) or more of
the behaviors described in division (b) after a law enforcement officer gives
the person reasonable warning to desist, and the person:
      (1)   Is a known unlawful drug user, possessor or seller as defined in
division (e) of this section; or
      (2)   Displays the physical characteristics of drug intoxication or
usage, including dilated pupils, glassy eyes, slurred speech, loss of
coordination or motor skills, or needle tracks; or
      (3)   Is identified by a law enforcement officer as a member of a gang or
association which has as its principal purpose illegal drug activity.
   (e)   Definition. For purposes of this section, a “known unlawful drug user,
possessor or seller” means a person who, within the knowledge of the arresting
officer, either:
      (1)   Has been convicted in any court within this state, within five (5)
years prior to the date of arrest, of any violation involving the use,
possession or sale of any of the substances referred to in RC Chapters 2925 or
4729 or Chapter
607 of the Codified Ordinances of Cleveland, Ohio, 1976, or any substantially
similar laws of any political subdivision of the state; or
      (2)   Has been charged two (2) or more times, within one (1) year prior
to the date of arrest, for a violation involving the use, possession or sale of
any of the substances referred to in RC Chapters 2925 and 4729 or Chapter
607 of the Codified Ordinances of Cleveland, Ohio, 1976, or any substantially
similar laws of any political subdivision of the state.
   (f)   Severability. If any provision of this section or the application of
it to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not
affect the other provisions or applications of this section which can be given
effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the
provisions of this section are severable.
   (g)   Penalty. Whoever violates the provisions of this section is guilty of
engaging in prohibited drug- related activity, a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(Ord. No. 1163-95. Passed 6-19-95, eff. 6-28-95)
§ 607.20 Soliciting Drug Sales
   (a)   No person shall solicit another person to sell any controlled
substance.
   (b)   This section does not apply to manufacturers, practitioners,
pharmacists, owners of pharmacies, and other persons whose conduct is in
accordance with RC Chapters 3719, 4715, 4729, 4731, and 4741 or to any activity
prohibited by RC Chapter 2925.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of soliciting drug sales, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(Ord. No. 774-91. Passed 4-29-91, eff. 5-1-91)
CHAPTER 609 – FAMILY OFFENSES
609.01   Bigamy
609.02   Abortion Offenses
609.03   Nonsupport of Dependents
609.04   Endangering Children
609.05   Interference with Custody
609.06   Child Stealing – Repealed
609.07   Domestic Violence
609.08   Temporary Protection Order
609.09   Criminal Child Enticement
609.10   Contributing to Unruliness or Delinquency of a Child
Cross-reference:
   Abortions, CO
Ch. 231
   Corruption of minors, CO
619.03
   Experimentation on a fetus, CO
231.05
   Improperly furnishing firearms to a minor, CO
627.07
   Matter harmful to juveniles, CO
619.12,
619.13
   Minor’s curfew, CO
605.14
   Renting watercraft to persons under 16, CO
485.18
   Sale of harmful intoxicants to minors, CO
607.11
   Sale of intoxicants to minors, CO
617.02
Statutory reference:
   See sectional histories for similar State law
§ 609.01 Bigamy
   (a)   No married person shall marry another or continue to cohabit with such
other person in this State.
   (b)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that the
actor’s spouse was continuously absent for five (5) years immediately preceding
the purported subsequent marriage, and was not known by the actor to be alive
within that time.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of bigamy, a misdemeanor of
the first degree.
(RC 2919.01; Ord. No. 54-74. Passed 3-25-74, eff. 4-1-74)
§ 609.02 Abortion Offenses
   (a)   Abortion Defined. As used in this section “abortion” means the
purposeful termination of a human pregnancy by any person, including the
pregnant woman herself, with an intention other than to produce a live birth or
to remove a dead fetus or embryo. Abortion is the practice of medicine or
surgery for the purposes of RC 4731.41.
(RC 2919.11)
   (b)   Abortion Without Informed Consent Prohibited.
      (1)   No person shall perform or induce an abortion without the informed
consent of the pregnant woman.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly perform or induce an abortion upon a
woman who is pregnant, unmarried, under eighteen (18) years of age and
unemancipated except as authorized under RC 2919.12.
      (3)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful abortion, a
misdemeanor of the first degree unless the offender has previously been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (b) of this section
or RC 2919.12.
(RC 2919.12)
   (c)   Abortion Trafficking.
      (1)   No person shall experiment upon or sell the product of human
conception which is aborted. Experiment does not include autopsies pursuant to
RC 313.13 and 2108.50.
      (2)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of abortion trafficking, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(RC 2919.14; Ord. No. 1414-86. Passed 11-3-86, eff. 11-5-86)
§ 609.03 Nonsupport of Dependents
   (a)   No person shall abandon, or fail to provide adequate support to:
      (1)   His or her spouse, as required by law;
      (2)   His or her legitimate or illegitimate child who is under age
eighteen (18), or mentally or physically handicapped child who is under age
twenty- one (21);
      (3)   His or her aged or infirm parent or adoptive parent, who from lack
of ability and means is unable to provide adequately for his or her own
support;
      (4)   Any person whom, by law or by court order or decree, the offender
is legally obligated to support.
   (b)   No person shall aid, abet, induce, cause, encourage or contribute to a
child or a ward of the juvenile court becoming a dependent child, as defined in
RC 2151.04, or a neglected child, as defined in RC 2151.03.
   (c)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (a) of this
section of failure to provide adequate support that the accused was unable to
provide adequate support, but did provide such support as was within his or her
ability and means.
   (d)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (a)(3) of this
section that the parent abandoned the accused or failed to support the accused
as required by law, while the accused was under age eighteen (18), or was
mentally or physically handicapped and under age twenty-one (21).
   (e)   It is not a defense to a charge under division (a)(4) of this section
that the person whom a court has ordered the accused to support is being
adequately supported by someone other than the accused.
(RC 2919.21(F))
   (f)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of nonsupport
of dependents, a misdemeanor of the first degree unless the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (a)(2) of
this section or there has been a court finding that the offender has failed to
provide support under division (a)(2) or (a)(4) of this section for a total
accumulated period of twenty-six (26) weeks out of one hundred four (104)
consecutive weeks, whether or not the twenty-six weeks (26) were consecutive.
If the offender is guilty of nonsupport of dependents by reason of failing to
provide support to his or her child as required by a child support order issued
on or after April 15, 1985, pursuant to RC 2151.23, 3105.21, 3109.05, 3111.13,
3113.04, 3113.31 or 3115.22, the court, in addition to any other sentence
imposed, shall assess all court costs arising out of the charge against the
person and require the person to pay any reasonable attorney’s fees of any
adverse party other than the State, as determined by the court, that arose in
relation to the charge. Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty
of contributing to the nonsupport of dependents, a misdemeanor of the first
degree. Each day of violation of division (b) of this section is a separate
offense.
(RC 2919.21; Ord. No. 1631-05. Passed 3-20-06, eff. 3-24-06)
§ 609.04 Endangering Children
   (a)   No person, who is the parent, guardian, custodian, person having
custody or control, or person in loco parentis of a child under eighteen (18)
years of age or a mentally or physically handicapped child under twenty-one
(21) years of age, shall create a substantial risk to the health or safety of
the child, by violating a duty of care, protection or support. It is not a
violation of a duty of care, protection or support under this division when the
parent, guardian, custodian or person having custody or control of a child
treats the physical or mental illness or defect of the child by spiritual means
through prayer alone, in accordance with the tenets of a recognized religious
body.
   (b)   No person shall abuse a child under eighteen (18) years of age or a
mentally or physically handicapped child under twenty-one (21) years of age.
   (c)   No person shall operate a vehicle, streetcar, or trackless trolley
within this state in violation of division (a) of Section
433.01 of the Codified Ordinances or division (A) of RC 4511.19 when one (1) or
more children under eighteen (18) years of age are in the vehicle, streetcar,
or trackless trolley. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a person may
be convicted at the same trial or proceeding of a violation of this division
and a violation of division (a) of Section
433.01 of the Codified Ordinances or division (A) of RC 4511.19 that
constitutes the basis of the charge of the violation of this division. For
purposes of RC 4511.191 to 4511.197 and all related provisions of law, a person
arrested for a violation of this division shall be considered to be under
arrest for operating a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of
abuse, or a combination of them or for operating a vehicle with a prohibited
concentration of alcohol in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or
urine.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of endangering children, a
misdemeanor of the first degree, if the violation of this section does not
result in serious physical harm to the child involved, or if the offender has
not previously been convicted of an offense under this section, RC 2919.22 or
of any offense involving neglect, abandonment, contributing to the delinquency
of or physical abuse of a child.
(RC 2919.22; Ord. No. 1631-05. Passed 3-20-06, eff. 3-24-06)
§ 609.05 Interference with Custody
   (a)   No person, knowing the person is without privilege to do so or being
reckless in that regard, shall entice, take, keep or harbor any of the
following persons from those persons’ parent, guardian or custodian:
      (1)   A child under the age of eighteen (18), or a mentally or physically
handicapped child under the age of twenty-one (21);
      (2)   A person committed by law to an institution for delinquent, unruly,
neglected, abused or dependent children;
      (3)   A person committed by law to an institution for the mentally ill or
mentally retarded.
   (b)   No person shall aid, abet, induce, cause or encourage a child or a
ward of the juvenile court who has been committed to the custody of any person,
department, or public or private institution to leave the custody of that
person, department or institution without legal consent.
   (c)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of enticing or taking under
division (a)(1) of this section that the actor reasonably believed that the
actor’s conduct was necessary to preserve the child’s health or safety. It is
an affirmative defense to a charge of keeping or harboring under division (a)
of this section that the actor in good faith gave notice to law enforcement or
judicial authorities within a reasonable time after the child or committed
person came under the actor’s shelter, protection or influence.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of interference with custody.
Except as otherwise provided in RC 2919.23(D)(2), violation of division (a)(1)
of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. A violation of division
(a)(2) or (3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the third degree. A violation
of division (b) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day
of violation of division (b) of this section is a separate offense.
(RC 2919.23; Ord. No. 834-03. Passed 6-10-03, eff. 6-12-03)
§ 609.06 Child Stealing – Repealed
(Ord. No. 834-03. Passed 6-10-03, eff. 6-12-03)
§ 609.07 Domestic Violence
   (a)   No person shall knowingly cause or attempt to cause physical harm to a
family or household member.
   (b)   No person shall recklessly cause serious physical harm to a family or
household member.
   (c)   No person, by threat of force, shall knowingly cause a family or
household member to believe that the offender will cause imminent physical harm
to the family or household member.
   (d)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Family or household member” means any of the following:
         A.   Any of the following who is residing or has resided with the
offender:
            1.   A spouse, a person living as a spouse or a former spouse of
the offender;
            2.   A parent or a child of the offender, or another person related
by consanguinity or affinity to the offender;
            3.   A parent, or a child of a spouse, person living as a spouse,
or former spouse of the offender; or another person related by consanguinity or
affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse or former spouse of the
offender.
         B.   The natural parent of any child of whom the offender is the other
natural parent or is the putative other natural parent.
      (2)   “Person living as a spouse” means a person who is living or has
lived with the offender in a common law marital relationship, who otherwise is
cohabiting with the offender, or who otherwise has cohabited with the offender
within five (5) years prior to the date of the alleged commission of the act in
question.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of domestic violence. A
violation of division (a) or (b) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree, if the offender has not previously been convicted of domestic violence
or a violation of RC 2903.11, 2903.12, 2903.13, 2903.14, 2909.06, 2909.07,
2903.211, 2911.12, 2911.211, or 2919.22, or Section
621.03 of the General Offenses Code involving a person who was a family or
household member at the time of such violation. A violation of division (c) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If the offender has a prior
conviction of domestic violence under this section or a code section enumerated
in this division (e), then on a first offense, a violation of division (c) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the second degree. A violation of division (c)
of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree if the offender has two
(2) prior convictions of domestic violence under this section or a code section
enumerated in this division (e).
(RC 2919.25)
   (f)   The same relief available under the Ohio Revised Code for filing a
complaint for violation of RC 2919.25 shall be available for filing a complaint
for violation of this section.
(Ord. No. 1631-05. Passed 3-20-06, eff. 3-24-06)
§ 609.08 Temporary Protection Order
   (a)   No person shall recklessly violate the terms of any of the following:
      (1)   A protection order issued or consent agreement approved pursuant to
RC 2919.26 or 3113.31;
      (2)   A protection order issued pursuant to RC 2903.213 or 2903.214;
      (3)   A protection order issued by a court of another state;
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (B)(3) and (B)(4) of RC
2919.27, if the offense involves a violation of this section, violating a
protection order is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (c)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (a)(3) of this
section that the protection order issued by a court of another state does not
comply with the requirements specified in 18 U.S.C. 2265(b) for a protection
order that must be accorded full faith and credit by a court of this state or
that is not entitled to full faith and credit under 18 U.S.C. 2265(c).
   (d)   As used in this section, “protection order issued by a court of
another state” means an injunction or another order issued by a criminal court
of another state for the purpose of preventing violent or threatening acts or
harassment against, contact or communication with, or physical proximity to
another person, including a temporary order, and means an injunction or order
of that nature issued by a civil court of another state, including a temporary
order and a final order issued in an independent action or as a pendente lite
order in a proceeding for other relief, if the court issued it in response to a
complaint, petition, or motion filed by or on behalf of a person seeking
protection. “Protection order issued by a court of another state” does not
include an order for support or for custody of a child issued pursuant to the
divorce and child custody laws of another state, except to the extent that the
order for support or for custody of a child is entitled to full faith and
credit under the laws of the United States.
(RC 2919.27; Ord. No. 1631-05. Passed 3-20-06, eff. 3-24-06)
§ 609.09 Criminal Child Enticement
   (a)   No person, with a sexual motivation as defined in RC 2971.01, or for
any other criminal purpose, by any means and without privilege to do so, shall
knowingly solicit, coax, entice or lure any child under fourteen (14) years of
age to accompany the person in any manner, including entering into any vehicle,
as defined in RC 4501.01, or onto any vessel, as defined in RC 1547.01, whether
or not the offender knows the age of the child, if both of the following apply:
      (1)   The actor does not have the express or implied permission of the
parent, guardian or other legal custodian of the child in undertaking the
activity;
      (2)   The actor is not a law enforcement officer, medic, firefighter or
other person who regularly provides emergency services, and is not an employee
or agent of, or a volunteer acting under the direction of any Board of
Education, or the actor is any of such persons, but, at the time the actor
undertakes the activity, the actor is not acting within the scope of his or her
lawful duties in that capacity.
   (b)   It is an affirmative defense to charge under division (a) of this
section that the actor undertook the activity in response to a bona fide
emergency situation or that the actor undertook the activity in a reasonable
belief that it was necessary to preserve the health, safety or welfare of the
child.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal child enticement,
a misdemeanor of the first degree. This section does not apply if the offender
previously has been convicted of this section or RC 2909.05, 2907.02, 2907.03,
2907.12, 2905.01, or 2907.05 when the victim of that prior offense was under
seventeen (17) years of age at the time of the offense.
(RC 2905.05; Ord. No. 1244-12. Passed 10-15-12, eff. 10-17-12)
§ 609.10 Contributing to Unruliness or Delinquency of a Child
   (a)   No person, including a parent, guardian, or other custodian of a
child, shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Aid, abet, induce, cause, encourage or contribute to a child or a
ward of the juvenile court becoming an unruly child as defined in RC 2151.022
or a delinquent child as defined in RC 2151.02.
      (2)   Act in a way tending to cause a child or a ward of the juvenile
court to become an unruly child as defined in RC 2151.022, or a delinquent
child as defined in RC 2151.02.
      (3)   If the person is the parent, guardian, or custodian of a child who
has the duties under RC Chapters 2152 and 2950 to register, register a new
residence address, and periodically verify a residence address, and, if
applicable, to send a notice of intent to reside, and if the child is not
emancipated, as defined in RC 2919.121, fail to ensure that the child complies
with those duties under RC Chapters 2152 and 2950.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of contributing to the
unruliness or delinquency of a child, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each
day of violation of this section is a separate offense.
(RC 2919.24; Ord. No. 1631-05. Passed 3-20-06, eff. 3-24-06)
CHAPTER 611 – GAMBLING
611.01   Definition
611.02   Gambling; Exceptions for Charitable Organizations
611.03   Charitable Games of Chance; Hours and Operators
611.04   Registration Required for Charitable Games of Chance; Fee
611.05   Operating a Gambling House
611.06   Public Gaming
611.07   Cheating
611.08   Methods of Conducting a Licensed Bingo Game; Prohibitions
611.09   Records to be Maintained; Enforcement; Prohibitions
611.10   Minor and Felon Not to Work at Bingo Session
611.11   Game for Amusement Only Excepted; Conditions; Enforcement; Offense
611.12   Permitting Unlawful Coin Machines
Cross-reference:
   Gambling at public dances, CO
690.09
   Gambling at shooting galleries, CO
695.07
   Gambling prohibited at airports, CO
571.19
   Games of chance in billiard rooms, CO
688.14
   Games of chance in parks, CO
559.38
Statutory reference:
   See sectional histories for similar State law
   Lotteries prohibited; exception, O Const Art XV § 6
   Search warrants, RC 2933.21(E)
§ 611.01 Definition
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   “Bookmaking” means the business of receiving or paying off bets.
   (b)   “Bet” means the hazarding of anything of value upon the result of an
event, undertaking, or contingency, but does not include a bona fide business
risk.
   (c)   “Scheme of chance” means a slot machine, lottery, numbers game, pool
conducted for profit, or other scheme in which a participant gives a valuable
consideration for a chance to win a prize, but does not include bingo, a skill-
based amusement machine, or a pool not conducted for profit.
   (d)   “Game of chance” means poker, craps, roulette, or other game in which
a player gives anything of value in the hope of gain, the outcome of which is
determined largely by chance, but does not include bingo.
   (e)   “Game of chance conducted for profit” means any game of chance
designed to produce income for the person who conducts or operates the game of
chance, but does not include bingo.
   (f)   “Gambling device” means any of the following:
      (1)   A book, totalizer, or other equipment for recording bets;
      (2)   A ticket, token, or other device representing a chance, share, or
interest in a scheme of chance or evidencing a bet;
      (3)   A deck of cards, dice, gaming table, roulette wheel, slot machine,
or other apparatus designed for use in connection with a game of chance;
      (4)   Any equipment, device, apparatus, or paraphernalia specially
designed for gambling purposes;
      (5)   Bingo supplies sold or otherwise provided, or used, in violation of
this chapter.
   (g)   “Gambling offense” means any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of Sections
611.02 to
611.10 or RC 2915.02 to 2915.11;
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of
this or any other state or the United States substantially equivalent to any
section listed in division (g)(1) of this section or a violation of RC 2915.06
as it existed prior to July 1, 1996;
      (3)   An offense under an existing or former municipal ordinance or law
of this or any other state or the United States, of which gambling is an
element;
      (4)   A conspiracy or attempt to commit, or complicity in committing, any
offense under division (g) of this section.
   (h)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, “charitable
organization” means any tax exempt religious, educational, veteran’s,
fraternal, sporting, service, nonprofit medical, volunteer rescue service,
volunteer firefighter’s, senior citizen’s, historic railroad educational, youth
athletic, amateur athletic, or youth athletic park organization. An
organization is tax exempt if the organization is, and has received from the
internal revenue service a determination letter that currently is in effect
stating that the organization is, exempt from federal income taxation under
subsection 501(a) and described in subsection 501(c)(3), 501(c)(4), 501(c)(8),
501(c)(10), or 501(c)(19) of the Internal Revenue Code, or if the organization
is a sporting organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under
subsection 501(a) and is described in subsection 501(c)(7) of the Internal
Revenue Code. To qualify as a charitable organization, an organization, except
a volunteer rescue service or volunteer fire fighter’s organization, shall have
been in continuous existence as such in this state for a period of two (2)
years immediately preceding either the making of an application for a bingo
license under RC 2915.08 or the conducting of any game of chance as provided in
division (D) of RC 2915.02. A charitable organization that is exempt from
federal income taxation under subsection 501(a) and described in subsection 501
(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code and that is created by a veteran’s
organization, a fraternal organization, or a sporting organization does not
have to have been in continuous existence as such in this state for a period of
two (2) years immediately preceding either the making of an application for a
bingo license under RC 2915.08 or the conducting of any game of chance as
provided in division (D) of RC 2915.02.
   (i)   “Religious organization” means any church, body of communicants, or
group that is not organized or operated for profit and that gathers in common
membership for regular worship and religious observances.
   (j)   “Educational organization” means any organization within this state
that is not organized for profit, the primary purpose of which is to educate
and develop the capabilities of individuals through instruction by means of
operating or contributing to the support of a school, academy, college, or
university.
   (k)   “Veteran’s organization” means any individual post or state
headquarters of a national veteran’s association or an auxiliary unit of any
individual post of a national veteran’s association, which post, state
headquarters, or auxiliary unit has been in continuous existence in this state
for at least two (2) years and incorporated as a nonprofit corporation and
either has received a letter from the state headquarters of the national
veteran’s association indicating that the individual post or auxiliary unit is
in good standing with the national veteran’s association or has received a
letter from the national veteran’s association indicating that the state
headquarters is in good standing with the national veteran’s association. As
used in this division, “national veteran’s association” means any veteran’s
association that has been in continuous existence as such for a period of at
least five (5) years and either is incorporated by an act of the United States
congress or has a national dues- paying membership of at least five thousand
(5,000) persons.
   (l)   “Volunteer firefighter’s organization” means any organization of
volunteer firefighters, as defined in RC 146.01, that is organized and operated
exclusively to provide financial support for a volunteer fire department or a
volunteer fire company and that is recognized or ratified by a county,
municipal corporation, or township.
   (m)   “Fraternal organization” means any society, order, state headquarters,
or association within this state, except a college or high school fraternity,
that is not organized for profit, that is a branch, lodge, or chapter of a
national or state organization, that exists exclusively for the common business
or sodality of its members, and that has been in continuous existence in this
state for a period of five (5) years.
   (n)   “Volunteer rescue service organization” means any organization of
volunteers organized to function as an emergency medical service organization,
as defined in RC 4765.01.
   (o)   “Service organization” means either of the following:
      (1)   Any organization, not organized for profit, that is organized and
operated exclusively to provide, or to contribute to the support of
organizations or institutions organized and operated exclusively to provide,
medical and therapeutic services for persons who are crippled, born with birth
defects, or have any other mental or physical defect or those organized and
operated exclusively to protect, or to contribute to the support of
organizations or institutions organized and operated exclusively to protect,
animals from inhumane treatment or provide immediate shelter to victims of
domestic violence;
      (2)   Any organization that is described in subsection 509(a)(1), 509(a)
(2), or 509(a)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code and is either a governmental
unit or an organization that is tax exempt under subsection 501(a) and
described in subsection 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code and that is an
organization, nor organized for profit, that is organized and operated
primarily to provide, or to contribute to the support of organizations or
institutions organized and operated primarily to provide, medical and
therapeutic services for persons who are crippled, born with birth defects, or
have any other mental or physical defect.
   (p)   “Nonprofit medical organization” means either of the following:
      (1)   Any organization that has been incorporated as a nonprofit
corporation for at least five (5) years and that has continuously operated and
will be operated exclusively to provide, or to contribute to the support of
organizations or institutions organized and operated exclusively to provide,
hospital, medical, research, or therapeutic services for the public;
      (2)   Any organization that is described and qualified under subsection
501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, that has been incorporated as a
nonprofit corporation for at least five (5) years, and that has continuously
operated and will be operated primarily to provide, or to contribute to the
support of organizations or institutions organized and operated primarily to
provide, hospital, medical, research, or therapeutic services for the public.
   (q)   “Senior citizen’s organization” means any private organization, not
organized for profit, that is organized and operated exclusively to provide
recreational or social services for persons who are fifty- five (55) years of
age or older and that is described and qualified under subsection 501(c)(3) of
the Internal Revenue Code.
   (r)   “Charitable bingo game” means any bingo game described in division (s)
(1) or (2) of this section that is conducted by a charitable organization that
has obtained a license under RC 2915.08 and the proceeds of which are used for
a charitable purpose.
   (s)   “Bingo” means either of the following:
      (1)   A game with all of the following characteristics:
         A.   The participants use bingo cards or sheets, including paper
formats and electronic representation or image formats, that are divided into
twenty-five (25) spaces arranged in five (5) horizontal and five (5) vertical
rows of spaces, with each space, except the central space, being designated by
a combination of a letter and a number and with the central space being
designated as a free space;
         B.   The participants cover the spaces on the bingo cards or sheets
that correspond to combinations of letters and numbers that are announced by a
bingo game operator;
         C.   A bingo game operator announces combinations of letters and
numbers that appear on objects that a bingo game operator selects by chance,
either manually or mechanically, from a receptacle that contains seventy-five
(75) objects at the beginning of each game, each object marked by a different
combination of a letter and a number that corresponds to one (1) of the
seventy-five (75) possible combinations of a letter and a number that can
appear on the bingo cards or sheets;
         D.   The winner of the bingo game includes any participant who
properly announces during the interval between the announcements of letters and
numbers as described in division (s)(1)C. of this section, that a predetermined
and preannounced pattern of spaces has been covered on a bingo card or sheet
being used by the participant.
      (2)   Instant bingo, punch boards, and raffles.
   (t)   “Conduct” means to back, promote, organize, manage, carry on, sponsor,
or prepare for the operation of bingo or a game of chance.
   (u)   “Bingo game operator” means any person, except security personnel, who
performs work or labor at the site of bingo, including, but not limited to,
collecting money from participants, handing out bingo cards or sheets or
objects to cover spaces on bingo cards or sheets, selecting from a receptacle
the objects that contain the combination of letters and numbers that appear on
bingo cards or sheets, calling out the combinations of letters and numbers,
distributing prizes, selling or redeeming instant bingo tickets or cards,
supervising the operation of a punch board, selling raffle tickets, selecting
raffle tickets from a receptacle and announcing the winning numbers in a
raffle, and preparing, selling, and serving food or beverages.
   (v)   “Participant” means any person who plays bingo.
   (w)   “Bingo session” means a period that includes both of the following:
      (1)   Not to exceed five (5) continuous hours for the conduct of one (1)
or more games described in division (s)(1) of this section, instant bingo, and
seal cards;
      (2)   A period for the conduct of instant bingo and seal cards for not
more than two (2) hours before and not more than two (2) hours after the period
described in division (w)(1) of this section.
   (x)   “Gross receipts” means all money or assets, including admission fees,
that a person receives from bingo without the deduction of any amounts for
prizes paid out or for the expenses of conducting bingo. “Gross receipts” does
not include any money directly taken in from the sale of food or beverages by a
charitable organization conducting bingo, or by a bona fide auxiliary unit or
society of a charitable organization conducting bingo, provided all of the
following apply:
      (1)   The auxiliary unit or society has been in existence as a bona fide
auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization for at least two (2)
years prior to conducting bingo.
      (2)   The person who purchases the food or beverage receives nothing of
value except the food or beverage and items customarily received with the
purchase of that food or beverage.
      (3)   The food and beverages are sold at customary and reasonable prices.
   (y)   “Security personnel” includes any person who either is a sheriff,
deputy sheriff, marshal, deputy marshal, township constable, or member of an
organized police department of a municipal corporation or has successfully
completed a peace officer’s training course under RC 109.71 to 109.79 and who
is hired to provide security for the premises on which bingo is conducted.
   (z)   “Charitable purpose” means that the net profit of bingo, other than
instant bingo, is used by, or is given, donated, or otherwise transferred to,
any of the following:
      (1)   Any organization that is described in subsection 509(a)(1), 509(a)
(2), or 509(a)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code and is either a governmental
unit or an organization that is tax exempt under subsection 501(a) and
described in subsection 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code;
      (2)   A veteran’s organization that is a post, chapter, or organization
of veterans, or an auxiliary unit or society of, or a trust or foundation for,
any such post, chapter, or organization organized in the United States or any
of its possessions, at least seventy-five per cent (75%) of the members of
which are veterans and substantially all of the other members of which are
individuals who are spouses, widows, or widowers of veterans, or such
individuals, provided that no part of the net earnings of such post, chapter,
or organization inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual,
and further provided that the net profit is used by the post, chapter, or
organization for the charitable purposes set forth in division (B)(12) of RC
5739.02, is used for awarding scholarships to or for attendance at an
institution mentioned in division (B)(12) of RC 5739.02, is donated to a
governmental agency, or is used for nonprofit youth activities, the purchase of
United States or Ohio flags that are donated to schools, youth groups, or other
bona fide nonprofit organizations, promotion of patriotism, or disaster relief;
      (3)   A fraternal organization that has been in continuous existence in
this state for fifteen (15) years and that uses the net profit exclusively for
religious, charitable, scientific, literary, or educational purposes, or for
the prevention of cruelty to children or animals, if contributions for such use
would qualify as a deductible charitable contribution under subsection 170 of
the Internal Revenue Code;
      (4)   A volunteer firefighter’s organization that uses the net profit for
the purposes set forth in division (1) of this section.
   (aa)   “Internal Revenue Code” means the “Internal Revenue Code of 1986,”
100 Stat. 2085, 26 U.S.C. 1, as now or hereafter amended.
   (bb)   “Youth athletic organization” means any organization, not organized
for profit, that is organized and operated exclusively to provide financial
support to, or to operate, athletic activities for persons who are twenty-one
(21) years of age or younger by means of sponsoring, organizing, operating, or
contributing to the support of an athletic team, club, league, or association.
   (cc)   “Youth athletic park organization” means any organization, not
organized for profit, that satisfies both of the following:
      (1)   It owns, operates, and maintains playing fields that satisfy both
of the following:
         A.   The playing fields are used at least one hundred (100) days per
year for athletic activities by one (1) or more organizations, not organized
for profit, each of which is organized and operated exclusively to provide
financial support to, or to operate, athletic activities for persons who are
eighteen (18) years of age or younger by means of sponsoring, organizing,
operating, or contributing to the support of an athletic team, club, league, or
association;
         B.   The playing fields are not used for any profit-making activity at
any time during the year.
      (2)   It uses the proceeds of bingo it conducts exclusively for the
operation, maintenance, and improvement of its playing fields of the type
described in division (cc)(1) of this section.
   (dd)   “Amateur athletic organization” means any organization, not organized
for profit, that is organized and operated exclusively to provide financial
support to, or to operate, athletic activities for persons who are training for
amateur athletic competition that is sanctioned by a national governing body as
defined in the “Amateur Sports Act of 1978,” 90 Stat. 3045, 36 U.S.C. 373.
   (ee)   “Bingo supplies” means bingo cards or sheets; instant bingo tickets
or cards; electronic bingo aids; raffle tickets; punch boards; seal cards;
instant bingo ticket dispensers; and devices for selecting or displaying the
combination of bingo letters and numbers or raffle tickets. Items that are
“bingo supplies” are not gambling devices if sold or otherwise provided, and
used, in accordance with this chapter. For purposes of this chapter, “bingo
supplies” are not to be considered equipment used to conduct a bingo game.
   (ff)   “Instant bingo” means a form of bingo that uses folded or banded
tickets or paper cards with perforated break-open tabs, a face of which is
covered or otherwise hidden from view to conceal a number, letter, or symbol,
or set of numbers, letters, or symbols, some of which have been designated in
advance as prize winners. “Instant bingo” includes seal cards. “Instant bingo”
does not include any device that is activated by the insertion of a coin,
currency, token, or an equivalent, and that contains as one (1) of its
components a video display monitor that is capable of displaying numbers,
letters, symbols, or characters in winning or losing combinations.
   (gg)   “Seal card” means a form of instant bingo that uses instant bingo
tickets in conjunction with a board or placard that contains one (1) or more
seals that, when removed or opened, reveal predesignated winning numbers,
letters, or symbols.
   (hh)   “Raffle” means a form of bingo in which the one (1) or more prizes
are won by one (1) or more persons who have purchased a raffle ticket. The one
(1) or more winners of the raffle are determined by drawing a ticket stub or
other detachable section from a receptacle containing ticket stubs or
detachable sections corresponding to all tickets sold for the raffle.
   (ii)   “Punch board” means a board containing a number of holes or
receptacles of uniform size in which are placed, mechanically and randomly,
serially numbered slips of paper that may be punched or drawn from the hole or
receptacle when used in conjunction with instant bingo. A player may punch or
draw the numbered slips of paper from the holes or receptacles and obtain the
prize established for the game if the number drawn corresponds to a winning
number or, if the punch board includes the use of a seal card, a potential
winning number.
   (jj)   “Gross profit” means gross receipts minus the amount actually
expended for the payment of prize awards.
   (kk)   “Net profit” means gross profit minus expenses.
   (ll)   “Expenses” means the reasonable amount of gross profit actually
expended for all of the following:
      (1)   The purchase or lease of bingo supplies;
      (2)   The annual license fee required under RC 2915.08;
      (3)   Bank fees and service charges for a bingo session or game account
described in RC 2915.10;
      (4)   Audits and accounting services;
      (5)   Safes;
      (6)   Cash registers;
      (7)   Hiring security personnel;
      (8)   Advertising bingo;
      (9)   Renting premises in which to conduct a bingo session;
      (10)   Tables and chairs;
      (11)   Expenses for maintaining and operating a charitable organization’s
facilities, including, but not limited to, a post home, club house, lounge,
tavern, or canteen and any grounds attached to the post home, club house,
lounge, tavern, or canteen;
      (12)   Any other product or service directly related to the conduct of
bingo that is authorized in rules adopted by the attorney general under
division (B)(1) of RC 2915.08.
   (mm)   “Person” has the same meaning as in RC 1.59 and includes any firm or
any other legal entity, however organized.
   (nn)   “Distributor” means any person who purchases or obtains bingo
supplies and who does either of the following:
      (1)   Sells, offers for sale, or otherwise provides or offers to provide
the bingo supplies to another person for use in this state.
      (2)   Modifies, converts, adds to, or removes parts from the bingo
supplies to further their promotion or sale for use in this state.
   (oo)   “Manufacturer” means any person who assembles completed bingo
supplies from raw materials, other items, or subparts or who modifies,
converts, adds to, or removes parts from bingo supplies to further their
promotion or sale.
   (pp)   (1)   “Electronic bingo aid” means an electronic device used by a
participant to monitor bingo cards or sheets purchased at the time and place of
a bingo session and that does all of the following:
         A.   It provides a means for a participant to input numbers and
letters announced by a bingo caller.
         B.   It compares the numbers and letters entered by the participant to
the bingo faces previously stored in the memory of the device.
         C.   It identifies a winning bingo pattern.
      (2)   “Electronic bingo aid” does not include any device into which a
coin, currency, token, or an equivalent is inserted to activate play.
   (qq)   (1)   “Slot” machine means either of the following:
         A.   Any mechanical, electronic, video, or digital device that is
capable of accepting anything of value, directly or indirectly, from or on
behalf of a player who gives the thing of value in the hope of gain, the
outcome of which is determined largely or wholly by chance;
         B.   Any mechanical, electronic, video, or digital device that is
capable of accepting anything of value, directly or indirectly, from or on
behalf of a player to conduct or dispense bingo or a scheme or game of chance.
      (2)   “Slot machine” does not include a skill- based amusement machine.
   (rr)   “Historic railroad educational organization” means an organization
that is exempt from federal income taxation under subsection 501(a) and
described in subsection 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, that owns in
fee simple the tracks and the right-of-way of a historic railroad that the
organization restores or maintains and on which the organization provides
excursions as part of a program to promote tourism and educate visitors
regarding the role of railroad transportation in Ohio history, and that
received as donations from a charitable organization that holds a license to
conduct bingo under this chapter an amount equal to at least fifty per cent
(50%) of that licensed charitable organization’s net proceeds from the conduct
of bingo during each of the five (5) years preceding June 30, 2003. “Historic
railroad” means all or a portion of the tracks and right-of-way of a railroad
that was owned and operated by a for profit common carrier in this state at any
time prior to January 1, 1950.
   (ss)   (1)   “Skill-based amusement machine” means a skill-based amusement
device, such as a mechanical, electronic, video, or digital device, or machine,
whether or not the skill-based amusement machine requires payment for use
through a coin or bill validator or other payment of consideration or value to
participate in the machine’s offering or to activate the machine, provided that
all of the following apply:
         A.   The machine involves a task, game, play, contest, competition, or
tournament in which the player actively participates in the task, game, play,
contest, competition, or tournament.
         B.   The outcome of an individual’s play and participation is not
determined largely or wholly by chance.
         C.   The outcome of play during a game is not controlled by a person
not actively participating in the game.
      (2)   All of the following apply to any machine that is operated as
described in division (aaa)(1) of this section:
         A.   As used in this section, “task,” “game,” and “play” mean one (1)
event from the initial activation of the machine until the results of play are
determined without payment of additional consideration. An individual utilizing
a machine that involves a single task, game, play, contest, competition, or
tournament may be awarded prizes based on the results of play.
         B.   Advance play for a single task, game, play, contest, competition,
or tournament participation may be purchased. The cost of the contest,
competition, or tournament participation may be greater than a single non-
contest, competition, or tournament play.
         C.   To the extent that the machine is used in a contest, competition,
or tournament, that contest, competition, or tournament has a defined starting
and ending date and is open to participants in competition for scoring and
ranking results toward the awarding of prizes that are stated prior to the
start of the contest, competition, or tournament.
   (tt)   “Pool not conducted for profit” means a scheme in which a participant
gives a valuable consideration for a chance to win a prize and the total amount
of consideration wagered is distributed to a participant or participants.
   (uu)   “Sporting organization” means a hunting, fishing, or trapping
organization, other than a college or high school fraternity or sorority, that
is not organized for profit, that is affiliated with a state or national
sporting organization, including but not limited to, the Ohio League of
sportsmen, and that has been in continuous existence in this state for a period
of three (3) years.
   (vv)   “Charitable game of chance operator” means any person, except
security personnel, who perform work or labor at the site of a charitable game
of chance, including, but not limited to, distributing or collecting money,
chips, cards, or dice from participants, distributing anything of value to
winners of the charitable game of chance, and serving food or beverages.
(Ord. No. 487-A-04. Passed 10-25-04, eff. 10-27-04)
§ 611.02 Gambling; Exceptions for Charitable Organizations
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Engage in bookmaking, or knowingly engage in conduct that
facilitates bookmaking;
      (2)   Establish, promote, or operate or knowingly engage in conduct that
facilitates any game of chance conducted for profit or any scheme of chance;
      (3)   Knowingly procure, transmit, exchange, or engage in conduct that
facilitates the procurement, transmission, or exchange of information for use
in establishing odds or determining winners in connection with bookmaking or
with any game of chance conducted for profit or any scheme of chance;
      (4)   Engage in betting or in playing any scheme or game of chance as a
substantial source of income or livelihood;
      (5)   With purpose to violate this section, acquire, possess, control, or
operate any gambling device.
   (b)   For purposes of division (a)(1) of this section, a person facilitates
bookmaking if the person in any way knowingly aids an illegal bookmaking
operation, including, without limitation, placing a bet with a person engaged
in or facilitating illegal bookmaking. For purposes of division (a)(2) of this
section, a person facilitates a game of chance conducted for profit or a scheme
of chance if the person in any way knowingly aids in the conduct or operation
of any such game or scheme, including, without limitation, playing any such
game or scheme.
   (c)   This section does not prohibit conduct in connection with gambling
expressly permitted by law.
   (d)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   Games of chance, if all of the following apply:
         A.   The games of chance are not craps for money or roulette for
money;
         B.   The games of chance are conducted by a charitable organization
that is, and has received from the internal revenue service a determination
letter that is currently in effect, stating that the organization is, exempt
from federal income taxation under subsection 501(a) and described in
subsection 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code;
         C.   The games of chance are conducted at festivals of the charitable
organization that are conducted either for a period of four (4) consecutive
days or less and not more than twice a year or for a period of five (5)
consecutive days not more than once a year, and are conducted on premises owned
by the charitable organization for a period of no less than one (1) year
immediately preceding the conducting of the games of chance, on premises leased
from a governmental unit, or on premises that are leased from a veteran’s or
fraternal organization and that have been owned by the lessor veteran’s or
fraternal organization for a period of no less than one (1) year immediately
preceding the conducting of the games of chance.
         A charitable organization shall not lease premises from a veteran’s or
fraternal organization to conduct a festival described in division (d)(1)C. of
this section if the veteran’s or fraternal organization already has leased the
premises four (4) times during the preceding year to charitable organizations
for that purpose. If a charitable organization leases premises from a veteran’s
or fraternal organization to conduct a festival described in division (d)(1)C.
of this section, the charitable organization shall not pay a rental rate for
the premises per day of the festival that exceeds the rental rate per bingo
session that a charitable organization may pay under division (B)(1) of RC
2915.09 when it leases premises from another charitable organization to conduct
bingo games;
         D.   All of the money or assets received from the games of chance
after deduction only of prizes paid out during the conduct of the games of
chance are used by, or given, donated, or otherwise transferred to, any
organization that is described in subsection 509(a)(1), 509(a)(2), or 509(a)(3)
of the Internal Revenue Code and is either a governmental unit or an
organization that is tax exempt under subsection 501(a) and described in
subsection 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code;
         E.   The games of chance are not conducted during, or within ten (10)
hours of, a bingo game conducted for amusement purposes only under RC 2915.12.
      No person shall receive any commission, wage, salary, reward, tip,
donation, gratuity, or other form of compensation, directly or indirectly, for
operating or assisting in the operation of any game of chance.
      (2)   Any tag fishing tournament operated under a permit issued under RC
1533.92, as “tag fishing tournament” is defined in RC 1531.01;
      (3)   Bingo conducted by a charitable organization that holds a license
issued under RC 2915.08.
   (e)   Division (d) of this section shall not be construed to authorize the
sale, lease, or other temporary or permanent transfer of the right to conduct
games of chance, as granted by that division, by any charitable organization
that is granted that right.
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of gambling, a misdemeanor of
the first degree. This section shall not apply in any case in which the conduct
constitutes a felony under the laws of the State of Ohio.
(Ord. No. 487-A-04. Passed 10-25-04, eff. 10-27-04)
§ 611.03 Charitable Games of Chance; Hours and Operators
   (a)   No charitable organization shall conduct a charitable game of chance
or charitable scheme of chance between the hours of mid-night and 10:00 a.m. on
Mondays through Fridays, and no charitable organization shall conduct a
charitable game of chance or charitable scheme of chance between the hours of
1:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. on Saturdays and Sundays.
   (b)   No person who has been convicted for a felony or gambling offense in
any jurisdiction shall serve as a charitable game of chance operator.
   (c)   No person who is under the age of eighteen (18) years shall serve as a
charitable game of chance operator.
   (d)   Whoever violates any provision of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day upon which a violation occurs shall
constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 487-A-04. Passed 10-25-04, eff. 10-27-04)
§ 611.04 Registration Required for Charitable Games of Chance; Fee
   (a)   No charitable organization shall conduct a charitable game of chance,
as defined in the Ohio Revised Code, without first registering with the
Director of Public Safety in accordance with this section.
   (b)   The registration to conduct a charitable game of chance shall be
furnished by the Director of Public Safety and shall contain the following
information:
      (1)   The name and address of the charitable organization;
      (2)   An affirmation that the charitable organization is a charitable
organization;
      (3)   The location at which the charitable organization will conduct the
game of chance;
      (4)   The days of the week and the times on each of such days when a game
of chance will be conducted;
      (5)   A sworn statement that charitable organization will comply with all
of the requirements for conducting a game of chance under RC 2915.02;
      (6)   A sworn statement that it will take reasonable steps to ensure that
all of the charitable game of chance operators are volunteers, are over the age
of eighteen (18) and are not felons, and that none of the volunteers will be
paid. A signed affidavit from each charitable game of chance operator attesting
to these facts is a reasonable step. The Director of Public Safety shall
provide sample affidavits to any charitable organization requesting them;
      (7)   A sworn statement that the charitable organization is receiving one
hundred percent (100%) of the proceeds less any costs or expenses allowed by
law;
      (8)   Identification of the source of the equipment and supplies for the
operation of the charitable game of chance.
   (c)   A five dollar ($5.00) fee for each charitable game of chance shall
accompany each registration application.
   (d)   Registration of a charitable game of chance shall be made at least
twenty-one (21) days prior to the proposed date of the charitable game of
chance.
   (e)   Registration shall not be required for a charitable game of chance
involving the sale of raffle tickets when the sale of raffle tickets may occur
at more than one (1) location.
   (f)   The Director of Public Safety, upon receiving a completed registration
form, shall issue to the applicant a proof of registration. This proof of
registration shall be kept at the gambling site during all hours of operation
and shall be shown to any Cleveland law enforcement officer who asks to see it.
   (g)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a fourth
degree misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 487-A-04. Passed 10-25-04, eff. 10-27-04)
§ 611.05 Operating a Gambling House
   (a)   No person, being the owner or lessee, or having custody, control, or
supervision of premises, shall:
      (1)   Use or occupy such premises for gambling in violation of Section
611.02 or RC 2915.02;
      (2)   Recklessly permit such premises to be used or occupied for gambling
in violation of Section
611.02 or RC 2915.02.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of operating a gambling house,
a misdemeanor of the first degree. This section shall not apply in any case in
which the conduct constitutes a felony under the laws of the State of Ohio.
   (c)   Premises used or occupied in violation of this section constitute a
nuisance subject to abatement under RC 3767.01 to 3767.99.
(Ord. No. 487-A-04. Passed 10-25-04, eff. 10-27-04)
§ 611.06 Public Gaming
   (a)   No person, while at a hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall,
or other place of public accommodation, business, amusement, or resort shall
make a bet or play any game of chance or scheme of chance.
   (b)   No person, being the owner or lessee, or having custody, control, or
supervision, of a hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall, or other place
of public accommodation, business, amusement, or resort shall recklessly permit
those premises to be used or occupied in violation of division (a) of this
section.
   (c)   No person while on any sidewalk, street, court, or alleyway, or at any
park, playground, or school property, or on any City-owned or City-leased
property shall make a bet or play any game of chance.
   (d)   Divisions (a) and (b) of this section do not prohibit conduct in
connection with gambling expressly permitted by law.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of public gaming. Except as
otherwise provided in this division, public gaming is a minor misdemeanor. If
the offender previously has been convicted of any gambling offense, public
gaming is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (f)   Premises used or occupied in violation of division (b) of this section
constitute a nuisance subject to abatement under RC Chapter 3767.
(Ord. No. 293-05. Passed 12-5-05, eff. 12-12-05)
§ 611.07 Cheating
   (a)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud, shall engage in conduct designed to corrupt the outcome
of any of the following:
      (1)   The subject of a bet;
      (2)   A contest of knowledge, skill, or endurance that is not an athletic
or sporting event;
      (3)   A scheme or game of chance.
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of cheating.
Cheating is a misdemeanor of the first degree. This section shall not apply in
any case in which the conduct constitutes a felony under the laws of the State
of Ohio.
(Ord. No. 487-A-04. Passed 10-25-04, eff. 10-27-04)
§ 611.08 Methods of Conducting a Licensed Bingo Game; Prohibitions
   (a)   No charitable organization that conducts bingo shall fail to do any of
the following:
      (1)   Own all of the equipment used to conduct bingo or lease that
equipment from a charitable organization that is licensed to conduct bingo for
a rental rate that is not more than is customary and reasonable for that
equipment;
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (a)(3) of this section,
use all of the gross receipts from bingo for paying prizes, for reimbursement
of expenses for or for renting premises in which to conduct a bingo session,
for reimbursement of expenses for or for purchasing or leasing bingo supplies
used in conducting bingo, for reimbursement of expenses for or for hiring
security personnel, for reimbursement of expenses for or for advertising bingo,
or for reimbursement of other expenses or for other expenses listed in division
(LL) of RC 2915.01, provided that the amount of the receipts so spent is not
more than is customary and reasonable for a similar purchase, lease, hiring,
advertising, or expense. If the building in which bingo is conducted is owned
by the charitable organization conducting bingo and the bingo conducted
includes a form of bingo described in division (S)(1) of RC 3915.01, the
charitable organization may deduct from the total amount of the gross receipts
from each session a sum equal to the lesser of six hundred dollars ($600.00) or
forty-five per cent (45%) of the gross receipts from the bingo described in
that division as consideration for the use of the premises.
      (3)   Use, or give, donate, or otherwise transfer, all of the net profit
derived from bingo, other than instant bingo, for a charitable purpose listed
in its license application and described in division (Z) of RC 2915.01.
   (b)   No charitable organization that conducts a bingo game described in
division (S)(1) of RC. 2915.01 shall fail to do any of the following:
      (1)   Conduct the bingo game on premises that are owned by the charitable
organization, on premises that are owned by another charitable organization and
leased from that charitable organization for a rental rate not in excess of the
lesser of six hundred dollars ($600.00) per bingo session or forty-five per
cent (45%) of the gross receipts of the bingo session, on premises that are
leased from a person other than a charitable organization for a rental rate
that is not more than is customary and reasonable for premises that are similar
in location, size, and quality but not in excess of four hundred fifty dollars
($450.00) per bingo session, or on premises that are owned by a person other
than a charitable organization, that are leased from that person by another
charitable organization, and that are subleased from that other charitable
organization by the charitable organization for a rental rate not in excess of
four hundred fifty dollars ($450.00) per bingo session. If the charitable
organization leases from a person other than a charitable organization the
premises on which it conducts bingo sessions, the lessor of the premises shall
provide only the premises to the organization and shall not provide the
organization with bingo game operators, security personnel, concessions or
concession operators, bingo supplies, or any other type of service or
equipment. A charitable organization shall not lease or sublease premises that
it owns or leases to more than one (1) other charitable organization per
calendar week for the purpose of conducting bingo sessions on the premises. A
person that is not a charitable organization shall not lease premises that it
owns, leases, or otherwise is empowered to lease to more than one (1)
charitable organization per calendar week for conducting bingo sessions on the
premises. In no case shall more than two (2) bingo sessions be conducted on any
premises in any calendar week.
      (2)   Display its license conspicuously at the premises where the bingo
session is conducted;
      (3)   Conduct the bingo session in accordance with the definition of
bingo set forth in division (S)(1) of RC 2915.01.
   (c)   No charitable organization that conducts a bingo game described in
division (S)(1) of RC 2915.01 shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Pay any compensation to a bingo game operator for operating a bingo
session that is conducted by the charitable organization or for preparing,
selling, or serving food or beverages at the site of the bingo session, permit
any auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization to pay
compensation to any bingo game operator who prepares, sells, or serves food or
beverages at a bingo session conducted by the charitable organization, or
permit any auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization to prepare,
sell, or serve food or beverages at a bingo session conducted by the charitable
organization, if the auxiliary unit or society pays any compensation to the
bingo game operators who prepare, sell, or serve the food or beverages;
      (2)   Pay consulting fees to any person for any services performed in
relation to the bingo session;
      (3)   Pay concession fees to any person who provides refreshments to the
participants in the bingo session;
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(4) of this section,
conduct more than two (2) bingo sessions in any seven (7) day period. A
volunteer firefighter’s organization or a volunteer rescue service organization
that conducts not more than five (5) bingo sessions in a calendar year may
conduct more than two (2) bingo sessions in a seven (7) day period after
notifying the attorney general when it will conduct the sessions;
      (5)   Pay out more than three thousand five hundred dollars ($3,500.00)
in prizes for bingo games described in division (s)(1) of RC 2915.01 during any
bingo session that is conducted by the charitable organization. “Prizes” does
not include awards from the conduct of instant bingo;
      (6)   Conduct a bingo session at any time during the ten (10) hour period
between midnight and 10:00 a.m., at any time during, or within ten (10) hours
of, a bingo game conducted for amusement only under RC 2915.12, at any premises
not specified on its license, or on any day of the week or during any time
period not specified on its license. Division (a)(6) of this section does not
prohibit the sale of instant bingo tickets beginning at 9:00 a.m. for a bingo
session that begins at 10:00 a.m. If circumstances make it impractical for the
charitable organization to conduct a bingo session at the premises, or on the
day of the week or at the time, specified on its license or if a charitable
organization wants to conduct bingo sessions on a day of the week or at a time
other than the day or time specified on its license, the charitable
organization may apply in writing to the attorney general for an amended
license under division (F) of RC 2915.08. A charitable organization may apply
twice in each calendar year for an amended license to conduct bingo sessions on
a day of the week or at a time other than the day or time specified on its
license. If the amended license is granted, the organization may conduct bingo
sessions at the premises, on the day of the week, and at the time specified on
its amended license;
      (7)   Permit any person whom the charitable organization knows, or should
have known, is under the age of eighteen (18) to work as a bingo game operator;
      (8)   Permit any person whom the charitable organization knows, or should
have known, has been convicted of a felony or gambling offense in any
jurisdiction to be a bingo game operator;
      (9)   Permit the lessor of the premises on which the bingo session is
conducted, if the lessor is not a charitable organization, to provide the
charitable organization with bingo game operators, security personnel,
concessions, bingo supplies, or any other type of service or equipment;
      (10)   Purchase or lease bingo supplies from any person except a
distributor issued a license under RC 2915.081;
      (11)   A.   Use or permit the use of electronic bingo aids except under
the following circumstances:
            1.   For any single participant, not more than ninety (90) bingo
faces can be played using an electronic bingo aid or aids;
            2.   The charitable organization shall provide a participant using
an electronic bingo aid with corresponding paper bingo cards or sheets;
            3.   The total price of bingo faces played with an electronic bingo
aid shall be equal to the total price of the same number of bingo faces played
with a paper bingo card or sheet sold at the same bingo session but without an
electronic bingo aid;
            4.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be part of an electronic
network other than a network that includes only bingo aids and devices that are
located on the premises at which the bingo is being conducted or be interactive
with any device not located on the premises at which the bingo is being
conducted;
            5.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be used to participate in bingo
that is conducted at a location other than the location at which the bingo
session is conducted and at which the electronic bingo aid is used;
            6.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be used to provide for the
input of numbers and letters announced by a bingo caller other than the bingo
caller who physically calls the numbers and letters at the location at which
the bingo session is conducted and at which the electronic bingo aid is used.
      (12)   Permit any person the charitable organization knows, or should
have known, to be under eighteen (18) years of age to play bingo described in
division (S)(1) of RC 2915.01.
   (d)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (d)(3) of this section,
no charitable organization shall provide to a bingo game operator, and no bingo
game operator shall receive or accept, any commission, wage, salary, reward,
tip, donation, gratuity, or other form of compensation, directly or indirectly,
regardless of the source, for conducting bingo or providing other work or labor
at the site of bingo during a bingo session.
   (e)   Notwithstanding division (b)(1) of this section, a charitable
organization that, prior to December 6, 1977, has entered into written
agreements for the lease of premises it owns to another charitable organization
or other charitable organizations for the conducting of bingo sessions so that
more than two (2) bingo sessions are conducted per calendar week on the
premises, and a person that is not a charitable organization and that, prior to
December 6, 1977, has entered into written agreements for the lease of premises
it owns to charitable organizations for the conducting of more than two (2)
bingo sessions per calendar week on the premises, may continue to lease the
premises to those charitable organizations, provided that no more than four (4)
sessions are conducted per calendar week, that the lessor organization or
person has notified the attorney general in writing of the organizations that
will conduct the sessions and the days of the week and the times of the day on
which the sessions will be conducted, that the initial lease entered into with
each organization that will conduct the sessions was filed with the attorney
general prior to December 6, 1977, and that each organization that will conduct
the sessions was issued a license to conduct bingo games by the attorney
general prior to December 6, 1977.
   (f)   This section does not prohibit a bingo licensed charitable
organization or a game operator from giving any person an instant bingo ticket
as a prize.
   (g)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a)(1) or (3), (b)(1), (2), or (3), (c)(1) to (12), or (d) of this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been
convicted of a violation of division (a)(1) or (3), (b)(1), (2), or (3), (c)(1)
to (11), or, (d) of this section, a violation of division (a)(1) or (3), (b)
(1), (2), or (3), (c), or (d) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. Whoever violates division (d)(12) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree. This section shall not apply in any case in
which the conduct constitutes a felony under the laws of the State of Ohio.
(Ord. No. 487-A-04. Passed 10-25-04, eff. 10-27-04)
§ 611.09 Records to be Maintained; Enforcement; Prohibitions
   (a)   No charitable organization that conducts bingo or a game of chance
pursuant to division (D) of RC 2915.02 shall fail to maintain the following
records for at least three (3) years from the date on which the bingo or game
of chance is conducted:
      (1)   An itemized list of the gross receipts of each bingo session, each
game of instant bingo by serial number, each raffle, each punch board game, and
each game of chance, and an itemized list of the gross profits of each game of
instant bingo by serial number;
      (2)   An itemized list of all expenses, other than prizes, that are
incurred in conducting bingo or instant bingo, the name of each person to whom
the expenses are paid, and a receipt for all of the expenses;
      (3)   A list of all prizes awarded during each bingo session, each
raffle, each punch board game, and each game of chance conducted by the
charitable organization, the total prizes awarded from each game of instant
bingo by serial number, and the name, address, and social security number of
all persons who are winners of prizes of six hundred dollars ($600.00) or more
in value;
      (4)   An itemized list of the recipients of the net profit of the bingo
or game of chance, including the name and address of each recipient to whom the
money is distributed, and if the organization uses the net profit of bingo, or
the money or assets received from a game of chance, for any charitable or other
purpose set forth in division (Z) of RC 2915.01, division (D) of RC 2915.02, or
RC 2915.101, a list of each purpose and an itemized list of each expenditure
for each purpose;
      (5)   The number of persons who participate in any bingo session or game
of chance that is conducted by the charitable organization;
      (6)   A list of receipts from the sale of food and beverages by the
charitable organization or one (1) of its auxiliary units or societies, if the
receipts were excluded from gross receipts under division (X) of RC 2915.01;
      (7)   An itemized list of all expenses incurred at each bingo session,
each raffle, each punch board game, or each game of instant bingo conducted by
the charitable organization in the sale of food and beverages by the charitable
organization or by an auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization,
the name of each person to whom the expenses are paid, and a receipt for all of
the expenses.
   (b)   A charitable organization shall keep the records that it is required
to maintain pursuant to division (a) of this section at its principal place of
business in this state or at its headquarters in this state and shall notify
the attorney general of the location at which those records are kept.
   (c)   The gross profit from each bingo session or game described in division
(S)(1) or (2) of RC 2915.01 shall be deposited into a checking account devoted
exclusively to the bingo session or game. Payments for allowable expenses
incurred in conducting the bingo session or game and payments to recipients of
some or all of the net profit of the bingo session or game shall be made only
by checks drawn on the bingo session or game account.
   (d)   Each charitable organization shall conduct and record an inventory of
all of its bingo supplies as of the first day of November of each year.
   (e)   The attorney general may adopt rules in accordance with RC Chapter 119
that establish standards of accounting, record keeping, and reporting to ensure
that gross receipts from bingo or games of chance are properly accounted for.
   (f)   A distributor shall maintain, for a period of three (3) years after
the date of its sale or other provision, a record of each instance of its
selling or otherwise providing to another person bingo supplies for use in this
state. The record shall include all of the following for each instance:
      (1)   The name of the manufacturer from which the distributor purchased
the bingo supplies and the date of the purchase;
      (2)   The name and address of the charitable organization or other
distributor to which the bingo supplies were sold or otherwise provided;
      (3)   A description that clearly identifies the bingo supplies;
      (4)   Invoices that include the non-repeating serial numbers of all paper
bingo cards and sheets and all instant bingo deals sold or otherwise provided
to each charitable organization.
   (g)   A manufacturer shall maintain, for a period of three (3) years after
the date of its sale or other provision, a record of each instance of its
selling or otherwise providing bingo supplies for use in this state. The record
shall include all of the following for each instance:
      (1)   The name and address of the distributor to whom the bingo supplies
were sold or otherwise provided;
      (2)   A description that clearly identifies the bingo supplies, including
serial numbers;
      (3)   Invoices that include the non-repeating serial numbers of all paper
bingo cards and sheets and all instant bingo deals sold or otherwise provided
to each distributor.
   (h)   The attorney general or any law enforcement agency may do all of the
following:
      (1)   Investigate any charitable organization or any officer, agent,
trustee, member, or employee of the organization;
      (2)   Examine the accounts and records of the organization;
      (3)   Conduct inspections, audits, and observations of bingo or games of
chance;
      (4)   Conduct inspections of the premises where bingo or games of chance
are conducted;
      (5)   Take any other necessary and reasonable action to determine if a
violation of any provision of RC 2915.01 to 2915.13 has occurred and to
determine whether RC 2915.11 has been complied with.
If any law enforcement agency has reasonable grounds to believe that a
charitable organization or an officer, agent, trustee, member, or employee of
the organization has violated any provision of this chapter, the law
enforcement agency may proceed by action in the proper court to enforce this
chapter, provided that the law enforcement agency shall give written notice to
the attorney general when commencing an action as described in this division.
   (i)   No person shall destroy, alter, conceal, withhold, or deny access to
any accounts or records of a charitable organization that have been requested
for examination, or obstruct, impede, or interfere with any inspection, audit,
or observation of bingo or a game of chance or premises where bingo or a game
of chance is conducted, or refuse to comply with any reasonable request of, or
obstruct, impede, or interfere with any other reasonable action undertaken by,
the attorney general or a law enforcement agency pursuant to division (h) of
this section.
   (j)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(Ord. No. 487-A-04. Passed 10-25-04, eff. 10-27-04)
§ 611.10 Minor and Felon Not to Work at Bingo Session
   (a)   No person shall be a bingo game operator unless he or she is eighteen
(18) years of age or older.
   (b)   No person who has been convicted of a felony or a gambling offense in
any jurisdiction shall be a bingo game operator.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(Ord. No. 487-A-04. Passed 10-25-04, eff. 10-27-04)
§ 611.11 Game for Amusement Only Excepted; Conditions; Enforcement; Offense
   (a)   RC 2915.07 to 2915.11 do not apply to bingo games that are conducted
for the purpose of amusement only. A bingo game is conducted for the purpose of
amusement only if it complies with all of the requirements specified in either
division (a)(1) or (2) of this section:
      (1)   A.   The participants do not pay any money or any other thing of
value including an admission fee, or any fee for bingo cards or sheets, objects
to cover the spaces, or other devices used in playing bingo, for the privilege
of participating in the bingo game, or to defray any costs of the game, or pay
tips or make donations during or immediately before or after the bingo game.
         B.   All prizes awarded during the course of the game are nonmonetary,
and in the form of merchandise, goods, or entitlements to goods or services
only, and the total value of all prizes awarded during the game is less than
one hundred dollars ($100.00).
         C.   No commission, wages, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity, or
other form of compensation, either directly or indirectly, and regardless of
the source, is paid to any bingo game operator for work or labor performed at
the site of the bingo game.
         D.   The bingo game is not conducted either during or within ten (10)
hours of any of the following:
            1.   A bingo session during which a charitable bingo game is
conducted under RC 2915.07 to 2915.11;
            2.   A scheme or game of chance, or bingo described in division (S)
(2) of RC 2915.01.
         E.   The number of players participating in the bingo game does not
exceed fifty (50).
      (2)   A.   The participants do not pay money or any other thing of value
as an admission fee, and no participant is charged more than twenty-five cents
($0.25) to purchase a bingo card or sheet, objects to cover the spaces, or
other devices used in playing bingo.
         B.   The total amount of money paid by all of the participants for
bingo cards or sheets, objects to cover the spaces, or other devices used in
playing bingo does not exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00).
         C.   All of the money paid for bingo cards or sheets, objects to cover
spaces, or other devices used in playing bingo is used only to pay winners
monetary and nonmonetary prizes and to provide refreshments.
         D.   The total value of all prizes awarded during the game does not
exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00).
         E.   No commission, wages, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity, or
other form of compensation, either directly or indirectly, and regardless of
the source, is paid to any bingo game operator for work or labor performed at
the site of the bingo game.
         F.   The bingo game is not conducted during or within ten (10) hours
of either of the following:
            1.   A bingo session during which a charitable bingo game is
conducted under RC 2915.07 to 2915.11;
            2.   A scheme of chance or game of chance, or bingo described in
division (S)(2) of RC 2915.01.
         G.   All of the participants reside at the premises where the bingo
game is conducted.
         H.   The bingo games are conducted on different days of the week and
not more than twice in a calendar week.
   (b)   The attorney general or any local law enforcement agency may
investigate the conduct of a bingo game that purportedly is conducted for
purposes of amusement only if there is reason to believe that the purported
amusement bingo game does not comply with the requirements of either division
(a)(1) or (2) of this section. A local law enforcement agency may proceed by
action in the proper court to enforce this section if the local law enforcement
agency gives written notice to the attorney general when commencing the action.
(Ord. No. 487-A-04. Passed 10-25-04, eff. 10-27-04)
§ 611.12 Permitting Unlawful Coin Machines
   (a)   No person shall exhibit, operate or permit the operation of any
machine, device or instrument, whether or not it purports to vend or distribute
merchandise or to furnish recreation or amusement, which is operated by the
insertion of any token, slug or disc, or exhibit, operate or permit the
operation of any machine, device or instrument which is operated by the
insertion of any coin, whether such machine, device or instrument purports to
vend or distribute merchandise or to furnish recreation or amusement, which as
a result of such operation discharges one (1) or more coins, tokens, slugs or
discs, or other memorandum of the result of operation which makes it possible
for one (1) user to receive more value than another user inserting a similar
coin.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of permitting unlawful coin
machines, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(Ord. No. 487-A-04. Passed 10-25-04, eff. 10-27-04)
CHAPTER 613 – LITTERING
613.01   Definitions
613.02   Litter on Public Property; Feeding Birds
613.03   Placement of Litter in Receptacles to Prevent Scattering
613.04   Upsetting Public or Private Receptacles
613.05   Depositing Litter Grass or Leaves in the Street
613.06   Littering From Motor Vehicle
613.07   Truck Loads Causing Litter
613.08   Litter in Parks
613.09   Litter in Lakes, Rivers and Watercourses
613.10   Discharging Oily Refuse
613.11   Throwing or Distributing Handbills in Public Places
613.12   Placing Commercial and Noncommercial Handbills on Vehicles
613.13   Litter on Occupied Private Property
613.14   Owner to Maintain Premises Free of Litter
613.15   Litter on Vacant Land
613.16   Release of Balloons
613.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Depositing garbage on public or private property, CO
551.26
   Drifting debris prohibited on City waters, CO
483.03
   Littering at airports, CO
571.16
   Littering enforcement by Traffic Engineering and Parking Division employees,
CO
403.08
   Obstructions and trash in parks, CO
559.29
   Vehicle loads dropping or leaking, CO
439.11
§ 613.01 Definitions
   As used in this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the following meanings. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the
plural number include the singular number and words used in the singular number
include the plural number. The word “shall” is always mandatory and not merely
directory.
   (a)   “Commercial handbill” means any printed or written matter, any sample
or devise, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other
printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature:
      (1)   Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or
thing;
      (2)   Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial
establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales; or
      (3)   Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition or event of any kind, for which an admission fee is
charged for the purpose of private gain or profit.
   (b)   “Garbage” means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from
the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
   (c)   “Litter” means “garbage”, “refuse” and “rubbish” as defined herein and
all other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited,
tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare.
   (d)   “Noncommercial handbill” means printed or written matter, any sample
or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper,
booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any
matter of literature not included in the aforementioned definitions of a
commercial handbill.
   (e)   “Park” means a park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center
or any other public area in the City, owned or used by the City and devoted to
active or passive recreation.
   (f)   “Public property” or “public place” means all property owned, operated
or controlled by any governmental agency, including but not limited to streets,
sidewalks, tree lawns, parks, playgrounds, parking lots, schools, libraries,
post offices, municipal transit facilities and other public lands and
buildings.
   (g)   “Private property” or “private places” means all property not included
in the definition of “public property” including, but not limited to, vacant
land or to any land, building or other structure designed or used for
residential, commercial, business, industrial, institutional or religious
purposes, together with any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, fence, porch, steps,
vestibule, mailbox and other structure appurtenant thereto.
   (h)   “Refuse” means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes,
including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned
automobiles and solid market and industrial wastes.
   (i)   “Rubbish” means nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both
combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, dirt,
cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding,
crockery and similar materials.
   (j)   “Vehicle” means every device in, upon or by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway.
(Ord. No. 1695-65. Passed 10-18-65, eff. 10-20-65)
§ 613.02 Litter on Public Property; Feeding Birds
   (a)   No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street,
sidewalk or other public place within the City except in public receptacles or
in authorized receptacles for collection.
   (b)   No person shall litter public property by the feeding of pigeons,
starlings, sparrows or other birds, nor shall any person place food for the
feeding of such birds on any public property so as to increase the hazard of
rodent infestation.
(Ord. No. 767-49. Passed 6-27-49)
§ 613.03 Placement of Litter in Receptacles to Prevent Scattering
   Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in private receptacles shall
do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the
elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private
property.
(Ord. No. 1695-65. Passed 10-18-65, eff. 10-20-65)
§ 613.04 Upsetting Public or Private Receptacles
   No person shall upset a public or private receptacle designed or used for
the deposit of litter or cause or permit its contents to be deposited or strewn
in or upon public or private property.
(Ord. No. 1695-65. Passed 10-18-65, eff. 10-20-65)
§ 613.05 Depositing Litter Grass or Leaves in the Street
   (a)   No person shall throw, deposit or sweep into any gutter, sidewalk,
street or other public place within the City the accumulation of litter from
any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons
owning or in control of or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front
of their premises free of litter.
   (b)   No person shall blow, dump or deposit leaves, grass clippings, or
other lawn debris onto any public street or alley, provided that nothing in
this division (b) shall prohibit depositing leaves onto a public street or
alley as part of a City-sponsored leaf pick-up program.
(Ord. No. 791-06. Passed 7-12-06, eff. 7-14-06)
§ 613.06 Littering From Motor Vehicle
   (a)   No operator or occupant of a motor vehicle shall, regardless of
intent, throw, drop, discard or deposit litter from any motor vehicle in
operation upon any street, road or highway, except into a litter receptacle in
a manner that prevents its being carried away or deposited by the elements.
   (b)   No operator of a motor vehicle in operation upon any street, road or
highway shall allow litter to be thrown, dropped, discarded or deposited from
the motor vehicle, except into a litter receptacle in a manner that prevents
its being carried away or deposited by the elements.
   (c)   As used in this section, “litter” means garbage, trash, waste,
rubbish, ashes, cans, bottles, wire, paper, cartons, boxes, automobile parts,
furniture, glass or anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature.
(RC 4511.82; Ord. No. 2823-89. Passed 3-19-90, eff. 3-22-90)
§ 613.07 Truck Loads Causing Litter
   No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the City
unless such vehicle is so loaded as to prevent any load, contents or litter
from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or other public place.
(Ord. No. 1695-65. Passed 10-18-65, eff. 10-20-65)
§ 613.08 Litter in Parks
   No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the City except
in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented
from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of that park or
upon any street or other public or private property. Where public receptacles
are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the
person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere.
(Ord. No. 1695-65. Passed 10-18-65, eff. 10-20-65)
§ 613.09 Litter in Lakes, Rivers and Watercourses
   (a)   No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond or any
other body of water or natural watercourse in a park or elsewhere within the
City.
   (b)   No person shall deposit, throw or dump any septic tank effluent,
refuse, rubbish, wood, stone, earth or other waste into Lake Erie, the Cuyahoga
River or any other body of water or watercourse, except when done under the
supervision and control of the City or the United States Government.
(Ord. No. 1695-65. Passed 10-18-65, eff. 10-20-65)
§ 613.10 Discharging Oily Refuse
   (a)   No distiller, refiner or person dealing in or handling petroleum,
having his or her refinery, yard, building or dock situated within the limits
of the City, or within the watercourse jurisdiction of the City, shall cause or
permit to be discharged into the Cuyahoga River, or into any stream running
into the same, any petroleum, tar, residuum, gasoline or other refuse matter,
not including spent acid or alkali, when the same has been entirely freed from
tar, residuum or oily matter.
   (b)   The absence of proper apparatus for taking care of and preventing the
flowing of these substances into the River, shall be deemed sufficient evidence
of violation. Any works, refineries, docks or yards, so found without such
apparatus, shall be suspended from operating until such time as they are
provided with the necessary apparatus for preventing such nuisance.
   (c)   All refineries, docks, yards or works where oils or tar are refined,
treated or handled, shall be thoroughly cleaned of all waste, oils, tar,
residuum or other waste matter, and kept free from the same. However, such
waste or refuse matter may be stored in tanks or barrels.
(Ord. No. 63410-A. Passed 9-22-24)
§ 613.11 Throwing or Distributing Handbills in Public Places
   No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in
or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the City. Nor shall
any person hand out or distribute or sell any commercial handbill in any public
place. However, it shall not be unlawful on any sidewalk, street or other
public place unless specifically prohibited by the controlling governmental
agency, for any person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the
receiver thereof, any noncommercial handbill to any person willing to accept
it, and provided further that the person making the distribution shall not
hamper or interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
(Ord. No. 1695-65. Passed 10-18-65, eff. 10-20-65)
§ 613.12 Placing Commercial and Noncommercial Handbills on Vehicles
   No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in
or upon any vehicle. However, it shall not be unlawful in any public place
unless specifically prohibited by the controlling governmental agency for a
person to hand out or distribute without charge to the receiver thereof, a
noncommercial handbill to any occupant of a vehicle who is willing to accept
it.
(Ord. No. 1695-65. Passed 10-18-65, eff. 10-20-65)
§ 613.13 Litter on Occupied Private Property
   No person shall throw or deposit any litter on any occupied private property
except in properly maintained receptacles. The owner or person in control of
private property must provide sufficient private receptacles for collection of
litter. No person shall deposit litter in receptacles in such a manner that it
will be carried or deposited by the elements upon private property or any
sidewalk, street or other public place.
(Ord. No. 1695-65. Passed 10-18-65, eff. 10-20-65)
§ 613.14 Owner to Maintain Premises Free of Litter
   The owner, occupant or person in control of any private property shall at
all times maintain the premises free of litter except that which is contained
in receptacles for collection.
(Ord. No. 1695-65. Passed 10-18-65, eff. 10-20-65)
§ 613.15 Litter on Vacant Land
   (a)   No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private
property within the City whether owned by such person or not.
   (b)   No person shall throw or deposit food, including any food intended for
animals, on any open or vacant private property within the City whether owned
by such person or not.
(Ord. No. 633-04. Passed 6-7-04, eff. 6-11-04)
§ 613.16 Release of Balloons
   No person shall intentionally release, organize the release or intentionally
cause to be released within a twenty-four (24) hour period ten (10) or more
balloons inflated with a gas that is lighter than air, except for:
   (a)   Balloons released by a person on behalf of a governmental agency or
pursuant to a governmental contract for scientific or meteorological purposes;
   (b)   Hot air balloons that are recovered after launching; or
   (c)   Balloons released indoors.
(Ord. No. 1022-2021. Passed 1-24-22, eff. 1-26-22)
§ 613.99 Penalty
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of littering, a
minor misdemeanor. In addition to any other method of enforcement provided in
this chapter, this chapter may be enforced by the issuance of a citation in
compliance with Rule 4.1 of the Ohio Rules of Criminal Procedures.
(Ord. No. 1308-05. Passed 12-5-05, eff. 12-12-05)
CHAPTER 615 – LAW ENFORCEMENT AND PUBLIC OFFICE
615.01   Definitions
615.02   Falsification
615.03   Compounding a Crime
615.04   Failure to Report a Crime, Injury or Knowledge of Death
615.05   Failure to Aid a Law Enforcement Officer
615.06   Obstructing Official Business
615.07   Obstructing Justice
615.08   Resisting Arrest
615.09   Personating an Officer
615.091   Impersonation of Peace Officer or Private Policeman
615.10   Having an Unlawful Interest in a Public Contract
615.11   Soliciting or Receiving Improper Compensation
615.12   Dereliction of Duty
615.13   Interfering with Civil Rights
615.14   Copying Police and Fire Uniforms
615.15   Giving False Information to Enforcement Agents
615.16   Operation of Telephone Alarm Systems
615.17   Unauthorized Display of Law Enforcement Emblems on Motor Vehicles
615.18   Use of City Resources for Construction and Maintenance of State Penal
and Reformatory Institution Prohibited
615.19   Fire Damage to Motor Vehicles Required to be Reported
Charter reference:
   Financial interest in contracts, Charter §
195
Cross-reference:
   Certification of death, CO
233.01
   Claims against City for damages suffered in crime prevention or apprehension
of criminals, CO
155.03
   Director of Public Safety to make monthly crime statistics report to
Council, CO
135.02
   Disposition of property held by Division of Police, CO
601.14
   Financial interest in contracts, CO
171.38
   Law enforcement officer defined, CO
601.01
   Making false alarms, CO
605.07
   Misconduct at an emergency, CO
605.05
   Refusal to obey subpoena or produce evidence, CO
111.08
   Resisting police in parks, CO
559.55
   Unlawful discriminatory conduct, CO
Ch. 667
Statutory reference:
   See sectional histories for similar State law
§ 615.01 Definitions
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   “Public official” means any elected or appointed officer, or employee,
or agent of the State or any political subdivision thereof, whether in a
temporary or permanent capacity, and including without limitation legislators,
judges and law enforcement officers.
   (b)   “Public servant” means any of the following:
      (1)   Any public official;
      (2)   Any person performing ad hoc a governmental function, including
without limitation a juror, member of a temporary commission, master,
arbitrator, advisor or consultant;
      (3)   A candidate for public office, whether or not he or she is elected
or appointed to the office for which he or she is a candidate. A person is a
candidate for purposes of this division if he or she has been nominated
according to law for election or appointment to public office, or if he or she
has filed a petition or petitions as required by law to have his or her name
placed on the ballot in a primary, general or special election, or if he or she
campaigns as a write-in candidate in any primary, general or special election.
   (c)   “Party official” means any person who holds an elective or appointive
post in a political party in the United States or this State, by virtue of
which he or she directs, conducts or participates in directing or conducting
party affairs at any level of responsibility.
   (d)   “Official proceeding” means any proceeding before a legislative,
judicial, administrative or other governmental agency or official authorized to
take evidence under oath, and includes any proceeding before a referee, hearing
examiner, commissioner, notary or other person taking testimony or a deposition
in connection with an official proceeding.
   (e)   “Detention” means arrest; confinement in any vehicle subsequent to an
arrest; confinement in any facility for custody of persons charged with or
convicted of crime or alleged or found to be a delinquent child or unruly
child; hospitalization, institutionalization, or confinement in any facility
that is ordered pursuant to or under the authority of RC 2945.37, 2945.371,
2945.38, 2945.39, or 2945.40; confinement in any vehicle for transportation to
or from any such facility; detention for extradition or deportation; except as
provided in this division, supervision by any employee of any such facility
that is incidental to hospitalization, institutionalization, or confinement in
the facility but that occurs outside the facility; or supervision by an
employee of the department of rehabilitation and correction of a person on any
type of release from a state correctional institution other than release on
parole or shock probation; or confinement in any vehicle, airplane, or place
while being returned from outside this state into this state by a private
person or entity pursuant to a contract entered into by division (E) of RC
311.29 or division (B) of RC 5149.03. For a person confined in a county jail
who participates in a county jail industry program pursuant to RC 5147.30,
“detention” includes time spent at an assigned work site and going to and from
the work site.
   (f)   “Detention facility” means any place used for the confinement of a
person charged with or convicted of a crime or alleged or found to be a
delinquent child or unruly child.
   (g)   “Provider agreement” and “medical assistance program” have the same
meanings as in RC 2913.40.
   (h)   “Valuable thing or valuable benefit” includes, but is not limited to,
a contribution. This inclusion does not indicate or imply that a contribution
was not included in those terms before the effective date of this division.
   (i)   “Campaign committee,” “contribution,” “political action committee,”
“legislative campaign fund,” and “political party” and “political contributing
entity” have the same meaning as in RC 3517.01.
(RC 2921.01; Ord. No. 1631-05. Passed 3-20-06, eff. 3-24-06)
§ 615.02 Falsification
   (a)   No person shall knowingly make a false statement, or knowingly swear
or affirm the truth of a false statement previously made, when any of the
following applies:
      (1)   The statement is made in any official proceeding;
      (2)   The statement is made with purpose to incriminate another;
      (3)   The statement is made with purpose to mislead a public official in
performing the public official’s function;
      (4)   The statement is made with purpose to secure the payment of
unemployment compensation; Ohio works first; prevention, retention, and
contingency benefits and services; disability financial assistance; retirement
benefits; economic development assistance, as defined in RC 9.66; or other
benefits administered by a governmental agency or paid out of a public
treasury;
      (5)   The statement is made with purpose to secure the issuance by a
governmental agency of a license, permit, authorization, certificate,
registration, release, or provider agreement;
      (6)   The statement is sworn or affirmed before a notary public or
another person empowered to administer oaths;
      (7)   The statement is in writing on or in connection with a report or
return that is required or authorized by law;
      (8)   The statement is in writing, and is made with purpose to induce
another to extend credit to or to employ the offender, or to confer any degree,
diploma, certificate of attainment, award of excellence or honor on the
offender, or to extend to or bestow upon the offender any other valuable
benefit or distinction, when the person to whom such statement is directed
relies upon it to his or her detriment;
      (9)   The statement is made with purpose to commit or facilitate the
commission of a theft offense if the value of the property or services stolen
is less than five hundred dollars ($500.00);
      (10)   The statement is knowingly made to a probate court in connection
with any action, proceeding, or other matter within its jurisdiction, either
orally or in a written document, including, but not limited to, an application,
petition, complaint, or other pleading, or an inventory, account, or report;
      (11)   The statement is made on an account, form, record, stamp, label or
other writing that is required by law;
      (12)   The statement is made in a document or instrument of writing that
purports to be a judgment, lien, or claim of indebtedness and is filed or
recorded with the secretary of state, a country recorder, or the clerk of court
of record;
      (13)   The statement is made with purpose to obtain an Ohio’s best Rx
program enrollment card under RC 5110.09 or a payment from the Ohio Department
of Job and Family Services under RC 5110.17;
      (14)   The statement is required under RC 5743.72 in connection with the
person’s purchase of cigarettes or tobacco products in a delivery sale.
   (b)   It is no defense to a charge under division (a)(6) of this section
that the oath or affirmation was administered or taken in an irregular manner.
   (c)   Where contradictory statements relating to the same fact are made by
the offender within the period of the statute of limitations for falsification,
it is not necessary for the prosecution to prove which statement was false, but
only that one (1) or the other was false.
   (d)   (1)   Whoever violates any provision of divisions (a)(1) to (8) or (a)
(10) to (14) of this section is guilty of falsification, a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (a)(9) of this section is guilty of
falsification in a theft offense a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (e)   A person who violates this section is subject to a civil action as
described in division (G) of RC 2921.13.
(RC 2921.13; Ord. No. 1631-05. Passed 3-20-06, eff. 3-24-06)
§ 615.03 Compounding a Crime
   (a)   No person shall knowingly demand, accept or agree to accept anything
of value in consideration of abandoning or agreeing to abandon a pending
criminal prosecution.
   (b)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section when both
of the following apply:
      (1)   The pending prosecution involved is for a violation of Sections
625.05,
625.11 or
625.12(b)(2) or RC 2913.02, 2913.11, 2913.21(B)(2), or 2913.47 of which the
actor under this section was the victim;
      (2)   The thing of value demanded, accepted or agreed to be accepted, in
consideration of abandoning or agreeing to abandon the prosecution, did not
exceed an amount which the actor reasonably believed due him or her as
restitution for the loss caused him or her by the offense.
   (c)   When a prosecuting witness abandons or agrees to abandon a prosecution
under division (b) of this section, such abandonment or agreement in no way
binds the State to abandoning the prosecution.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of compounding a crime, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(RC 2921.21; Ord. No. 1631-05. Passed 3-20-06, eff. 3-24-06)
§ 615.04 Failure to Report a Crime, Injury or Knowledge of Death
   (a)   No person, knowing that a felony has been or is being committed, shall
knowingly fail to report such information to law enforcement authorities.
   (b)   Except for conditions that are within the scope of division (e) of
this section, no physician, limited practitioner, nurse or person giving aid to
a sick or injured person, shall negligently fail to report to law enforcement
authorities any gunshot or stab wound treated or observed by him or her, or any
serious physical harm to persons that he or she knows or has reasonable cause
to believe resulted from an offense of violence.
   (c)   No person who discovers the body or acquires the first knowledge of
the death of any person shall fail to report the death immediately to any
physician whom the person knows to be treating the deceased for a condition
from which death at such time would not be unexpected, or to a law enforcement
officer, ambulance service, emergency squad or the coroner in a political
subdivision in which the body is discovered, the death is believed to have
occurred or knowledge concerning the death is obtained.
   (d)   No person shall fail to provide upon request of the person to whom he
or she has made a report required by division (c) of this section, or to any
law enforcement officer who has reasonable cause to assert the authority to
investigate the circumstances surrounding the death, any facts within his or
her knowledge that may have a bearing on the investigation of the death.
   (e)   (1)   As used in this division (e), “burn injury” means any of the
following:
         A.   Second or third degree burns;
         B.   Any burns to the upper respiratory tract or laryngeal edema due
to the inhalation of super- heated air;
         C.   Any burn injury or wound that may result in death;
         D.   Any physical harm to persons caused by or as the result of
fireworks, novelties and trick noisemakers, and wire sparklers, as each is
defined in RC 3743.01.
      (2)   No physician, nurse or limited practitioner who, outside a
hospital, sanitarium or other medical facility, attends or treats a person who
has sustained a burn injury inflicted by an explosion or other incendiary
device, or that shows evidence of having been inflicted in a violent, malicious
or criminal manner, shall fail to report the burn injury immediately to the
local arson bureau, if there is such a bureau in the jurisdiction in which the
person is attended or treated, or otherwise to local law enforcement
authorities.
      (3)   No manager, superintendent or other person in charge of a hospital,
sanitarium or other medical facility in which a person is attended or treated
for any burn injury inflicted by an explosion or other incendiary device, or
that shows evidence of having been inflicted in a violent, malicious, or
criminal manner, shall fail to report the burn injury immediately to the local
arson bureau, if there is such a bureau in the jurisdiction in which the person
is attended or treated, or otherwise to local law enforcement authorities.
      (4)   No person who is required to report any burn injury under division
(e)(2) or (3) of this section shall fail to file, within three (3) working days
after attending or treating the victim, a written report of the burn injury
with the Office of the State Fire Marshal. The report shall be made on a form
developed by the State Fire Marshal.
      (5)   Anyone participating in the making of reports under division (e) of
this section or anyone participating in a judicial proceeding resulting from
the reports shall be immune from any civil or criminal liability that otherwise
might be incurred or imposed as a result of such actions. Notwithstanding RC
4731.22, the physician-patient relationship is not a ground for excluding
evidence regarding a person’s burn injury or the cause of the burn injury in
any judicial proceeding resulting from a report submitted pursuant to division
(e) of this section.
   (f)   (1)   Any doctor of medicine or osteopathic medicine, hospital intern
or resident, registered or licensed practical nurse, psychologist, social
worker, independent social worker, social work assistant, professional clinical
counselor, professional counselor, or professional counselor’s assistant who
knows or has reasonable cause to believe that a patient or client has been the
victim of domestic violence, as defined in RC 3113.31, shall note that
knowledge or belief and the basis for it in the patient’s or client’s records.
      (2)   Notwithstanding RC 4731.22, the doctor-patient privilege shall not
be a ground for excluding any information regarding the report containing the
knowledge or belief noted pursuant to division (f)(1) of this section, and the
information may be admitted as evidence in accordance with the Rules of
Evidence.
   (g)   Division (a) or (d) of this section does not require disclosure of
information, when any of the following applies:
      (1)   The information is privileged by reason of the relationship between
attorney and client, doctor and patient, licensed psychologist or licensed
school psychologist and client, clergyman or rabbi or minister or priest and
any person communicating information confidentially to him or her for a
religious counseling purpose in his or her professional character, husband and
wife, or a communications assistant and those who are a party to a
telecommunications relay service call;
      (2)   The information would tend to incriminate a member of the actor’s
immediate family;
      (3)   Disclosure of the information would amount to revealing a news
source, privileged under RC 2739.04 or 2739.12;
      (4)   Disclosure of the information would amount to disclosure by an
ordained clergyman of an organized religious body of a confidential
communication made to him or her in his or her capacity as such by a person
seeking his or her aid or counsel;
      (5)   Disclosure would amount to revealing information acquired by the
actor in the course of his or her duties in connection with a bona fide program
of treatment or services for drug dependent persons or persons in danger of
drug dependence, which program is maintained or conducted by a hospital,
clinic, person, agency or organization certified pursuant to RC 3793.06;
      (6)   Disclosure would amount to revealing information acquired by the
actor in the course of his or her duties in connection with a bona fide program
for providing counseling services to victims of crimes that are violations of
RC 2907.02, 2907.05 or 2907.12. As used in this division, “counseling services”
include services provided in an informal setting by a person who by education
or experience, is competent to provide such services.
   (h)   No disclosure of information pursuant to this section gives rise to
any liability or recrimination for a breach of privilege or confidence.
   (i)   Whoever violates division (a) or (b) of this section is guilty of
failure to report a crime. Violation of division (a) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Violation of division (b) of this section is
a misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (j)   Whoever violates division (c) or (d) of this section is guilty of
failure to report knowledge of a death, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (k)   (1)   Whoever negligently violates division (e) of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   Whoever knowingly violates division (e) of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
(RC 2921.22; Ord. No. 1631-05. Passed 3-20-06, eff. 3-24-06)
§ 615.05 Failure to Aid a Law Enforcement Officer
   (a)   No person shall negligently fail or refuse to aid a law enforcement
officer, when called upon for assistance in preventing or halting the
commission of an offense, or in apprehending or detaining an offender, when
such aid can be given without a substantial risk of physical harm to the person
giving it.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to aid a law
enforcement officer, a minor misdemeanor.
(RC 2921.23; Ord. No. 54-74. Passed 3-25-74, eff. 4-1-74)
§ 615.06 Obstructing Official Business
   (a)   No person, without privilege to do so and with purpose to prevent,
obstruct or delay the performance by a public official of any authorized act
within his or her official capacity, shall do any act which hampers or impedes
a public official in the performance of his or her lawful duties.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of obstructing official
business, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
(RC 2921.31)
   (c)   This section does not apply if a violation creates a risk of physical
harm to any person.
(Ord. No. 1631-05. Passed 3-20-06, eff. 3-24-06)
§ 615.07 Obstructing Justice
   (a)   No person, with purpose to hinder the discovery, apprehension,
prosecution, conviction or punishment of another for a misdemeanor offense, or
to assist another to benefit from the commission of a misdemeanor offense,
shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Harbor or conceal such other person;
      (2)   Provide such other person with money, transportation, a weapon, a
disguise or other means of avoiding discovery or apprehension;
      (3)   Warn such other person of impending discovery or apprehension;
      (4)   Destroy or conceal physical evidence of the crime, or induce any
person to withhold testimony or information or to elude legal process summoning
him or her to testify or supply evidence;
      (5)   Communicate false information to any person;
      (6)   Prevent or obstruct any person by means of force intimidating, or
deception, from performing any act to aid in the discovery, apprehension, or
prosecution of the other person.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of obstructing justice, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(RC 2921.32; Ord. No. 1631-05. Passed 3-20-06, eff. 3-24-06)
§ 615.08 Resisting Arrest
   (a)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a
lawful arrest of himself or herself or another.
   (b)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a
lawful arrest of the person or another person and, during the course of or as a
result of the interference, cause physical harm to a law enforcement officer.
   (c)   This section does not apply if the offender during the course of or as
a result of the resistance or interference, recklessly causes physical harm to
a law enforcement officer by means of a deadly weapon or during the course of
the resistance or interference, brandishes a deadly weapon.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of resisting arrest. A
violation of division (a) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second
degree. A violation of division (b) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(RC 2921.33; Ord. No. 1631-05. Passed 3-20-06, eff. 3-24-06)
§ 615.09 Personating an Officer
   (a)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she is
facilitating a fraud, or with purpose to induce another to purchase property or
services, shall personate a law enforcement officer, or an inspector,
investigator or agent of any governmental agency.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of personating an officer, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(RC 2913.44; Ord. No. 54-74. Passed 3-25-74; eff. 4-1-74)
§ 615.091 Impersonation of Peace Officer or Private Policeman
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Peace officer” means a sheriff, deputy sheriff, marshal, deputy
marshal, member of the organized police department of a municipal corporation
or township constable who is employed by a political subdivision of this State,
a member of a police force employed by a metropolitan housing authority under
RC 3735.31, a member of a police force employed by a regional transit authority
under RC 306.35, a State university law enforcement officer appointed under RC
3345.04, an Ohio veterans’ home policeman appointed under RC 5907.02, a special
police officer employed by a port authority under RC 4528.04 or 4582.28, or a
State highway patrol trooper and whose primary duties are to preserve the
peace, to protect life and property and to enforce the laws, ordinances or
rules of the State or any of its political subdivisions.
      (2)   “Private policeman” means any security guard, special policeman,
private detective or other person who is privately employed in a police
capacity.
      (3)   “Impersonate” means to act the part of, assume the identity of,
wear the uniform or any part of the uniform of or display the identification of
a particular person or a member of a class of persons with purpose to make
another person believe that the actor is that particular person or is a member
of that class of persons.
   (b)   No person shall impersonate a peace officer or a private policeman.
   (c)   No person, by impersonating a peace officer or a private policeman,
shall arrest or detain any person, search any person or search the property of
any person.
   (d)   No person, with purpose to commit or facilitate the commission of an
offense, shall impersonate a peace officer, a private policeman or an officer,
agent or employee of the State or the Municipality.
   (e)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (b) of this
section that the impersonation of the peace officer was for a lawful purpose.
   (f)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Whoever violates divisions(c) or (d) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree, provided that the
purpose of a violation of division (d) of this section is not to commit or
facilitate the commission of a felony.
(RC 2921.51; Ord. No. 1631-05. Passed 3-20-06, eff. 3-24-06)
§ 615.10 Having an Unlawful Interest in a Public Contract
   (a)   No public official shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   During his or her term of office or within one (1) year thereafter,
occupy any position of profit in the prosecution of a public contract
authorized by him, her or by a legislative body, commission, or board of which
he or she was a member at the time of authorization, unless the contract was
let by competitive bidding to the lowest and best bidder;
      (2)   Have an interest in the profits or benefits of a public contract
entered into by or for the use of the political subdivision or governmental
agency or instrumentality with which he or she is connected;
      (3)   Have an interest in the profits or benefits of a public contract
which is not let by competitive bidding when required by law, and which
involves more than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).
   (b)   In the absence of bribery or a purpose to defraud, a public official,
member of his or her family, or any of his or her business associates shall not
be considered as having an interest in a public contract or the investment of
public funds, if all of the following apply:
      (1)   The interest of such person is limited to owning or controlling
shares of the corporation, or being a creditor of the corporation or other
organization, which is the contractor on the public contract involved, or which
is the issuer of the security in which public funds are invested;
      (2)   The shares owned or controlled by such person do not exceed five
percent (5%) of the outstanding shares of the corporation, and the amount due
such person as creditor does not exceed five percent (5%) of the total
indebtedness of the corporation or other organization;
      (3)   Such person, prior to the time the public contract is entered into,
files with the political subdivision or governmental agency or instrumentality
involved, an affidavit giving his or her exact status in connection with the
corporation or other organization.
   (c)   This section does not apply to a public contract in which a public
official, member of his or her family, or one (1) of his or her business
associates has an interest, when all of the following apply:
      (1)   The subject of the public contract is necessary supplies or
services for the political subdivision or governmental agency or
instrumentality involved;
      (2)   The supplies or services are unobtainable elsewhere for the same or
lower cost, or are being furnished to the political subdivision or governmental
agency or instrumentality as part of a continuing course of dealing established
prior to the public official’s becoming associated with the political
subdivision or governmental agency or instrumentality involved;
      (3)   The treatment accorded the political subdivision or governmental
agency or instrumentality is either preferential to or the same as that
accorded other customers or clients in similar transactions;
      (4)   The entire transaction is conducted at arm’s length, with full
knowledge by the political subdivision or governmental agency or
instrumentality involved, of the interest of the public official, member of his
or her family, or business associate, and the public official takes no part in
the deliberations or decision of the political subdivision or governmental
agency or instrumentality with respect to the public contract.
   (d)   Division (a)(4) of this section does not prohibit participation by a
public employee in any housing program funded by public moneys if the public
employee otherwise qualifies for the program and does not use the authority or
influence of his or her office or employment to secure benefits from the
program and if the moneys are to be used on the primary residence of the public
employee. Such participation does not constitute an unlawful interest in a
public contract in violation of this section.
   (e)   This section does not apply where a public official authorizes, or
employs the authority or influence of his or her office to:
      (1)   Secure authorization of any public contract in which he or she, a
member of his or her family or any of his or her business associates has an
interest; or
      (2)   Secure the investment of public funds in any share, bond, mortgage,
or other security with respect to which he or she, a member of his or her
family, or any of his or her business associates either has an interest, is an
underwriter, or receives any brokerage, origination, or servicing fees.
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of having an unlawful interest
in a public contract. Violation of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
   (g)   It is not a violation of this section for a prosecuting attorney to
appoint assistants and employees in accordance with Section
309.06 and RC 2921.421 of this section, for a chief legal officer of a
municipal corporation or an official designated as prosecutor in a municipal
corporation to appoint assistants and employees in accordance with RC 733.621
and 2921.421, or for a township law director appointed under RC 504.15 to
appoint assistants and employees in accordance with RC 504.151 and 2921.421.
   (h)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Public contract” means any of the following:
         A.   The purchase or acquisition, or a contract for the purchase or
acquisition of property or services by or for the use of the State, any of its
political subdivisions, or any agency or instrumentality of either, including
the employment of an individual by the State, any of its political
subdivisions, or any agency or instrumentality of either.
         B.   A contract for the design, construction, alteration, repair or
maintenance of any public property.
      (2)   “Chief legal officer” has the same meaning as in RC 733.621.
(RC 2921.42; Ord. No. 1631-05. Passed 3-20-06, eff. 3-24-06)
§ 615.11 Soliciting or Receiving Improper Compensation
   (a)   No public servant shall knowingly solicit or accept and no person
shall knowingly promise or give to a public servant either of the following:
      (1)   Any compensation, other than is allowed by divisions (G), (H), and
(I) of RC 102.03 or other provisions of law, to perform his or her official
duties, to perform any other act or service in the public servant’s public
capacity, for the general performance of the duties of the public servant’s
public office or public employment, or as a supplement to the public servant’s
public compensation;
      (2)   Additional or greater fees or costs than are allowed by law to
perform his or her official duties.
   (b)   No public servant for his or her own personal or business use and no
person for his or her own personal or business use or for the personal or
business use of a public servant or party official, shall solicit or accept
anything of value in consideration of either of the following:
      (1)   Appointing or securing, maintaining or renewing the appointment of
any person to any public office, employment or agency;
      (2)   Preferring, or maintaining the status of any public employee with
respect to his or her compensation, duties, placement, location, promotion or
other material aspects of his or her employment.
   (c)   No person for the benefit of a political party, campaign committee,
legislative campaign fund, political action committee, or political
contributing entity shall coerce any contribution in consideration of either of
the following:
      (1)   Appointing or securing, maintaining or renewing the appointment of
any person to any public office, employment or agency;
      (2)   Preferring, or maintaining the status of, any public employee with
respect to his or her compensation, duties, placement, location, promotion or
other material aspects of his or her employment.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of soliciting improper
compensation, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (e)   A public servant who is convicted of a violation of this section is
disqualified from holding any public office, employment or position of trust in
this City for a period of seven (7) years from the date of conviction.
   (f)   Divisions (a), (b) and (c) of this section do not prohibit a person
from making voluntary contributions to a political party, campaign committee,
legislative campaign fund, political action committee, or political
contributing entity or prohibit a political party, campaign committee,
legislative campaign fund, political action committee, or political
contributing entity from accepting voluntary contributions.
(RC 2921.43; Ord. No. 1631-05. Passed 3-20-06, eff. 3-24-06)
§ 615.12 Dereliction of Duty
   (a)   No law enforcement officer shall negligently do any of the following:
      (1)   Fail to serve a lawful warrant without delay;
      (2)   Fail to prevent or halt the commission of an offense or to
apprehend an offender, when it is in his or her power to do so alone or with
available assistance.
   (b)   No law enforcement, ministerial or judicial officer shall negligently
fail to perform a lawful duty in a criminal case or proceeding.
   (c)   No officer, having charge of a detention facility, shall negligently
do any of the following:
      (1)   Allow the detention facility to become littered or unsanitary;
      (2)   Fail to provide persons confined in the detention facility with
adequate food, clothing, bedding, shelter and medical attention;
      (3)   Fail to control an unruly prisoner, or to prevent intimidation of
or physical harm to a prisoner by another;
      (4)   Allow a prisoner to escape;
      (5)   Fail to observe any lawful and reasonable regulation for the
management of the detention facility.
   (d)   No public official of the State shall recklessly create a deficiency,
incur a liability or expend a greater sum than is appropriated by the General
Assembly for the use in any one (1) year of the department, agency or
institution of the State with which the public official is connected.
   (e)   No public servant shall recklessly fail to perform a duty expressly
imposed by law with respect to his or her office, or recklessly do any act
expressly forbidden by law with respect to his or her office.
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of dereliction of duty, a
misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (g)   As used in this section, “public servant” includes an officer or
employee of a contractor as defined in RC 9.08.
(RC 2921.44; Ord. No. 1631-05. Passed 3-20-06, eff. 3-24-06)
§ 615.13 Interfering with Civil Rights
   (a)   No public servant, under color of his or her office, employment or
authority, shall knowingly deprive, conspire or attempt to deprive any person
of a constitutional or statutory right.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of interfering with civil
rights, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(RC 2921.45; Ord. No. 54-74. Passed 3-25-74, eff. 4-1-74)
§ 615.14 Copying Police and Fire Uniforms
   (a)   No person not a member of the Police or Fire Division shall wear a
uniform, cap, badge or buttons similar to, or in imitation of the official
uniform, cap, badge or buttons at the time in use by members of the Police and
Fire Divisions.
   (b)   No person, firm or corporation desiring to provide special police,
watchmen, or detective service, either for itself or for hire to others, shall
use a distinctive uniform cap, badge or buttons, to be worn by such person or
any employees engaged for such purpose, until the form, design and color
thereof have first been submitted to and approved by the Director of Public
Safety, and a record sufficient to identify the users thereof has been made by
the Director.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of copying official uniforms,
a minor misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 1115-18. Passed 10-15-18, eff. 10-17-18)
§ 615.15 Giving False Information to Enforcement Agents
   (a)   No person shall knowingly give or assist in giving any false or
fictitious information relative to the name, address or the date of birth of
any person to any duly authorized enforcement agent.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of giving false information to
enforcement agents, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(Ord. No. 1020-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
§ 615.16 Operation of Telephone Alarm Systems
   (a)   No person, firm or corporation shall install, operate or maintain a
telephonic alarm system which automatically transmits a signal, message or
warning to any City of Cleveland Division of Fire or Division of Police
telephone line.
   (b)   It shall be the responsibility of any person, firm or corporation
which has installed or sold existing alarms to give to the buyer or subscriber
of such alarm a written notice of the provisions of this section.
   (c)   For the purpose of this section, “telephone alarm system” means any
mechanism, equipment or device which is designed to operate automatically
through the use of public telephone facilities to transmit a signal, message or
warning to another location.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful telephone alarm
system operation, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(Ord. No. 1020-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
§ 615.17 Unauthorized Display of Law Enforcement Emblems on Motor Vehicles
   (a)   No person who is not entitled to do so shall knowingly display on a
motor vehicle the emblem of a law enforcement agency or an organization of law
enforcement officers.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of the unlawful display of the
emblem of a law enforcement agency or an organization of law enforcement
officers, a minor misdemeanor.
(RC 2913.441; Ord. No. 1475-78. Passed 10-9-78, eff. 10-11-78)
§ 615.18 Use of City Resources for Construction and Maintenance of State Penal
and Reformatory Institution Prohibited
   No funds, credit, services, facilities or any other resources of the City of
Cleveland may be used, lent, allocated or provided in the planning,
construction, maintenance or operation of any State of Ohio Penal or
Reformatory Institution as defined by RC 2967.01(A) built or planned to be
built within the City of Cleveland municipal limits. No officer, employee or
elected official of the City of Cleveland may provide any assistance, provide
any service or participate in the planning, operation or maintenance of any
State of Ohio Penal or Reformatory Institution as defined by RC 2967.01(A)
built or planned to be built within the City of Cleveland municipal limits. The
word “services” or “service” as used in this section shall include, but not be
limited to, police protection, fire protection, water, electricity and/or waste
collection. Any private citizen may bring a lawsuit in proper jurisdiction to
obtain injunctive relief to enforce this section without the necessity to post
a bond or other security.
   The provisions and prohibitions of this section shall not apply to the
Northeast Ohio Pre-Release Center, located at East 30th Street and Orange
Avenue, in the City of Cleveland.
   Violation of this section by any employee, officer, elected official or
agent of the City of Cleveland shall be a misdemeanor of the first degree,
punishable by a maximum of six (6) months imprisonment and/or a maximum fine of
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). If any portion of this section is found to be
invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, the
remaining portions of this section shall be unaffected and enforceable.
(Ord. No. 457-87. Passed 2-23-87, eff. 2-25-87)
§ 615.19 Fire Damage to Motor Vehicles Required to be Reported
   (a)   As used in this section, “actual, economic or constructive total loss”
means the damage or destruction of a motor vehicle as a result of fire in which
the cost of parts and/or labor for the repair is eighty percent (80%) or
greater than the fair market value, with reference to the National Automobile
Dealers Association (NADA) guide or other pricing guides.
   (b)   Any person owning a motor vehicle that is damaged by fire in the City
of Cleveland shall make a report to the Division of Fire if the motor vehicle
is an actual, economic or constructive total loss due to the fire or if the
fire is determined to be incendiary by the Division of Fire. The report shall
disclose all owners and lienholders of the motor vehicle, the purchase price of
the motor vehicle, the amount of the loan payments, if any, all insurance
claims made previously concerning the motor vehicle or any other property in
the five (5) year period prior to the fire, the condition of the motor vehicle
prior to the fire, the names of the insurance companies to which prior claims
were made, and such additional information as deemed necessary by the Chief of
Fire. The format, number of copies needed, and filing locations shall be
determined by the Chief of Fire. The Division of Fire shall make the
uncompleted form reports available to insurance companies and persons
requesting them.
   (c)   The report required by this section shall be acknowledged before a
notary public and subject to the penalties for falsification contained in RC
2921.13 and Section
615.02 of these Codified Ordinances.
   (d)   Any person who violates this section is guilty of failing to file a
fire damage report, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
(Ord. No. 1779-89. Passed 1-22-90, eff. 1-30-90)
CHAPTER 617 – LIQUOR CONTROL
617.01   Definitions
617.02   Sales to and Use by Minors; Securing Public Accommodations
617.021   Purchase, Consumption or Possession by Minor; Misrepresentation
617.03   Sales to Intoxicated Persons
617.04   Liquor Consumption in Motor Vehicle
617.05   Permit Required
617.06   Printed Warnings to be Posted
617.07   Open Container Prohibited; Exception
617.08   Hours of Sale or Consumption
617.09   Bottle Clubs
617.10   Conveying Intoxicating Liquors or Drugs into Hospital
617.11   Selling or Dispensing Beer or Liquor in Certain Public Premises
617.12   Consumption of Intoxicating Liquor in Parks and Recreational
Facilities
Cross-reference:
   Disorderly conduct; intoxication, CO
605.03
   Intoxicant use prohibited while operating motor vehicle at airport, CO
571.25
   Intoxicating liquors at markets, CO
553.07
   Renting vessels to intoxicated persons, CO
573.40
   Renting watercraft to intoxicated persons, CO
485.17
   Use or sale of intoxicating liquor in parks, CO
559.46
   Using weapons while intoxicated, CO
627.04
   Watercraft operation under influence of alcohol or drug of abuse, CO
485.03
Statutory reference:
   See sectional histories for similar State law
   Local option, RC 4301.32 et seq., 4303.29
   Prohibiting sale of intoxicating liquor on Sunday, RC 4301.22
§ 617.01 Definitions
   As used in the Codified Ordinances:
   (a)   “Alcohol” means ethyl alcohol, whether rectified or diluted with water
or not, whatever its origin may be, and includes synthetic ethyl alcohol.
Alcohol does not include denatured alcohol and wood alcohol.
   (b)   “Intoxicating liquor” and “liquor” include all liquids and compounds,
other than beer as defined in division (c) of this section containing one-half
of one percent (0.5%) or more of alcohol by volume which are fit to use for
beverage purposes, from whatever source and by whatever process produced, by
whatever name called and whether or not the same are medicated, proprietary or
patented. The phrase includes wine as defined in RC 4301.01 even if it contains
less than four percent (4%) of alcohol by volume, mixed beverages as defined in
RC 4301.01 even if they contain less than four percent (4%) of alcohol by
volume, cider, as defined in RC 4301.01, alcohol and all solids and confections
which contain any alcohol.
   (c)   “Beer”, “malt liquor” or “malt beverages” includes all brewed or
fermented malt products containing one-half of one percent (0.5%) or more of
alcohol by volume but not more than six percent (6%) of alcohol by weight.
   (d)   “Person” includes firms and corporations.
   (e)   “Cider” means all liquids fit to use for beverage purposes that
contain one-half of one per cent (0.5%) of alcohol by volume, but not more than
six per cent (6%) of alcohol by weight that are made through the normal
alcoholic fermentation of the juice of sound, ripe apples, including, without
limitation, flavored, sparkling, or carbonated cider and cider made from pure
condensed apple must.
(RC 4301.01; Ord. No. 90-96. Passed 3-18-96, eff. 3-26-96)
§ 617.02 Sales to and Use by Minors; Securing Public Accommodations
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or RC Chapter 4301, no
person shall sell beer or intoxicating liquor to an underage person, or buy
beer or intoxicating liquor for, or furnish it to, an underage person, unless
given by a physician in the regular line of his or her practice or given for
established religious purposes, or unless the underage person is accompanied by
a parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian.
   In proceedings before the Liquor Control Commission, no permit holder, his
or her employee or agent charged with a violation of this division shall, for
the same offense, be charged with a violation of division (A)(1) of RC 4301.22.
   (b)   No person who is the owner or occupant of any public or private place
shall knowingly allow any underage person to remain in or on the place while
possessing or consuming beer or intoxicating liquor, unless the intoxicating
liquor or beer is given to the person possessing or consuming it by that
person’s parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian and
the parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian is present
at the time of the person’s possession or consumption of the beer or
intoxicating liquor.
   An owner of a public or private place is not liable for acts or omissions in
violation of this division that are committed by a lessee of that public place,
unless the owner authorizes or acquiesces in the lessee’s acts or omissions.
   (c)   No person shall engage or use accommodations at a hotel, inn, cabin,
campground or restaurant when he or she knows or has reason to know either of
the following:
      (1)   That beer or intoxicating liquor will be consumed by an underage
person on the premises of the accommodations that the person engages or uses,
unless the person engaging or using the accommodations is the spouse of the
underage person and who is not himself or herself an underage person, or is the
parent or legal guardian of all of the underage persons, who consume beer or
intoxicating liquor on the premises and that person is on the premises at all
times when beer or intoxicating liquor is being consumed by an underage person;
      (2)   That a drug of abuse will be consumed on the premises of the
accommodations by any person, except a person who obtained the drug of abuse
pursuant to a prescription issued by a practitioner and has the drug of abuse
in the original container in which it was dispensed to the person.
   (d)   (1)   No person is required to permit the engagement of accommodations
at any hotel, inn, cabin or campground by an underage person or for an underage
person, if the person engaging the accommodations knows or has reason to know
that the underage person is intoxicated, or that the underage person possesses
any beer or intoxicating liquor and is not accompanied by a parent, spouse who
is not an underage person, or legal guardian who is or will be present at all
times when the beer or intoxicating liquor is being consumed by the underage
person.
      (2)   No underage person shall knowingly engage or attempt to engage
accommodations at any hotel, inn, cabin or campground by presenting
identification that falsely indicates that he or she is twenty-one (21) years
of age or older for the purpose of violating this section.
   (e)   No underage person shall knowingly possess or consume any beer or
intoxicating liquor, in any public or private place, unless the underage person
is accompanied by a parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal
guardian, or unless the beer or intoxicating liquor is given by a physician in
the regular line of his or her practice or given for established religious
purposes.
   (f)   No parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian of
a minor shall knowingly permit the minor to violate this section or divisions
(a) to (d) of Section
617.021.
   (g)   The operator of any hotel, inn, cabin or campground shall make the
provisions of this section available in writing to any person engaging or using
accommodations at the hotel, inn, cabin or campground.
   (h)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Drug of abuse” has the same meaning as in RC 3719.011.
      (2)   “Hotel” has the same meaning as in RC 3731.01.
      (3)   “Minor” means a person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
      (4)   “Practitioner” and “prescription” have the same meanings as in RC
3719.01.
      (5)   “Underage person” means a person under the age of twenty-one (21)
years.
(RC 4301.69)
   (i)   Whoever violates division (b), (c), (d), (e), or (f) of this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. Whoever violates division (a)
of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor, shall be fined not less than five
hundred ($500.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and, in
addition to the fine, may be imprisoned for a definite term of not more than
six (6) months.
(RC 4301.99)
   (j)   The provisions of this section relating to the attempted purchase,
purchase, sale, possession or consumption of beer apply only to persons who on
July 31, 1987, are less than nineteen (19) years of age.
(Ord. No. 90-96. Passed 3-18-96, eff. 3-26-96)
§ 617.021 Purchase, Consumption or Possession by Minor; Misrepresentation
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or RC Chapter 4301, no
person under the age of twenty-one (21) years shall purchase beer or
intoxicating liquor.
(RC 4301.63)
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or RC Chapter 4301, no
person shall knowingly furnish any false information as to the name, age or
other identification of any person under twenty-one (21) years of age for the
purpose of obtaining or with the intent to obtain, beer or intoxicating liquor
for a person under twenty-one (21) years of age, by purchase, or as a gift.
(RC 4301.633)
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or RC Chapter 4301, no
person under the age of twenty-one (21) years shall knowingly show or give
false information concerning his or her name, age or other identification for
the purpose of purchasing or otherwise obtaining beer or intoxicating liquor in
any place where beer or intoxicating liquor is sold under a permit issued by
the State Division of Liquor Control or sold by the State Division of Liquor
Control.
(RC 4301.634)
   (d)   (1)   Whoever violates any provision of this section for which no
other penalty is provided is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section, shall be fined not
less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred dollars
($100.00). The court imposing a fine for a violation of division (a) of this
section may order that the fine be paid by the performance of public work at a
reasonable hourly rate established by the court. The court shall designate the
time within which the public work shall be completed.
(RC 4301.99(F))
      (3)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If, in committing a first violation of that
section, the offender presented to the permit holder or the permit holder’s
employee or agent a false, fictitious, or altered identification card, a false
or fictitious driver’s license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver’s
license issued by any state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than two hundred
fifty ($250.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and may be
sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more than six (6) months.
      (4)   On a second violation of division (c) of this section or if the
offender has violated RC 4301.634 once in the past on a first violation of
division (c) of this section in which, for the second time, the offender
presented to the permit holder or the permit holder’s employee or agent a
false, fictitious, or altered identification card, a false or fictitious
driver’s license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver’s license issued
by any state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree and shall be fined not less than five hundred ($500.00) nor
more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and may be sentenced to a term of
imprisonment of not more than six (6) months. The court also may suspend the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident
operating privilege or deny the offender the opportunity to be issued a
driver’s or commercial driver’s license for a period not exceeding sixty (60)
days.
      (5)   On a third or subsequent violation of division (c) of this section
or if the offender has violated RC 4301.634 one (1) or more times in the past,
on a first or subsequent violation of division (c) of this section if the total
violations of this section and RC 4301.634 is three (3) or more, in which, for
the third or subsequent time, the offender presented to the permit holder or
the permit holder’s employee or agent a false, fictitious, or altered
identification card, a false or fictitious driver’s license purportedly issued
by any state, or a driver’s license issued by any state that has been altered,
the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined
not less than five hundred ($500.000) nor more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00), and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more than
six (6) months. The court also shall suspend the offender’s driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege or
deny the offender the opportunity to be issued a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license for a period of ninety (90) days, and the court may order that
the suspension or denial remain in effect until the offender attains the age of
twenty-one (21) years. The court also may order the offender to perform a
determinate number of hours of community service, with the court determining
the actual number of hours and the nature of the community service the offender
shall perform.
(Ord. No. 834-03. Passed 6-10-03, eff. 6-12-03)
§ 617.03 Sales to Intoxicated Persons
   (a)   No permit holder and no agent or employee of a permit holder shall
sell or furnish beer or intoxicating liquor to an intoxicated person.
   (b)   No intoxicating liquor shall be sold to any individual who habitually
drinks intoxicating liquor to excess, or to whom the department has, after
investigation, determined to prohibit the sale of such intoxicating liquor,
because of cause shown by the husband, wife, father, mother, brother, sister,
or other person dependent upon, or in charge of such individual, or by the
mayor of any municipal corporation, or a township trustee of any township in
which the individual resides. The order of the State Division of Liquor Control
in such case shall remain in effect until revoked by the State Division of
Liquor Control.
(RC 4301.22(B), (C))
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(RC 4301.99(D); Ord. No. 834-03. Passed 6-10-03, eff. 6-12-03)
§ 617.04 Liquor Consumption in Motor Vehicle
   (a)   No person shall consume any beer or intoxicating liquor in a motor
vehicle. This section does not apply to persons described in division (D) of RC
4301.62.
(RC 4301.64)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(RC 4301.99(B); Ord. No. 90-96. Passed 3-18-96, eff. 3-26-96)
§ 617.05 Permit Required
   (a)   No person by himself or herself or by his or her clerk, agent or
employee shall manufacture, manufacture for sale, offer, keep or possess for
sale, furnish or sell, or solicit the purchase or sale of any beer or
intoxicating liquor in the City, or transport, import or cause to be
transported or imported any beer, intoxicating liquor or alcohol in or into the
City for delivery, use or sale, unless such person has fully complied with RC
Chapters 4301 and 4303 or is the holder of a permit issued by the Department of
Liquor Control and in force at the time.
(RC 4303.25)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(Ord. No. 1020-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
§ 617.06 Printed Warnings to be Posted
   (a)   Every place in the City where beer, intoxicating liquor, or any low-
alcohol beverage is sold for beverage purposes, either under a permit issued by
the Ohio Department of Liquor Control, or by the Ohio Department of Liquor
Control shall display at all times, in a prominent place on the premises
thereof, a printed card, which shall be furnished by the Department and which
shall read substantially as follows:
   WARNING TO PERSONS UNDER AGE
   If you are under the age of 21
   Under the statutes of the State of Ohio, if you order, pay for, share the
cost of, or attempt to purchase, or possess or consume beer or intoxicating
liquor, in any public place, or furnish false information as to name, age or
other identification, you are subject to a fine of up to one thousand dollars
($1,000.00), or imprisonment up to six (6) months, or both.
   If you are under the age of 18
   Under the statutes of the State of Ohio, if you order, pay for, share the
cost of, or attempt to purchase, or possess or consume, any type of beer or
wine that contains either no alcohol or less than one-half of one per cent
(0.5%) of alcohol by volume in any public place, or furnish false information
as to name, age, or other identification, you are subject to a fine of up to
two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or to imprisonment up to thirty (30) days,
or both.
   No person shall be subject to any criminal prosecution or any proceedings
before the Department or the Liquor Control Commission for failing to display
this card. No permit issued by the Department shall be suspended, revoked or
canceled because of the failure of the permit holder to display this card.
   (b)   Every place in the City for which a D permit has been issued under RC
Chapter 4303 shall be issued a printed card, that shall be furnished by the
Department of Liquor Control that shall read substantially as follows:
   WARNING
   If you are carrying a firearm
   Under the statutes of Ohio, if you possess a firearm in any room in which
liquor is being dispensed in premises for which a D permit has been issued
under RC Chapter 4303, you may be guilty of a felony and are subject to a term
of actual incarceration of one (1) or two (2) years.
   No person shall be subject to any criminal prosecution or any proceedings
before the Department of Liquor Control or the Liquor Control Commission for
failing to display this card. No permit issued by the Department shall be
suspended, revoked or canceled because of the failure of the permit holder to
display this card.
(RC 4301.637; Ord. No. 90-96. Passed 3-18-96, eff. 3-26-96)
§ 617.07 Open Container Prohibited; Exception
   (a)   As used in this section, “street”, “highway”, and “motor vehicle” have
the same meanings as in RC 4511.01.
   (b)   No person shall have in his or her possession an opened container of
beer or intoxicating liquor in any of the following circumstances:
      (1)   In a state liquor store;
      (2)   On the premises of the holder of any permit issued by the
Department of Liquor Control;
      (3)   In any other public place;
      (4)   While operating or being a passenger in or on a motor vehicle on
any street, highway, or other public or private property open to the public for
purposes of vehicular travel or parking;
      (5)   While being in or on a stationary motor vehicle on any street,
highway, or other public or private property open to the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking.
      (6)   A.   A person may have in the person's possession an opened
container of beer or intoxicating liquor at an outdoor location within an
outdoor refreshment area created under
Chapter 699B if the opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor was
purchased from a qualified permit holder to which both of the following apply:
            1.   The permit holder's premises is located within the outdoor
refreshment area.
            2.   The permit held by the permit holder has an outdoor
refreshment area designation.
         B.   Division (b)(6) of this section does not authorize a person to do
either of the following:
            1.   Enter the premises of an establishment within an outdoor
refreshment area while possessing an opened container of beer or intoxicating
liquor acquired elsewhere;
            2.   Possess an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor
while being in or on a motor vehicle within an outdoor refreshment area.
   (c)   This section does not apply to beer or intoxicating liquor which has
been lawfully purchased for consumption on the premises where bought of a
holder of an A-1-A, A-2, D-1, D-2, D-3, D-3a, D-4, D-4a, D-5, D-5a, D-5b, D-5c,
D-5d, D-5e, D-5f, D-5g, D-5h, D-5i, D-7, E, F, or F-2 permit, or to beer or
intoxicating liquor consumed on the premises of a convention facility as
provided in RC 4303.201.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(Ord. No. 666-16. Passed 6-6-16, eff. 6-7-16)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see RC 4301.62
§ 617.08 Hours of Sale or Consumption
   (a)   No beer or other malt beverages shall be sold by, delivered by, or be
permitted to be consumed on week days upon the premises of a C-1, C-2, D-1, D-
2 or D-4 permit holder between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:30 a.m.
   No wine, prepared highballs, cocktails or other mixed drinks, as defined in
the Liquor Control Act, shall be sold, delivered or be permitted to be consumed
on week days upon the premises of an A-2, C-2, D-2 or D-4 permit holder between
the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:30 a.m.
   No beer or intoxicating liquor shall be sold, delivered or be permitted to
be consumed on week days on the premises of a D-3a, D-5, D-5a or A-1-A permit
holder between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 5:30 a.m., and no intoxicating liquor
shall be sold, delivered or be permitted to be consumed on week days on the
premises of a D-3 permit holder between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:30 a.m.
   No beer or intoxicating liquor shall be sold, delivered or be permitted to
be consumed on week days on the premises of a D-4 permit holder between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:30 a.m.
   No intoxicating liquor may be sold by, delivered or be permitted to be
consumed on the premises of any permit holder during the hours between 1:00
a.m. on Sunday and Sunday midnight, except on the premises of a D-3a, D-5, D-5a
or an A-1-A permit. As to holders of these excepted classes, no intoxicating
liquor shall be sold or permitted to be consumed after 2:30 a.m. on Sunday.
   No beer whether by the package or by the glass shall be sold or delivered or
be consumed on the premises of a permit holder on Sunday between the hours of
1:00 a.m. and 5:30 a.m. except on the premises of a holder of a D-3a permit who
is also the holder of a D-1 permit or the holder of a D-5, D-5a or A-1-
A permit. As to these excepted classes neither shall sell, deliver or permit to
be consumed on the premises, beer between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 5:30 a.m.
   The holder of a D-6 permit may sell or allow the consumption of intoxicating
liquors, as authorized by his or her other permits, between the hours of 1:00
p.m. Sunday and Sunday midnight for on the premises consumption only.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 1020-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
§ 617.09 Bottle Clubs
   (a)   No person, club, organization, association or corporation shall:
      (1)   Keep, set up, maintain or operate any place, structure, building or
conveyance for the purpose of providing a storage area wherein members, guests
or other persons are allowed to keep and maintain for the purpose of
consumption therein, beer and intoxicating liquors;
      (2)   Occupy any place, structure, building or conveyance for the purpose
of providing a storage area wherein members, guests or other persons are
allowed to keep and maintain, for the purpose of consumption therein, beer and
intoxicating liquors;
      (3)   Receive, or offer or agree to receive, any person into any place,
structure, building or conveyance for the purpose of allowing such person to
consume or store liquors or beer therein, or permit any person to remain there
for such purpose;
      (4)   Reside in, enter or remain in any place, structure or building, or
enter or remain in any conveyance for the purpose of storing or consuming beer
or intoxicating liquors therein.
   (b)   This section does not apply to any premises being operated under the
authority of a license issued by the Ohio Department of Liquor Control.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful operation or use
of a bottle club, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(Ord. No. 1020-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
§ 617.10 Conveying Intoxicating Liquors or Drugs into Hospital
   (a)   No person shall convey or attempt to convey into any hospital,
sanitarium or other place of confinement for the ill or convalescent, other
than a private dwelling, any intoxicating liquor or a stimulating sedative or
narcotic medicine such as cocaine, opium, chloral, chloroform or ether, except
in accordance with the rules of the institution involved or unless the same is
prescribed by a physician in attendance at such institution; nor shall any
person admitted as a patient at any such hospital, sanitarium or other place of
confinement for the ill or convalescent, other than a private dwelling, have in
his or her possession, or attempt to induce others to obtain for him or her,
any such liquor or drug unless the same is authorized by a physician in
attendance at such institution nor shall any person in the employ of any
hospital, sanitarium or other place of confinement for the ill or convalescent,
other than a private dwelling, knowingly permit a patient confined therein to
receive any such liquor or drug unless the same is prescribed by a physician in
attendance at such institution.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of conveying intoxicating
liquors or drugs into hospitals, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(Ord. No. 1020-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
§ 617.11 Selling or Dispensing Beer or Liquor in Certain Public Premises
   (a)   No person, group, association, partnership or corporation, for profit
or not for profit, shall sell, give or dispense any beer or intoxicating liquor
to any person anywhere on or in any part or portion of the premises of the
Public Utilities Building at 1201 Lakeside, the 205 St. Clair Building, and the
1825 Lakeside Avenue Building.
   (b)   It shall be the duty of the Director of Public Safety to strictly
enforce the provisions of this section.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 394-12. Passed 5-21-12, eff. 5-25-12)
§ 617.12 Consumption of Intoxicating Liquor in Parks and Recreational
Facilities
   (a)   Subject to division (b) of this section, no person shall consume any
intoxicating liquor, as defined in Section
617.01, upon the grounds of any park, parkway, playground, ballfield, tennis
court, skating rink, recreation center or model airplane field which is owned
and controlled by the City.
   (b)   When the Director of Parks and Recreation issues a permit pursuant to
Section 133.03 to the sponsors of an event or activity, the primary purpose of
which is something other than the consumption of intoxicating liquor, division
(a) of this section shall not apply to those who participate in said event or
activity.
   (c)   Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) and, sentenced to not less than thirty (30) days’
imprisonment. The minimum fine to be imposed by the court for a violation of
the provisions of this section is mandatory. The court shall not suspend all or
any portion of said minimum fine; provided that in lieu of all or a portion of
the sentence of imprisonment required hereunder, the court may require the
offender to perform supervised community service work pursuant to division (H)
of RC 2951.02.
(Ord. No. 1562-90. Passed 4-8-91, eff. 4-15-91)
CHAPTER 618 – LIQUOR PERMIT MANAGER REGISTRY
618.01   Definitions
618.02   Registration of Liquor Permit Owners and Liquor Permit Managers; Fee
618.99   Penalty
§ 618.01 Definitions
   (a)   “Person” means an individual, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company, or business of any kind.
   (b)   “Liquor permit business” means an establishment granted the privilege
to conduct liquor sales pursuant to a class C or D liquor permit issued by the
Division of Liquor Control.
   (c)   “Liquor permit owner” means any person who owns a class C or D liquor
permit issued by the Division of Liquor Control.
   (d)   “Liquor permit manager” means any person who engages a liquor permit
owner to assume active charge of the day-to-day management of a liquor permit
business and has a financial interest in the net profits derived from the
operation of the liquor permit business or receives any compensation directly
proportionate to the revenue generated from the liquor permit business.
(Ord. No. 1287-06. Passed 11-20-06, eff. 11-27-06)
§ 618.02 Registration of Liquor Permit Owners and Liquor Permit Managers; Fee
   (a)   Each liquor permit owner that engages a liquor permit manager shall
register with the Clerk of Cleveland City Council using forms designated by the
Clerk of Cleveland City Council for this purpose, and shall provide the name of
the liquor permit owner, the name of the liquor permit manager, the location of
the liquor permit business, the liquor permit number for the liquor permit
business, the date the liquor permit owner transferred operational control over
the liquor permit business to the liquor permit manager, whether the engagement
the liquor permit manager is pursuant to a bona fide sale of the liquor permit
business, the date the bona fide sale of the liquor permit business is expected
to be consummated, and any other information as Clerk of Cleveland City Council
shall require.
   (b)   Each liquor permit manager shall register with the Clerk of Cleveland
City Council using forms designated by the Clerk of Cleveland City Council for
this purpose, and shall provide the name of the liquor permit manager, the name
of the liquor permit owner, the location of the liquor permit business, the
liquor permit number for the liquor permit business, the date the liquor permit
manager will assume, or assumed, operational control over the liquor permit
business, whether the engagement is pursuant to a bona fide purchase of the
liquor permit business, the date the bona fide purchase of the liquor permit
business is expected to be consummated, and any other information as the Clerk
of Cleveland City Council shall require.
   (c)   Each liquor permit owner and liquor permit manager shall initially
register within thirty (30) days of the effective date of this section. Each
liquor permit owner that engages a liquor permit manager after the effective
date of this section shall initially register not later than ten (10) days
after the date the liquor permit manager is engaged. Each liquor permit manager
that is engaged after the effective date of this section shall initially
register not later than ten (10) days after the date of engagement by the
liquor permit owner.
   (d)   After the initial registration required by division (c) of this
section, each liquor permit owner and liquor permit manager shall re-register
between June 15 and July 15, inclusive, of each calendar year after the
calendar year in which the initial registration is made.
   (e)   Each liquor permit owner shall pay a fee of one hundred dollars
($100.00) for each registration or re-registration required by this section.
   (f)   Each liquor permit manager shall pay a fee of one hundred dollars
($100.00) for each registration or re-registration required by this section.
   (g)   No person shall fail to register or re-register as liquor permit owner
or liquor permit manager as required by this section.
(Ord. No. 1287-06. Passed 11-20-06, eff. 11-27-06)
§ 618.99 Penalty
   Whoever violates division (g) of Section
618.02 is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day of a continuing
violation shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 1287-06. Passed 11-20-06, eff. 11-27-06)
CHAPTER 619 – OBSCENITY AND SEX OFFENSES
619.01   Definitions
619.02   Presumption of Knowledge; Actual Notice and Defense
619.03   Corruption of a Minor
619.04   Sexual Imposition
619.05   Importuning
619.06   Voyeurism
619.07   Public Indecency
619.08   Procuring
619.09   Soliciting
619.10   Prostitution
619.11   Loitering for the Purpose of Engaging in Prostitution, Solicitation or
Procurement
619.12   Disseminating Material Harmful to Juveniles
619.13   Deception to Obtain Matter Harmful to Juveniles
619.14   Possession of Obscene Material Involving Minor
619.15   Possession of Sexually-Oriented Material Involving Minor
619.16   Possession of Nudity-Oriented Material Involving Minor
619.161   Displaying Matter Harmful to Juveniles
619.17   Prohibited Conduct
619.18   Notice of Obscene Material or Action
619.19   Types of Proceedings
619.20   Evidence; Defenses
619.21   Material Disposition; Penalty
619.22   License Requirements for Publishing, Selling Printed Material
619.23   Use of a Vehicle to Solicit a Person to Engage in Prostitution or a
Drug Offense Prohibited
619.24   Nuisance Property Declared
619.25   Action to Abate Nuisances
Cross-reference:
   Complicity, CO
601.09
   Criminal trespass, CO
623.04
   Disorderly conduct; intoxication, CO
605.03
   Telephone harassment, CO
621.11
Statutory reference:
   See sectional histories for similar State law
§ 619.01 Definitions
   (a)   As used in Sections
619.01 to
619.19:
      (1)   “Sexual conduct” means vaginal intercourse between a male and
female, and anal intercourse, fellatio and cunnilingus between persons
regardless of sex. Penetration, however slight, is sufficient to complete
vaginal or anal intercourse.
      (2)   “Sexual contact” means any touching of an erogenous zone of
another, including without limitation the thigh, genitals, buttocks, pubic
region or, if such person is a female, a breast, for the purpose of sexually
arousing or gratifying either person.
      (3)   “Sexual activity” means sexual conduct or sexual contact, or both.
      (4)   “Prostitute” means a male or female who promiscuously engages in
sexual activity for hire, regardless of whether the hire is paid to the
prostitute or to another.
      (5)   Any material or performance is “harmful to juveniles” if it is
offensive to prevailing standards in the adult community with respect to what
is suitable for juveniles, and if any of the following apply:
         A.   It tends to appeal to the prurient interest of juveniles;
         B.   It contains a display, description or representation of sexual
activity, masturbation, sexual excitement, or nudity;
         C.   It contains a display, description or representation of
bestiality or extreme or bizarre violence, cruelty or brutality;
         D.   It contains a display, description or representation of human
bodily functions of elimination;
         E.   It makes repeated use of foul language;
         F.   It contains a display, description or representation in lurid
detail of the violent physical torture, dismemberment, destruction or death of
a human being;
         G.   It contains a display, description or representation of criminal
activity which tends to glorify or glamorize such activity, and which, with
respect to juveniles, has a dominant tendency to corrupt.
      (6)   When considered as a whole, and judged with reference to ordinary
adults, or, if it is designed for sexual deviates or other specially
susceptible group, judged with reference to such group, any material or
performance is “obscene” if any of the following apply:
         A.   Its dominant appeal is to prurient interest;
         B.   Its dominant tendency is to arouse lust by displaying or
depicting sexual activity, masturbation, sexual excitement or nudity in a way
which tends to represent human beings as mere objects of sexual appetite;
         C.   Its dominant tendency is to arouse lust by displaying or
depicting bestiality or extreme or bizarre violence, cruelty or brutality;
         D.   Its dominant tendency is to appeal to scatological interest by
displaying or depicting human bodily functions of elimination in a way which
inspires disgust or revulsion in persons with ordinary sensibilities, without
serving any genuine scientific, educational, sociological, moral or artistic
purpose;
         E.   It contains a series of displays or descriptions of sexual
activity, masturbation, sexual excitement, nudity, bestiality, extreme or
bizarre violence, cruelty, or brutality, or human bodily functions of
elimination, the cumulative effect of which is a dominant tendency to appeal to
prurient or scatological interest, when the appeal to such an interest is
primarily for its own sake or for commercial exploitation, rather than
primarily for a genuine scientific, educational, sociological, moral, or
artistic purpose.
         F.   When taken as a whole, it lacks serious literary, artistic,
political or scientific value.
      (7)   “Sexual excitement” means the condition of human male or female
genitals when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
      (8)   “Nudity” means the showing, representation or depiction of human
male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a full, opaque
covering, or of a female breast with less than a full, opaque covering of any
portion thereof below the top of the nipple, or of covered male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state.
      (9)   “Nudity-oriented material” means any material that shows a minor in
a state of nudity and that, taken as a whole by the average person applying
contemporary community standards, appeals to prurient interest.
      (10)   “Juveniles or minors” means an unmarried person under the age of
eighteen (18).
      (11)   “Material” means any book, magazine, newspaper, pamphlet, poster,
print, picture, figure, image, description, motion picture film, phonographic
record or tape or other tangible thing capable of arousing interest through
sight, sound or touch.
      (12)   “Performance” means any motion picture, preview, trailer, play,
show, skit, dance or other exhibition performed before an audience.
(RC 2907.01)
      (13)   “Knowledge of character” means having general knowledge or reason
to know, or a belief or ground for belief which warrants further inspection or
inquiry, of the nature and character of the material or performance involved. A
person has such knowledge when he or she knows or is aware that the material or
performance contains, depicts or describes sexually explicit nudity, sexual
activity, sadomasochistic sexual abuse, or lewd exhibition of the genitals,
whichever is applicable, whether or not such person has precise knowledge of
the specific contents thereof. Such knowledge may be proven by direct or
circumstantial evidence, or both.
   (b)   As used in Sections
619.17 to
619.19:
      (1)   “Obscene” means that to the average person applying contemporary
community standards:
         A.   The predominant appeal of the matter taken as a whole, is to
prurient interest; i.e., a shameful or morbid interest in sexual conduct,
nudity or excretion;
         B.   The matter depicts or describes in a patently offensive manner
sexual conduct;
         C.   The work, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic,
political or scientific value.
      (2)   “Material” means any book, magazine, newspaper or other printed or
written material or any picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture or other
pictorial representation or any statue or other figure, or any recording,
transcription or mechanical, chemical or electrical reproduction or any other
articles, equipment or machines.
      (3)   “Person” means any individual, partnership, firm, association,
corporation or other legal entity.
      (4)   “Disseminate” means to transfer possession of, with or without
consideration.
      (5)   “Knowingly” means being aware of the character and the content of
the material.
      (6)   “Nudity” means the showing of the human male or female genitals or
pubic area with less than fully opaque covering, or the depiction of covered
male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
      (7)   “Performance” means any preview, play, show, skit, film, dance or
other exhibition performed before an audience.
      (8)   “Available to the public” means that the matter or performance may
be purchased or attended on a subscription basis, on a membership fee
arrangement or for a separate fee for each item or performance.
      (9)   “Service to patrons” means the provision of services to paying
guests in establishments providing food and beverages; including but not
limited to hostessing, hat checking, cooking, bartending, serving, table
setting and clearing, waiter and waitressing and entertaining.
      (10)   “Promote” means to cause, permit, procure, counsel or assist.
(Ord. No. 90-96. Passed 3-18-96, eff. 3-26-96)
§ 619.02 Presumption of Knowledge; Actual Notice and Defense
   (a)   An owner or manager, or his or her agent or employee, of a bookstore,
newsstand, theater or other commercial establishment engaged in selling
materials or exhibiting performances, who, in the course of business:
      (1)   Possesses five (5) or more identical or substantially similar
obscene articles, having knowledge of their character, is presumed to possess
them in violation of Section
619.17(e).
      (2)   Does any of the acts prohibited by Section
619.12 or
619.17 is presumed to have knowledge of the character of the material or
performance involved, if he or she has actual notice of the nature of such
material or performance, whether or not he or she has precise knowledge of its
contents.
   (b)   Without limitation on the manner in which such notice may be given,
actual notice of the character of material or a performance may be given in
writing by the chief legal officer of the jurisdiction in which the person to
whom the notice is directed does business. Such notice, regardless of the
manner in which it is given, shall identify the sender, identify the material
or performance involved, state whether it is obscene or harmful to juveniles
and bear the date of such notice.
(RC 2907.35; Ord. No. 54-74. Passed 3-25-74, eff. 4-1-74)
§ 619.03 Corruption of a Minor
   (a)   No person, eighteen (18) years of age or older, shall engage in sexual
conduct with another, not the spouse of the offender, when the offender knows
such other person is over twelve (12) but not over fifteen (15) years of age,
or the offender is reckless in that regard.
   (b)   This section shall not apply if the offender is four (4) or more years
older than the other person.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of corrupting a minor, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(RC 2907.04; Ord. No. 54-74. Passed 3-25-74, eff. 4-1-74)
§ 619.04 Sexual Imposition
   (a)   No person shall have sexual contact with another, not the spouse of
the offender; cause another, not the spouse of the offender, to have sexual
contact with the offender; or cause two (2) or more other persons to have
sexual contact when any of the following applies:
      (1)   The offender knows that the sexual contact is offensive to the
other person, or one (1) of the other persons, or is reckless in that regard.
      (2)   The offender knows that the other person’s or one (1) of the other
person’s ability to appraise the nature of or control the offender’s or
touching person’s conduct is substantially impaired.
      (3)   The offender knows that the other person or one (1) of the other
persons submits because of being unaware of the sexual contact.
      (4)   The other person or one (1) of the other persons is over twelve
(12) but not over fifteen (15) years of age, whether or not the offender knows
the age of such person, and the offender is at least eighteen (18) years of age
and four (4) or more years older than such other person.
   (b)   No person shall be convicted of a violation of this section solely
upon the victim’s testimony unsupported by other evidence.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of sexual imposition, a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(RC 2907.06; Ord. No. 90-96. Passed 3-18-96, eff. 3-26-96)
§ 619.05 Importuning
   (a)   No person shall solicit a person under thirteen (13) years of age to
engage in sexual activity with the offender, whether or not the offender knows
the age of such person.
   (b)   No person shall solicit a person of the same sex to engage in sexual
activity with the offender, when the offender knows such solicitation is
offensive to the other person, or is reckless in that regard.
   (c)   No person shall solicit another, not the spouse of the offender, to
engage in sexual conduct with the offender, when the offender is eighteen (18)
years of age or older and four (4) or more years older than the other person,
and the other person is over twelve (12) but not over fifteen (15) years of
age, whether or not the offender knows the age of the other person.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of importuning. Violation of
subsection (a) or (b) hereof is a misdemeanor of the first degree. Violation of
subsection (c) hereof is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(RC 2907.07; Ord. No. 54-74. Passed 3-25-74, eff. 4-1-74)
§ 619.06 Voyeurism
   (a)   No person, for the purpose of sexually arousing or gratifying himself
or herself, shall commit trespass or otherwise surreptitiously invade the
privacy of another, to spy or eavesdrop upon another.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of voyeurism, a misdemeanor of
the third degree.
(RC 2907.08; Ord. No. 54-74. Passed 3-25-74, eff. 4-1-74)
§ 619.07 Public Indecency
   (a)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following, under
circumstances in which his or her conduct is likely to be viewed by and affront
others, not members of his or her household:
      (1)   Expose his or her private parts, or engage in masturbation;
      (2)   Engage in sexual conduct;
      (3)   Engage in conduct which to an ordinary observer would appear to be
sexual conduct or masturbation.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of public indecency. If the
offender previously has not been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation
of this section, public indecency is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one (1)
violation of this section, public indecency is a misdemeanor of the third
degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
two (2) violations of this section, public indecency is a misdemeanor of the
second degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to three (3) or more violations of this section, public indecency is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(RC 2907.09; Ord. No. 90-96. Passed 3-18-96, eff. 3-26-96)
§ 619.08 Procuring
   (a)   No person, knowingly and for gain, shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Entice or solicit another to patronize a prostitute or brothel;
      (2)   Procure a prostitute for another to patronize, or take or direct
another at his or her request to any place for the purpose of patronizing a
prostitute.
   (b)   No person, having authority or responsibility over the use of
premises, shall knowingly permit such premises to be used for the purpose of
engaging in sexual activity for hire.
(RC 2907.23)
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of procuring, a misdemeanor of
the first degree. Notwithstanding any other section of this Code:
      (1)   At least thirty (30) days' imprisonment and a fine of at least four
hundred fifty dollars ($450.00) is mandatory upon conviction of a first offense
under this section;
      (2)   At least sixty (60) days' imprisonment and a fine of four hundred
fifty dollars ($450.00) is mandatory upon conviction of a second offense; and
      (3)   At least ninety (90) days' imprisonment and a fine of four hundred
fifty dollars ($450.00) is mandatory upon conviction of a third or any
subsequent offense under this section.
(Ord. No. 1353-13. Passed 10-21-13, eff. 10-24-13)
§ 619.09 Soliciting
   (a)   No person shall solicit another to engage with such other person in
sexual activity for hire. This section forbids the solicitations of paid sexual
activity, whether the solicitor is the one buying or selling his or her favors.
(RC 2907.24)
   (b)   Whoever violates the provisions of this section is guilty of
soliciting, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Notwithstanding any other
section of this Code:
      (1)   At least ten (10) days' imprisonment and a fine of at least four
hundred fifty dollars ($450.00) is mandatory upon conviction of a first offense
under this section.
      (2)   At least twenty (20) days' imprisonment and a fine of four hundred
fifty dollars ($450.00) is mandatory upon conviction of a second offense; and
      (3)   At least thirty (30) days' imprisonment and a fine of four hundred
fifty dollars ($450.00) is mandatory upon conviction of a third or any
subsequent offense under this section.
(Ord. No. 1353-13. Passed 10-21-13, eff. 10-24-13)
§ 619.10 Prostitution
   (a)   No person shall engage in sexual activity for hire.
(RC 2907.25)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of prostitution, a misdemeanor
of the first degree. Notwithstanding any other section of this Code:
      (1)   A fine of at least two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) is mandatory
upon conviction of a first offense under this section;
      (2)   At least three (3) days’ imprisonment and a fine of two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00) is mandatory upon conviction of a second offense or any
subsequent offense under this section.
(Ord. No. 773-87. Passed 6-16-87, eff. 6-19-87)
§ 619.11 Loitering for the Purpose of Engaging in Prostitution, Solicitation or
Procurement
   (a)   For the purposes of this section:
      (1)   “Public place” means any street, sidewalk, bridge, alley or
alleyway, plaza, park, driveway, parking lot or transportation facility or the
doorways and entrance ways to any building which fronts on any of the aforesaid
places, or a motor vehicle in or on any such place.
      (2)   “Known prostitute or panderer” means a person who, within a year
previous to the date of arrest for a violation of this section, has, within the
knowledge of the arresting officer been convicted of violating this section or
any other section of the Codified Ordinances or the Ohio Revised Code relating
to prostitution, solicitation or procurement.
   (b)   No person shall remain or wander about in a public place and
repeatedly beckon to, or repeatedly attempt to engage passersby in
conversation, or repeatedly stop or attempt to stop motor vehicles, or
repeatedly interfere with the free passage of other persons, for the purpose of
engaging in, soliciting or procuring sexual activity for hire. The
circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such purpose is
manifested are: That such person is a known prostitute or panderer, repeatedly
beckons to, stops or attempts to stop, or engages passersby in conversation, or
repeatedly stops or attempts to stop motor vehicle operators by hailing, waving
of arms or any other bodily gestures.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of loitering for the purpose
of engaging in, soliciting or procuring sexual activity for hire, a misdemeanor
of the first degree. Notwithstanding any other section of this Code a fine of
at least two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) is mandatory upon conviction of an
offense under this section.
(Ord. No. 773-87. Passed 6-16-87, eff. 6-19-87)
§ 619.12 Disseminating Material Harmful to Juveniles
   (a)   No person, with knowledge of its character or content, shall
recklessly do any of the following:
      (1)   Sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent or
present to a juvenile any material or performance that is obscene or harmful to
juveniles;
      (2)   Offer or agree to sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide,
exhibit, rent or present to a juvenile any material or performance that is
obscene or harmful to juveniles;
      (3)   Allow any juvenile to review or peruse any material or view any
live performance that is harmful to juveniles.
   (b)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under this section,
that involves material or a performance that is harmful to juveniles but not
obscene:
      (1)   The defendant is the parent, guardian or spouse of the juvenile
involved;
      (2)   The juvenile involved, at the time of the conduct in question, was
accompanied by his or her parent or guardian who, with knowledge of its
character, consented to the material or performance being furnished or
presented to the juvenile;
      (3)   The juvenile exhibited to the defendant or his or her agent or
employee a draft card, driver’s license, birth certificate, marriage license,
or other official or apparently official document purporting to show that such
juvenile was eighteen (18) years of age or over or married, and the person to
whom such document was exhibited did not otherwise have reasonable cause to
believe that such juvenile was under the age of eighteen (18) and unmarried.
   (c)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section,
involving material or a performance that is obscene or harmful to juveniles,
that such material or performance was furnished or presented for a bona fide
medical, scientific, educational, governmental, judicial or other proper
purpose, by a physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist, teacher,
librarian, clergyman, prosecutor, judge or other proper person.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (b)(3) of this section, mistake of
age is not a defense to a charge under this section.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disseminating matter
harmful to juveniles. If the material or performance involved is harmful to
juveniles but not obscene, violation of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(RC 2907.31; Ord. No. 2823-89. Passed 3-19-90, eff. 3-22-90)
§ 619.13 Deception to Obtain Matter Harmful to Juveniles
   (a)   No person, for the purpose of enabling a juvenile to obtain any
material or gain admission to any performance which is harmful to juveniles,
shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Falsely represent that he or she is the parent, guardian, or spouse
of such juvenile;
      (2)   Furnish such juvenile with any identification or document
purporting to show that such juvenile is eighteen (18) years of age or over or
married.
   (b)   No juvenile, for the purpose of obtaining any material or gaining
admission to any performance which is harmful to juveniles, shall do either of
the following:
      (1)   Falsely represent that he or she is eighteen (18) years of age or
over or married;
      (2)   Exhibit any identification or document purporting to show that he
or she is eighteen (18) years of age or over or married.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of deception to obtain matter
harmful to juveniles, a misdemeanor of the second degree. A juvenile who
violates subsection (b) hereof shall be adjudged an unruly child, with such
disposition of the case as may be appropriate under RC Chapter 2151.
(RC 2907.33; Ord. No. 90-96. Passed 3-18-96, eff. 3-26-96)
§ 619.14 Possession of Obscene Material Involving Minor
   (a)   No person, with knowledge of the character of the material involved,
shall possess or control any obscene material that has a minor as one (1) of
its participants.
   (b)   This section does not apply to any material that is possessed or
controlled for a bona fide medical, scientific, educational, religious,
governmental, judicial or other proper purpose, by or to a physician,
psychologist, sociologist, scientist, teacher, person pursuing bona fide
studies or research, librarian, clergyman, prosecutor, judge, or other person
having a proper interest in the material.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possession or control of
obscene material involving a minor, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(Ord. No. 485-85. Passed 5-13-85, eff. 5-15-85)
§ 619.15 Possession of Sexually-Oriented Material Involving Minor
   (a)   No person, with knowledge of the character of the material involved,
shall possess or control sexually-oriented material involving a minor.
   (b)   “Sexually-oriented material involving a minor” means any material that
shows a minor participating or engaging in sexual activity, masturbation or
bestiality.
   (c)   This section does not apply to any material that is possessed or
controlled for a bona fide medical, scientific, educational, religious,
governmental, judicial or other proper purpose, by or to a physician,
psychologist, sociologist, scientist, teacher, person pursuing bona fide
studies or research, librarian, clergyman, prosecutor, judge, or other person
having a proper interest in the material.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possession or control of
sexually-oriented material involving a minor, a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(Ord. No. 485-85. Passed 5-13-85, eff. 5-15-85)
§ 619.16 Possession of Nudity-Oriented Material Involving Minor
   (a)   No person, with knowledge of the character of the material involved,
shall possess or view any nudity-oriented material involving a minor who is not
the person’s child or ward, unless one (1) of the following applies:
      (1)   The material is possessed or controlled for a bona fide artistic,
medical, scientific, educational, religious, governmental, judicial or other
proper purpose, by or to a physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist,
teacher, person pursuing bona fide studies or research, librarian, clergyman,
prosecutor, judge, or other person having a proper interest in the material;
      (2)   The person knows that the parents, guardian, or custodian has
consented in writing to photographing or use of the minor in a state of nudity
and to the manner in which the material is used or transferred.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possession or control of
nudity-oriented material involving a minor, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(Ord. No. 485-85. Passed 5-13-85, eff. 5-15-85)
§ 619.161 Displaying Matter Harmful to Juveniles
   (a)   No person who has custody, control or supervision of a commercial
establishment, with knowledge of the character or content of the material
involved, shall display at the establishment any material that is harmful to
juveniles and that is open to view by juveniles as part of the invited general
public.
   (b)   It is not a violation of division (a) of this section if the material
in question is displayed by placing it behind “blinder racks” or similar
devices that cover at least the lower two-thirds (2/3) of the material, if the
material in question is wrapped or placed behind the counter, or if the
material in question otherwise is covered or located so that the portion that
is harmful to juveniles is not open to the view of juveniles.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of displaying matter harmful
to juveniles, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day during which the
offender is in violation of this section constitutes a separate offense.
(RC 2907.311; Ord. No. 2823-89. Passed 3-19-90, eff. 3-22-90)
§ 619.17 Prohibited Conduct
   No person shall:
   (a)   Knowingly disseminate, distribute or make available to the public any
obscene material;
   (b)   Knowingly engage or participate in any obscene performance made
available to the public;
   (c)   Knowingly engage in commerce for commercial gain with materials
depicting and describing explicit sexual conduct, nudity or excretion utilizing
displays, circulars, advertisements and other public sales efforts that promote
such commerce primarily on the basis of their prurient appeal;
   (d)   Provide service to patrons in such a manner as to expose to public
view:
      (1)   His or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anal region or
pubic hair region;
      (2)   Any device, costume or covering which gives the appearance of or
simulates the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anal region or pubic
hair region; or
      (3)   Any portion of the female breast at or below the areola thereof.
   (e)   Knowingly promote the commission of any of the above listed unlawful
acts.
(Ord. No. 2139-74. Passed 4-28-75, eff. 5-1-75)
§ 619.18 Notice of Obscene Material or Action
   (a)   Actual notice of the obscene nature of such material, performance or
activity may be given to a person involved in or responsible for such from the
City Prosecutor on the basis of information lawfully gathered and supplied to
him or her by the Division of Police or citizens.
      (1)   Such notice shall be in writing and delivered by mail or in person
to the alleged offender.
      (2)   Such notice shall state that:
         A.   In the opinion of the City Prosecutor the activity engaged in
falls within the prohibitions of Section
619.17;
         B.   If such activity has not ceased within three (3) judicial days,
the City will take appropriate legal action;
         C.   A declaratory judgment proceeding as described in Section
619.19(b) is available if a person engaged in the challenged activity wishes to
initiate the legal determination of whether the activity is in fact obscene.
   (b)   A person who promotes any obscene activity as prohibited in Section
619.17 in the course of his or her business is presumed to do so with knowledge
of its content and character.
(Ord. No. 2139-74. Passed 4-28-75, eff. 5-1-75)
§ 619.19 Types of Proceedings
   (a)   In Rem Proceedings.
      (1)   The Chief of Police may apply to the City Prosecutor to institute
an attachment proceeding against any material which is alleged to be obscene in
a sworn affidavit.
      (2)   Upon filing of an application for attachment authorized in
subsection (a)(1) hereof, the Chief shall immediately cause notice thereof to
be served either personally or by mail upon any person residing or doing
business in the City who is known or believed by the Chief to have any of the
following interests in material named in the complaint:
         A.   The publisher;
         B.   The wholesaler, distributor, circulator;
         C.   Every retailer or dealer who has, or may have, possession of any
material identical to material named in the complaint.
      (3)   Trial shall be held no later than the fourth judicial day following
the filing for attachment. No trial under this section shall be continued or
otherwise postponed more than one (1) judicial day, but may be conducted by a
judge pro tempore in the event of unavailability of the trial judge.
   (b)   Declaratory Judgment.
      (1)   Any person receiving notice in writing from the City Prosecutor
under Section
619.18 that a specified activity is obscene may bring action against the City
for a declaratory judgment to determine whether such activity is obscene.
      (2)   If it is adjudged and declared by the court that such activity is
obscene, then the City Prosecutor may cause the publication of such judgment in
a newspaper of general circulation in the City. Upon such publication all
persons residing or doing business in the City will be presumed to have actual
notice of the nature of the activity.
   (c)   Criminal Prosecution.
      (1)   The City Prosecutor may cause criminal charges to be brought
against any person presently engaging in or who has engaged in any prohibited
activity in violation of Section
619.17(a), (c) and (e).
      (2)   If the City Prosecutor has given notice pursuant to Section
619.18, then such criminal charges may be brought only after three (3) judicial
days after receipt of notice.
   (d)   Injunction.
      (1)   The City Prosecutor may seek a temporary restraining order in the
Cleveland Municipal Court in order to enjoin any obscene performance or the
service of patrons in violation of Section
619.17.
      (2)   If the City Prosecutor has given written notice pursuant to Section
619.18(a), he or she may after the passage of three (3) judicial days seek such
a temporary restraining order.
      (3)   A judicial hearing on a request for such order must be granted
within three (3) judicial days, and if the temporary restraining order is
issued, a trial on the issue of the obscenity of the activity must be commenced
within ten (10) days of the issuance of the temporary restraining order. Such
trial is not to be postponed, stayed or adjourned by the Municipal Court for
more than two (2) judicial days, but it may be conducted by a judge pro tempore
if no trial judge is available.
   (e)   Proceedings authorized by this section shall be in addition to any
others provided by law.
(Ord. No. 2139-74. Passed 4-28-75, eff. 5-1-75)
§ 619.20 Evidence; Defenses
   (a)   Expert affirmative evidence that the materials or activities are
obscene is not required when the materials or activities themselves are
presented as evidence.
   (b)   It shall be an affirmative defense in any prosecution under Section
619.17 that allegedly obscene material was disseminated, or presented for a
bona fide scientific, medical, educational, governmental or judicial purpose by
a physician, psychologist, teacher, clergyman, prosecutor or judge.
(Ord. No. 2139-74. Passed 4-28-75, eff. 5-1-75)
§ 619.21 Material Disposition; Penalty
   (a)   In an in rem proceeding against sexually explicit material under
Section
619.19(a), the court shall, upon a determination by the trier of fact that the
material is obscene material, authorize and direct the Chief of Police, pending
the exhaustion of all appeals, to destroy the same.
   (b)   Notwithstanding the provisions of Section
601.99(b), whoever violates Section
619.17 shall be fined not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more
than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or imprisoned not less than thirty (30)
days and not more than one (1) year, or both. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed each day during or on which an offense occurs or continues.
(Ord. No. 90-96. Passed 3-18-96, eff. 3-26-96)
§ 619.22 License Requirements for Publishing, Selling Printed Material
   Any person publishing or involved in the sale of material as defined in
Section
619.01(b)(2) shall first obtain a license from the office of the Division of
Assessments and Licenses. The license shall be prominently displayed and show
the ownership of and the principal officers of the corporation or company, as
well as the addresses of the owners or officers of the company or corporation;
further, upon change of ownership or corporate structure, the license shall be
required to be renewed showing new information as to corporate or company
status. The license fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) per each application.
(Ord. No. 90-96. Passed 3-18-96, eff. 3-26-96)
§ 619.23 Use of a Vehicle to Solicit a Person to Engage in Prostitution or a
Drug Offense Prohibited
   (a)   No person, while operating a vehicle, or while a passenger in or on a
vehicle, shall solicit another to engage such other person in sexual activity
for hire.
   (b)   No person, while operating a vehicle or while a passenger in or on a
vehicle, shall stop, attempt to stop, beckon to, attempt to beckon to, or
entice any person to approach or enter the vehicle with intent to entice the
other person to engage in sexual activity for hire contrary to Section
619.09 of the Codified Ordinances.
   (c)   No person, while operating a vehicle, or while a passenger in or on a
vehicle, shall knowingly obtain, possess, or use a controlled substance
contrary to Section
607.03.
   (d)   No person, while operating a vehicle or while a passenger in or on a
vehicle, shall stop, attempt to stop, beckon to, attempt to beckon to, or
entice any person to approach or enter the vehicle with intent to entice the
other person to engage in any drug abuse offense contrary to Chapter
607 of the Codified Ordinances.
   (e)   Any vehicle that has been used on two (2) occasions in the commission
of one (1) or any combination of the offenses defined in divisions (a), (b),
(c) or (d) of this section, for which convictions have been entered in the
court’s journal, without regard to the ownership of the property and without
regard to whether the same person(s) were convicted of both offenses, is hereby
declared to be a nuisance, and its contents, if any, are also hereby declared
to be a nuisance. Any vehicle that constitutes a nuisance under this division
and its contents may be abated as provided in Section
619.25.
   (f)   Whoever violates divisions (a), (b), (c ) or (d) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. The sentencing court shall
sentence the offender to a mandatory term of imprisonment of not less than
three (3) days on the first offense, not less than ten (10) days on the second
offense, and not less than thirty (30) days on the third or any subsequent
offense, and may sentence the offender to a longer term of imprisonment. In
addition, the sentencing court may impose a fine not exceeding one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00).
(Ord. No. 164-A-2000. Passed 6-19-00, eff. 6-29-00)
§ 619.24 Nuisance Property Declared
   (a)   Any vehicle, boat, aircraft, building or place that has been used on
two (2) occasions in the commission of one (1) or any combination of the
following offenses, for which convictions have been entered in the court’s
journal, without regard to the ownership of the property and without regard to
whether the same person(s) were convicted of both offenses, is hereby declared
to be a nuisance:
   Pertaining to Prostitution:
      (1)   Procuring, Section
619.08;
      (2)   Soliciting, Section
619.09;
      (3)   Prostitution, Section
619.10;
      (4)   Use of a Vehicle to Solicit a Person to engage in Prostitution or a
Drug Offense Prohibited, Section
619.23.
   Pertaining to Drugs:
      (5)   Drug Abuse: Controlled Substance Possession or Use, Section
607.03;
      (6)   Possessing Drug Abuse Instruments, Section
607.04;
      (7)   Permitting Drug Abuse, Section
607.05;
      (8)   Possession, Manufacture and Sale of Drug Paraphernalia, Section
607.17.
   Pertaining to Liquor:
      (9)   Permit Required, Section
617.05.
   Pertaining to Gambling:
      (10)   Gambling, Section
611.02;
      (11)   Operating a Gambling House, Section
611.05;
      (12)   Public Gaming, Section
611.06.
   (b)   Any building, vehicle, boat, aircraft, or place that constitutes a
nuisance as defined in division (a) and all of the contents of the same, if
any, may be abated as provided in Section
619.25.
(Ord. No. 1233-15. Passed 11-9-15, eff. 11-11-15)
§ 619.25 Action to Abate Nuisances
   (a)   Nature of Action. The Director of Law may file an action in rem to
abate any nuisance as defined by Section
619.24. The standard of proof shall be by a preponderance of the evidence. This
action may be brought as a separate action or concurrently with any other
action available at law or in equity to enjoin and/or abate the nuisance
including, without limitation, an action authorized by RC Chapter 3767 or other
actions authorized by these Codified Ordinances.
   (b)   Notice and Opportunity to Be Heard. Prior to the issuance of an order
under this section, a reasonably diligent search shall be conducted of the
public records that relate to the property that is the subject of an abatement
action to identify the owner, lienholder, and any other person with an
ownership interest in the property. Such persons shall be sent notice by
certified mail, return receipt requested, or shall be personally served, and
shall be granted an opportunity to be heard by the court.
   (c)   Innocent Owners or Lienholders. No abatement order shall be issued
pursuant to this section if an owner or lienholder or other person with an
ownership interest in the property that is the subject of an abatement action
establishes to the court, by a preponderance of evidence after filing a motion
with the court, that the owner, lienholder or other person neither knew nor
should have known after a reasonable inquiry that the property would be used,
or likely would be used or involved in the commission of a criminal offense,
and further that the owner, lienholder or other person with an ownership
interest in the property did not expressly or impliedly consent to the use or
involvement of the property in the violation, and that the lien or ownership
interest was perfected pursuant to law prior to the existence of the nuisance.
   (d)   Family Hardship. A family or household member of the person who is the
owner of property used to maintain a nuisance may file a motion with the court
having jurisdiction over the action to abate a nuisance claiming that the order
of abatement and sale of the property will create an undue hardship on the
family or household member. If the court determines by a preponderance of the
evidence that an undue hardship would be caused to a family or household member
filing the motion, and if the court further finds that the moving party has not
in any previous case benefited from a finding of family hardship relative to
the property at issue, no order of abatement shall issue. As used in this
section, “family or household member” means the spouse, brother, sister or
child of the person who is the owner of property used to maintain a nuisance.
   (e)   Order of Abatement. If the existence of a nuisance is established, an
order of abatement as described in this division shall be entered as a part of
the judgment in the case.
   If the property involved in the abatement action is a building or other
place, it shall be ordered closed and kept closed for a period of one (1) year,
unless sooner released by the court. The contents and fixtures of such a
building or other place shall be given to an agency identified by the Director
of Law, which may be a battered women’s shelter or similar agency, if the
agency desires to have it, or if it does not, the same shall be sold at public
auction or as otherwise directed by the court, and the proceeds shall be
distributed as provided in division (g) of this section.
   If the property involved in the abatement action is a vehicle, boat or
aircraft, the same shall be given to a battered women’s shelter or similar
agency identified by the Director of Law, if the agency desires to have it, or
if it does not, the same sold at public auction or as otherwise directed by the
court, and the proceeds shall be distributed as provided in division (g) of
this section.
   The court may order any person in charge of personalty that is subject to
sale under this division to present the same at a time and place directed by
the court for the purpose of conducting its sale. In addition, the court may
authorize any law enforcement agency to seize such personalty.
   In identifying an agency to receive the property or the proceeds from the
sale of the property as provided in this section, the Director of Law shall
confer with the council member representing the community in which the criminal
activity that gave rise to the nuisance occurred, and where possible, the
agency selected will be one that serves that community.
   (f)   Use of Closed Building. Any person who uses a building or place
ordered closed in accordance with division (e) of this section, with knowledge
that such building or place has been ordered closed, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (g)   Sale of Property, Costs and Liens. Upon the sale of any furniture,
fixtures, contents, vehicle, boat or aircraft as provided in this section, the
person executing the order of the court shall, after deducting the expenses of
keeping such property and costs of such sale, pay all liens according to their
priorities which may be established by intervention or otherwise at the hearing
or in other proceedings brought for the purpose as being bona fide and as
having been created without the lienholder having any notice that such property
was being used or was to be used for the maintenance of a nuisance as herein
defined, and shall pay the balance to a battered women’s shelter or similar
agency identified by the Director of Law.
(Ord. No. 164-A-2000. Passed 6-19-00, eff. 6-29-00)
CHAPTER 621 – OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS
621.01   Negligent Homicide
621.02   Vehicular Homicide
621.03   Assault
621.031   Assault by a Minor; Parental Duty Imposed
621.04   Negligent Assault
621.05   Reserved
621.06   Aggravated Menacing
621.07   Menacing
621.071   Menacing by Stalking
621.072   Exceptions to Aggravated Menacing and Menacing
621.08   Unlawful Restraint
621.09   Coercion
621.10   Telecommunications Harassment
621.11   Threatening or Harassing Telecommunications
621.12   Revelation of Confidential Matters
621.13   Abuse of Corpse
621.14   Hazing
Cross reference:
   Family offenses, CO
Ch. 609
   Fighting; provoking violent response, CO
605.03
   Physical harm to persons defined, CO
601.01
Statutory reference:
   See sectional histories for similar State law
§ 621.01 Negligent Homicide
   (a)   No person shall negligently cause the death of another by means of a
deadly weapon or dangerous ordnance as defined in Section
627.01.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of negligent homicide, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(RC 2903.05; Ord. No. 54-74. Passed 3-25-74, eff. 4-1-74)
§ 621.02 Vehicular Homicide
   (a)   No person, while operating or participating in the operation of a
motor vehicle, motorcycle, snowmobile, locomotive, watercraft or aircraft shall
negligently cause the death of another.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of vehicular homicide, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the jury or judge as trier of fact in the
case in which the person is convicted finds that the offender was under the
influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or alcohol and a drug of abuse, at the
time of the commission of the offense, the offender shall in addition be given
mandatory sentence and license revocation found in RC 4507.16.
   (c)   To assist the trier of fact in determining whether the offender was
under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or alcohol and a drug of
abuse, the concentration of alcohol in the offender’s blood, breath or urine as
shown by a chemical test taken pursuant to RC 1547.111 or 4511.191 may be
considered as a competent evidence and the offender shall be presumed to have
been under the influence of alcohol if there was at the time the bodily
substance was withdrawn for the chemical test a concentration of ten-hundredths
of one percent (0.10%) or more by weight of alcohol in the offender’s blood,
ten- hundredths (0.10) of one (1) gram or more by weight of alcohol per 210
liters of his or her breath, or fourteen- hundredths (0.14) of one (1) gram or
more by weight of alcohol per one hundred (100) milliliters of his or her
urine.
(RC 2903.07).
   (d)   This section shall not apply whenever the conduct prohibited by this
section constitutes a felony under RC 2903.07.
(Ord. No. 820-90. Passed 6-14-93, eff. 6-23-93)
§ 621.03 Assault
   (a)   No person shall knowingly cause or attempt to cause physical harm to
another.
   (b)   No person shall recklessly cause serious physical harm to another.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of assault, a misdemeanor of
the first degree.
   (d)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (c) of this section, if the
sentencing court determines that the victim of the offense was any of the
following:
      (1)   An official or employee of the Cleveland City School District or
the City of Cleveland; or
      (2)   A member of the City's Auxiliary Police Force; or
      (3)   A school crossing guard or his or her alternate; or
      (4)   A volunteer working on school property, whether public or private,
or at a City-owned recreation center; or
      (5)   A taxicab driver licensed under
Chapter 443 of the Codified Ordinances; or
      (6)   A Regional Transit Authority worker, driver or operator or any
other public transportation system worker, driver or operator,
and the court further determines that the victim was performing his or her
official duties at the time of the offense, the court shall set the offender's
fine at one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and in addition to said fine shall
sentence the offender to not less than sixty (60) days' and not more than six
(6) months' imprisonment. The minimum fine and imprisonment to be imposed by
the court pursuant to this division (d) are mandatory. The court shall not
suspend all or any portion of said fines and imprisonment.
   (e)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (c) of this section, if the
sentencing court determines that the victim of the offense was a child between
the ages of six (6) and seventeen (17) and was in attendance in a facility
owned by the Cleveland City School District at the time of the offense, the
court shall set the offender's fine at one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and, in
addition to said fine, shall sentence the offender to not less than sixty (60)
days' and not more than six (6) months' imprisonment. The minimum fine and
imprisonment to be imposed by the court pursuant to this division (d) are
mandatory. The court shall not suspend all or any portion of said fines and
imprisonment.
   (f)   This section does not apply where the offense constitutes a felony
pursuant to RC 2903.13.
(Ord. No. 167-13. Passed 4-15-13, eff. 4-19-13)
§ 621.031 Assault by a Minor; Parental Duty Imposed
   (a)   No child between the ages of six (6) and seventeen (17), inclusive,
shall knowingly cause or attempt to cause physical harm to an official or
employee of the Cleveland City School District or City of Cleveland while
performing his or her official duties.
   (b)   Each parent or legal guardian of a child between the ages of six (6)
and seventeen (17), inclusive, shall have a duty to prohibit the child from
behaving contrary to division (a) of this section. No person shall negligently
fail to fulfill the duty imposed by this division.
   (c)   It shall be an affirmative defense to division (b) of this section
that the parent or legal guardian:
      (1)   Initiated the jurisdiction of the Juvenile Court against the child
prior to the time that the child was found violating division (a) of this
section; or
      (2)   Can demonstrate based upon the records of the Cleveland City School
District that they have been actively working with officials of the Cleveland
City School District regarding the behavior of the child prior to the time that
the child was found violating division (a) of this section.
   (d)   Any child who violates division (a) of this section is an unruly child
and is subject to the jurisdiction of the Juvenile Court.
   (e)   Any school official or employee who has knowledge that a child between
the ages of six (6) and seventeen (17), inclusive, has caused or attempted to
cause physical harm to an official or employee of the Cleveland City School
District or City of Cleveland while performing his or her official duties shall
immediately notify the Chief of Police or his or her designee and request the
assistance of the Division of Police. This division (e) shall not apply to any
school official or employee who has personal knowledge that the notification
required by this division (e) has already been given with respect to a
particular assault. The notification required by this division (e) shall be
separate from and in addition to any notification regarding prohibited weapons
required to be given pursuant to Section
627.082.
   (f)   Any person who violates division (b) or division (e) of this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(Ord. No. 864-05. Passed 7-13-05, eff. 7-20-05)
§ 621.04 Negligent Assault
   (a)   No person shall negligently, by means of a deadly weapon or dangerous
ordnance as defined in Section
627.01 cause physical harm to another.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of negligent assault, a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(RC 2903.14; Ord. No. 54-74. Passed 3-25-74, eff. 4-1-74)
§ 621.05 Reserved
§ 621.06 Aggravated Menacing
   (a)   No person shall knowingly cause another to believe that the offender
will cause serious physical harm to the person or property of such other person
or member of his or her immediate family.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of aggravated menacing, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(RC 2903.21; Ord. No. 1020-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
§ 621.07 Menacing
   (a)   No person shall knowingly cause another to believe that the offender
will cause physical harm to the person or property of such other person or
member of his or her immediate family.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of menacing, a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.
(RC 2903.22; Ord. No. 54-74. Passed 3-25-74, eff. 4-1-74)
§ 621.071 Menacing by Stalking
   (a)   No person by engaging in a pattern of conduct shall knowingly cause
another to believe that the offender will cause physical harm to the other
person or cause mental distress to the other person.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of menacing by stalking, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (c)   RC 2919.27 applies in relation to a defendant charged with violation
of this section.
   (d)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Pattern of conduct” means two (2) or more actions or incidents
closely related in time, whether or not there has been a prior conviction based
on any of those actions or incidents. Actions or incidents that prevent,
obstruct, or delay the performance by a public official, firefighter, rescuer,
emergency medical services person, or emergency facility person of any
authorized act within the public official’s firefighter’s, rescuer’s, emergency
medical services person’s, or emergency facility person’s official capacity may
constitute a “pattern of conduct.”
      (2)   “Mental distress” means any mental illness or condition that
involves some temporary substantial incapacity or mental illness or condition
that would normally require psychiatric treatment.
      (3)   “Emergency medical services person” is the singular of “emergency
medical services personnel” as defined in RC 2133.21.
      (4)   “Emergency facility person” is the singular of “emergency facility
personnel” as defined in RC 2909.04.
      (5)   “Public official” has the same meaning as in RC 2921.01.
   (e)   This section shall not apply whenever the conduct prohibited by this
section constitutes a felony under RC 2903.211.
(RC 2903.211; Ord. No. 834-03. Passed 6-10-03, eff. 6-12-03)
§ 621.072 Exceptions to Aggravated Menacing and Menacing
   Sections
621.06 and
621.07 do not apply if the victim of the offense is an officer or employee of a
public children services agency or a private child placing agency and the
offense relates to the officer’s employee’s performance or anticipated
performance of official responsibilities or duties or, if the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to an offense of violence,
the victim of that prior offense was an officer or employee of a public
children services agency or private child placing agency, and that prior
offense related to the officer’s or employee’s performance or anticipated
performance of official responsibilities or duties.
(RC 2903.214; Ord. No. 834-03. Passed 6-10-03, eff. 6-12-03)
§ 621.08 Unlawful Restraint
   (a)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly restrain
another of his or her liberty.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful restraint, a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(RC 2905.03; Ord. No. 54-74. Passed 3-25-74, eff. 4-1-74)
§ 621.09 Coercion
   (a)   No person, with purpose to coerce another into taking or refraining
from action concerning which he or she has a legal freedom of choice, shall do
any of the following:
      (1)   Threaten to commit any offense;
      (2)   Utter or threaten any calumny against any person;
      (3)   Expose or threaten to expose any matter tending to subject any
person to hatred, contempt or ridicule, or to damage his or her personal or
business repute, or impair his or her credit;
      (4)   Institute or threaten criminal proceedings against any person;
      (5)   Take or withhold, or threaten to take or withhold official action,
or cause or threaten to cause official action to be taken or withheld.
   (b)   Subsections (a)(4) and (5) hereof shall not be construed to prohibit a
prosecutor or court from doing any of the following in good faith and in the
interests of justice:
      (1)   Offering or agreeing to grant, or granting immunity from
prosecution pursuant to RC 2945.44;
      (2)   In return for a plea of guilty to one (1) or more offenses charged
or to one (1) or more other or lesser offenses, or in return for the testimony
of the accused in a case to which he or she is not a party, offering or
agreeing to dismiss, or dismissing one (1) or more charges pending against an
accused, or offering or agreeing to impose, or imposing a certain sentence or
modification of sentence;
      (3)   Imposing probation on certain conditions, including without
limitation requiring the offender to make restitution or redress to the victim
of his or her offense.
   (c)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under subsection (a)(3), (4)
or (5) hereof that the actor’s conduct was a reasonable response to the
circumstances which occasioned it, and that his or her purpose was limited to:
      (1)   Compelling another to refrain from misconduct or to desist from
further misconduct;
      (2)   Preventing or redressing a wrong or injustice;
      (3)   Preventing another from taking action for which the actor
reasonably believed such other person to be disqualified;
      (4)   Compelling another to take action which the actor reasonably
believed such other person to be under a duty to take.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of coercion, a misdemeanor of
the second degree.
   (e)   As used in this section, “threat” includes a direct threat and a
threat by innuendo.
(RC 2905.12; Ord. No. 54-74. Passed 3-25-74, eff. 4-1-74)
§ 621.10 Telecommunications Harassment
   (a)   No person shall knowingly make or cause to be made a
telecommunication, or knowingly permit a telecommunication to be made from a
telecommunications device under the person's control, to another, if the caller
does any of the following:
      (1)   Fails to identify the caller to the recipient of the
telecommunication and makes the telecommunication with purpose to harass or
abuse any person at the premises to which the telecommunication is made,
whether or not actual communication takes place between the caller and a
recipient;
      (2)   Describes, suggests, requests, or proposes that the caller, the
recipient of the telecommunication, or any other person engage in sexual
activity, and the recipient or another person at the premises to which the
telecommunication is made has requested, in a previous telecommunication or in
the immediate telecommunication, that the caller not make a telecommunication
to the recipient or to the premises to which the telecommunication is made;
      (3)   During the telecommunication, violates Section
621.06 or RC 2903.21;
      (4)   Knowingly states to the recipient of the telecommunication that the
caller intends to cause damage to or destroy public or private property, and
the recipient, any member of recipient's family, or any other person who
resides at the premises to which the telecommunication is made owns, leases,
resides, or works in, will at the time of the destruction or damaging be near
or in, has the responsibility of protecting, or insures the property that will
be destroyed or damaged;
      (5)   Knowingly makes the telecommuni-cation to the recipient of the
telecommunication, to another person at the premises to which the
telecommunication is made, or to those premises, and the recipient or another
person at those premises previously has told the caller not to make a
telecommunication to those premises or to any persons at those premises.
   (b)   No person shall make or cause to be made a telecommunication, or
permit a telecommunication to be made from a telecommunications device under
the person's control, with purpose to abuse, threaten, or harass another
person.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of telecommunication
harassment, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (d)   This section shall not apply in any case in which the proscribed
conduct constitutes a felony under RC 2917.21.
   (e)   As used in this section:
      (1)   "Caller" means the person described in division (a) of this section
who makes or causes to be made a telecommunication or who permits a tele-
communication to be made from a telecommunications device under that person's
control.
      (2)   "Sexual activity" has the same meaning as in Section
619.01 and shall also include all conduct constituting "sexual activity" as
defined in RC 2907.01.
      (3)   "Telecommunication" means the origination, emission, dissemination,
transmission, or reception of data, images, signals, sounds, or other
intelligence or equivalence of intelligence of any nature over any
communications system by any method, including, but not limited to, a fiber
optic, electronic, magnetic, optical, digital, or analog method. (RC 2913.01)
      (4)   "Telecommunications device" means any instrument, equipment,
machine, or other device that facilitates telecommunication, including, but not
limited to, a computer, computer network, computer chip, computer circuit,
scanner, telephone, cellular telephone, pager, personal communications device,
transponder, receiver, radio, modem, or device that enables the use of a modem.
(RC 2913.01)
   (f)    Nothing in this section prohibits a person from making a
telecommunication to a debtor that is in compliance with the "Fair Debt
Collection Practices Act", 91 Stat. 874 (1977), 15 U.S.C. 1692, as amended, or
the "Telephone Consumer Protection Act", 105 Stat. 2395 (1991), 47 U.S.C. 227,
as amended.
(RC 2917.21; Ord. No. 270-12. Passed 4-23-12, eff. 4-26-12)
§ 621.11 Threatening or Harassing Telecommunications
   (a)   No person shall, while communicating with any other person over a
telecommunications device, threaten to do bodily harm or use or address to such
other person any words or language of a lewd, lascivious or indecent character,
nature or connotation for the sole purpose of annoying such other person; nor
shall any person make a telecommunication to any other person repeatedly or
cause any person to be a telecommunications recipient repeatedly for the sole
purpose of harassing or molesting such other person or his family.
   Any use, communication or act prohibited by this section may be deemed to
have occurred or to have been committed at either the place at which the
telecommunication was made or was received.
   (b)   As used in this section, "telecommunications device" has the same
meaning as in Section
621.10.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a threatening or harassing
telecommunication, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(Ord. No. 270-12. Passed 4-23-12, eff. 4-26-12)
§ 621.12 Revelation of Confidential Matters
   (a)   No employee of another, who in the course and within the scope of his
or her employment receives any confidential matter or information, shall
knowingly, without the consent of his or her employer, furnish or disclose such
matter or information to any person not privileged to acquire it.
(RC 1333.81)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(RC 1333.99(F); Ord. No. 54-74. Passed 3-25-74, eff. 4-1-74)
§ 621.13 Abuse of Corpse
   (a)   No person, except as authorized by law, shall treat a human corpse in
a way that he or she knows would outrage reasonable family sensibilities.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of abuse of a corpse, a
misdemeanor of the second degree.
(RC 2927.01; Ord. No. 54-74. Passed 3-25-74, eff. 4-1-74)
§ 621.14 Hazing
   (a)   As used in this section, “hazing” means doing any act or coercing
another, including the victim, to do any act of initiation into any student or
other organization that causes or creates a substantial risk of causing mental
or physical harm to any person.
   (b)   (1) No person shall recklessly participate in the hazing of another.
      (2)   No administrator, employee, or faculty member of any primary,
secondary, or post-secondary school or of any other educational institution,
public or private, shall recklessly permit the hazing of any person.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of hazing, a misdemeanor of
the first degree.
(RC 2903.31; Ord. No. 542-90. Passed 3-19-90, eff. 3-22-90)
CHAPTER 623 – PROPERTY OFFENSES
623.01   Arson
623.02   Criminal Damaging or Endangering
623.03   Criminal Mischief
623.04   Criminal Trespass
623.041   Aggravated Trespass
623.05   Trespass on RTA Property
623.06   Destruction of Shrubs, Trees or Crops
623.07   Desecration
623.08   Vandalism of Vacant Buildings and Structures
623.09   War Memorial Vandalism
623.091   Vandalism to Police and Firefighter Memorials
623.10   Spray Painting Property
623.101   Selling or Furnishing Aerosol Containers of Paint to Minors
Prohibited
623.102   Purchase or Possession of Aerosol Containers of Paint by Minors
Prohibited
623.11   Defacing and Removing Signs
623.12   Posting on Private Property Without Consent
623.13   Notices or Signs on Public Property Prohibited; Removal
623.131   Banners Prohibited Over Certain Highways
623.14   Removal of Political Signs
623.15   Criminal Damage to Swimming Pools
623.16   Ethnic Intimidation
623.161   Intimidation of a Homeless Person
623.17   Criminal Damage to Parks and Recreational Facilities
Cross-reference:
   Airport property damage, CO
571.10
   Defacing, damaging or climbing on bridges, CO
577.13
   Defacing notices of park rules prohibited, CO
559.51
   Desecration of U.S. flag, CO
105.10
   Physical harm to property defined, CO
601.01
   Vehicle trespass, CO
625.07
Statutory reference:
   See sectional histories for similar State law
   Parents’ liability for destructive acts of their children, RC 3109.09
§ 623.01 Arson
   (a)   No person, by means of fire or explosion, shall knowingly and without
purpose to defraud cause, or create a substantial risk of physical harm to any
property of another without his or her consent.
   (b)   This section shall not apply if:
      (1)   The value of the property or the amount of physical harm involved
is three hundred dollars ($300.00) or more; or
      (2)   The property involved is a statehouse, courthouse, school building
or other structure owned or controlled by the State or any of its political
subdivisions, or any department, agency or instrumentality of either, and used
for public purposes.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of arson, a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(RC 2909.03; Ord. No. 304-86. Passed 4-15-85, eff. 4-17-85)
§ 623.02 Criminal Damaging or Endangering
   (a)   No person shall cause, or create a substantial risk of physical harm
to any property of another without his or her consent:
      (1)   Knowingly, by any means;
      (2)   Recklessly, by means of fire, explosion, flood, poison gas, poison,
radioactive material, caustic or corrosive material, or other inherently
dangerous agency or substance.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal damaging or
endangering, a misdemeanor if the property involved is not an aircraft, an
aircraft engine, propeller, appliance, spare part or any other equipment or
implement used or intended to be used in the operation of an aircraft and if
the violation does not create a risk of physical harm to any person, and if the
property involved is not an occupied aircraft. A violation of this section is a
misdemeanor of the second degree. If violation of this section creates a risk
of physical harm to any person, criminal damaging or endangering is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(RC 2909.06; Ord. No. 1414-86. Passed 11-3-86, eff. 11-5-86)
§ 623.03 Criminal Mischief
   (a)   No person shall:
      (1)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage, destroy
or otherwise improperly tamper with the property of another;
      (2)   With purpose to interfere with the use or enjoyment of property of
another employ a tear gas device, stink bomb, smoke generator or other device
releasing a substance which is harmful or offensive to persons exposed or which
tends to cause public alarm;
      (3)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage, destroy
or otherwise improperly tamper with a bench mark, triangulation station,
boundary marker or other survey station, monument or marker;
      (4)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage, destroy
or otherwise improperly tamper with any safety device, the property of another
or the property of the offender when required or placed for the safety of
others, so as to destroy or diminish its effectiveness or availability for its
intended purpose;
      (5)   With purpose to interfere with the use or enjoyment of the property
of another, set a fire on the land of another or place personal property that
has been set on fire on the land of another, which fire or personal property is
outside and apart from any building, other structure or personal property that
is on that land.
   (b)   As used in this section, “safety device” means any fire extinguisher,
fire hose or fire axe, or any fire escape, emergency exit or emergency escape
equipment, or any life line, life-saving ring, life preserver or life boat or
raft, or any alarm, light, flare, signal, sign or notice intended to warn of
danger, or emergency, or intended for other safety purpose, or any guard
railing or safety barricade, or any traffic sign or signal, or any railroad
grade crossing sign, signal or gate, or any first aid or survival equipment, or
any other device, apparatus, or equipment intended for protecting or preserving
the safety of persons or property.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal mischief, a
misdemeanor if the property involved is not an aircraft, an aircraft engine,
propeller, appliance, spare part, fuel, lubricant, hydraulic fluid, any other
equipment, implement or material used or intended to be used in the operation
of an aircraft, or any cargo carried or intended to be carried in an aircraft
and if the violation does not create a risk of physical harm to any person, and
if the property involved is not an occupied aircraft. A violation of this
section is a misdemeanor of the third degree. If violation of this section
creates a risk of physical harm to any person, criminal mischief is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(RC 2909.07; Ord. No. 2823-89. Passed 3-19-90, eff. 3-22-90)
§ 623.04 Criminal Trespass
   (a)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly enter or remain on the land or premises of another;
      (2)   Knowingly enter or remain on the land or premises of another, the
use of which is lawfully restricted to certain persons, purposes, modes or
hours, when the offender knows he or she is in violation of any such
restriction or is reckless in that regard.
      (3)   Recklessly enter or remain on the land or premises of another, as
to which notice against unauthorized access or presence is given by actual
communication to the offender, or in a manner prescribed by law, or by posting
in a manner reasonably calculated to come to the attention of potential
intruders, or by fencing or other enclosure manifestly designed to restrict
access;
      (4)   Being on the land or premises of another, negligently fail or
refuse to leave upon being notified to do so by the owner or occupant, or the
agent or servant of either;
      (5)   Knowingly enter or remain in any vacant and vandalized building or
structure, including, but not limited to, a formerly occupied residential
dwelling or dwelling unit, without having on his or her person the written
permission of the owner of such structure granting permission to be in any such
building or structure. This paragraph does not apply to governmental officers
or employees when carrying out a lawful governmental function.
      (6)   After first being warned to desist, knowingly enter or remain on
vacant land of another, or outdoors on the land or premises of another on which
any vacant and vandalized building or structure is situated, including, but not
limited to, a formerly occupied residential dwelling or dwelling unit, without
having on his or her person a writing such as, by way of example only, a
contract or work order for work at the land or premises, or a writing signed by
the owner, lessee or other person entitled to possession of the land or
premises, that shows that the person has a lawful reason to enter or remain
there.
   (b)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that the land or
premises involved was owned, controlled or in custody of a public agency.
   (c)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that the offender was
authorized to enter or remain on the land or premises involved when such
authorization was secured by deception.
   (d)   Whoever violates divisions (a)(1), (2), (3) and (4) of this section is
guilty of criminal trespass, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (e)   Whoever violates division (a)(5) of this section is guilty of
trespassing on a vacant and vandalized building, a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
   (f)   Whoever violates division (a)(6) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor on the first offense and a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on the
second and any subsequent offense.
   (g)   As used in this section, “land or premises” includes any land,
building, structure of place belonging to, controlled by or in custody of
another, and any separate enclosure or room, or portion thereof.
(RC 2911.21; Ord. No. 1076-09. Passed 5-10-10, eff. 5-20-10)
§ 623.041 Aggravated Trespass
   (a)   No person shall enter or remain on the land or premises of another
with purpose to commit on that land or those premises a misdemeanor, the
elements of which involve causing physical harm to another person or causing
another person to believe that the offender will cause physical harm to him or
her.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of aggravated trespass, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(RC 2911.211; Ord. No. 1298-93. Passed 6-14-93, eff. 6-23-93)
§ 623.05 Trespass on RTA Property
   (a)   No person shall enter upon any portion of the right-of-way, owned or
leased by the Regional Transit Authority or any other transit system, upon
which are located rail tracks of any rapid transit system, without proper
authority.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of trespass on RTA property, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(Ord. No. 1020-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
§ 623.06 Destruction of Shrubs, Trees or Crops
   (a)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall recklessly cut down,
destroy, girdle or otherwise injure a vine, bush, shrub, sapling, tree or crop
standing or growing on the land of another or upon public land.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is liable in treble damages for the
injury caused.
(RC 901.51)
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(RC 901.99(A); Ord. No. 90-96. Passed 3-18-96, eff. 3-26-96)
§ 623.07 Desecration
   (a)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall purposely deface, damage,
pollute or otherwise physically mistreat any of the following:
      (1)   The flag of the United States or of this State;
      (2)   Any public monument;
      (3)   Any historical or commemorative marker, or any structure, Indian
mound or earthwork, cemetery thing or site of great historical or archeological
interest;
      (4)   A work of art or museum piece;
      (5)   Any other object of reverence or sacred devotion.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of desecration. A violation of
this section is a misdemeanor of the second degree.
(RC 2927.11; Ord. No. 834-03. Passed 6-10-03, eff. 6-12-03)
§ 623.08 Vandalism of Vacant Buildings and Structures
   (a)   No person shall purposely destroy, injure or deface any vacant
building or structure or units therein, or purposely remove therefrom any
interior or exterior fixtures or portions thereof, so as to cause physical harm
to such buildings, structures or units therein.
   (b)   No person shall purposely attempt to destroy, injure or deface any
vacant building or structure or units thereon, or purposely attempt to remove
therefrom any fixtures or portions thereof, so as to cause physical harm to
such buildings, structures or units thereon.
   (c)   The provisions of this section are not applicable to any governmental
agency, or its employees, acting within the scope of their official duties and
according to law, or to any lawful owner of such premises or agent of such
owners, acting according to law and so as not to create a nuisance or unsafe
structure.
   (d)   Notwithstanding the provisions of Section
601.99(a), whoever violates this section shall be guilty of vandalism of vacant
buildings and structures, a first- degree misdemeanor and fined not less than
five hundred dollars ($500.00), nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
and imprisoned not less than thirty (30) days nor more than one hundred and
eighty (180) days.
   If the person has been previously convicted of violating this section he or
she shall receive the mandatory maximum sentence and be fined one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) and imprisoned one hundred and eighty (180) days.
   No portion of the minimum sentences imposed by this section shall be subject
to reduction in any manner.
(Ord. No. 1965-06. Passed 12-11-06, eff. 12-15-06)
§ 623.09 War Memorial Vandalism
   (a)   No person shall wilfully or maliciously defile, mar, injure, deface,
mutilate, sit or walk upon any portion of, or deposit or throw any object into
or at the War Memorial Fountain.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of war memorial vandalism a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(Ord. No. 1020-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
§ 623.091 Vandalism to Police and Firefighter Memorials
   (a)   No person shall purposely mar, injure, deface, damage or otherwise
physically mistreat the Police Memorial or Firefighter Memorial.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of desecration, a misdemeanor
of the second degree.
(Ord. No. 1569-01. Passed 8-15-01, eff. 8-24-01)
§ 623.10 Spray Painting Property
   (a)   No person shall intentionally, maliciously or recklessly destroy,
damage or deface in any way any public or private property by the use of spray
paint or any other paint or any other similar substance. Public or private
property shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   Public or private buildings, including sidewalks about such grounds
and all appurtenances thereto, fences or trees;
      (2)   Public street lights, fire hydrants, pumps, fountains, inlets,
manholes or sewer ventilators, waste containers, and noise walls;
      (3)   Telephone or telegraph wires or electric wires of any kind or the
poles sustaining or attaching thereto;
      (4)   Statues, monuments or plaques;
      (5)   Official notices or signs posted by the State, the City or any
other public agency;
      (6)   Any property, including vehicles, seats, equipment, buildings, and
bus stops owned by the Regional Transit Authority or any other public
transportation system.
   (b)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of spray painting
property, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   In addition to any other penalty imposed, as a separate and
independent penalty, whoever violates this section shall be ordered to either,
(i) make restitution by monetary payment for the loss or damage incurred on the
property at that location where the offender committed the violation or, (ii)
at his or her own cost, remove the spray paint from the property at that
location where the offender committed the violation and to restore by physical
labor the property to its former condition; and, also at his or her own cost,
to perform one hundred (100) hours of community service removing spray paint
from other public or private property.
(Ord. No. 167-13. Passed 4-15-13, eff. 4-19-13)
§ 623.101 Selling or Furnishing Aerosol Containers of Paint to Minors
Prohibited
   (a)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to
sell to another person, who is under the age of eighteen (18) years, any
aerosol container of paint that is capable of defacing property without first
obtaining bona-fide evidence of majority and identity.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to
furnish or give to another person, who is under the age of eighteen (18) years,
any aerosol container of paint that is capable of defacing property.
   (b)   For purposes of this subdivision, “bona-fide evidence of majority and
identity” is any document evidencing the age and identity of an individual
which has been issued by a federal, state or local governmental entity,
including, but not limited to, a motor vehicle operator’s license, a
registration certificate issued under the federal Selective Service Act, or an
identification card issued to a member of the armed forces.
   (c)   Subsection (a)(2) hereof shall not apply to the furnishing of an
aerosol container of paint to a minor for the minor’s use or possession while
engaged in a lawful activity under the supervision and control of the minor’s
parent, guardian, teacher or employer.
   (d)   Subsection (a)(2) hereof shall not apply to aerosol containers of
paint or related substances that are furnished for use in school-related
activities as part of the instructional program when used under the control and
supervision of a teacher, instructor or other adult supervisor for such
activities, either within the classroom or on the site of a supervised project.
These containers shall be inventoried by the teacher, instructor, or adult
supervisor upon completion of the activity or project.
   (e)   After thirty (30) days from passage of this section, all retail
businesses within the City of Cleveland that sell or offer for sale aerosol
containers of paint shall post in a conspicuous area near such containers a
notice that states:
   “WARNING: SALE OF SPRAY PAINT TO
   MINORS PROHIBITED”
   “1)   It is unlawful in the City of Cleveland for any person under the age
of eighteen (18) to purchase an aerosol container of paint.”
   “2)   It is unlawful in the City of Cleveland for any person under the age
of eighteen (18) to possess or to be furnished with an aerosol container of
paint, except while engaged in a lawful activity under the supervision and
control of a parent, guardian, teacher, or employer.”
   (f)   After thirty (30) days from passage of this section, whoever violates
subsection (e) hereof is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not
more than one hundred dollars ($100.00).
   (g)   Whoever violates subsections (a)(1) or (a)(2) hereof is guilty of
selling or furnishing an aerosol paint container to a minor, a misdemeanor of
the first degree.
(Ord. No. 1646-06. Passed 4-23-07, eff. 4-26-07)
§ 623.102 Purchase or Possession of Aerosol Containers of Paint by Minors
Prohibited
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18)
years to purchase an aerosol container of paint that is capable of defacing
property.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) to
possess or to have under his or her control an aerosol container of paint that
is capable of defacing property.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18)
years to possess or to have under his or her control an aerosol container of
paint with purpose to deface property while on any public highway, street,
alley, or way, or other public place, regardless of whether that person is or
is not in any automobile, vehicle, or other conveyance.
   (d)   Subsection (b) hereof does not apply to the possession of an aerosol
paint container by a person under the age of eighteen (18) in the circumstances
described in subsections (c) and (d) of preceding Section
623.101.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful purchase or
possession of an aerosol container of paint, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(Ord. No. 1646-06. Passed 4-23-07, eff. 4-26-07)
§ 623.11 Defacing and Removing Signs
   (a)   No person shall tear down, remove, destroy, cover up, mutilate,
obliterate or otherwise injure any proclamation or official notice, any sign or
handbill, notice, poster or advertisement containing a notice of any meeting,
lecture, theater, show, play or concert, or any public or private sale of
property until after they have served the purpose for which they were put up.
This section does not prevent any person owning or controlling billboards used
for advertising purposes from changing or removing advertisements or notices
which he or she may post thereon, or prohibit any owner from removing
advertisements or notices placed or remaining on his or her property without
his or her consent.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of defacing and removing
signs, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(Ord. No. 1020-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
§ 623.12 Posting on Private Property Without Consent
   (a)   No person shall stick or post any advertisement, poster, sign or
handbill or placard of any description upon any private building, or upon any
tree, post, fence, billboard or any other structure or thing, the property of
another, without permission of the occupant or owner of the same, nor paint,
mark, write, print or impress, or in any manner attach any notice or
advertisement or the name of any commodity or thing or any trademark, symbol or
figure of any kind upon anything whatever, the property of another, without
first obtaining permission of the owner of such thing.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of posting on private property
without consent, a minor misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 1020-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
§ 623.13 Notices or Signs on Public Property Prohibited; Removal
   (a)   No person shall stick, post or attach any notice, advertisement,
poster, sign, handbill, or placard of any kind or description on any telegraph,
telephone, railway or electric light poles within the limits of the City, or on
any bridge, public building, voting booth, flagging, curbstone, walk, step
stone, or sidewalk, or write, print, or impress or in any manner attach any
notice, advertisement, poster, sign, handbill, or placard of any kind or
description on any public building, bridge, voting booth, flagging, curbstone,
step stone, or sidewalk, the property of the City or within the street lines of
the City, or over which the City has the care, custody, or control, except as
may be required by the laws of the State or City ordinances. The prohibitions
of this ordinance include the placing of building numbers on curbs.
   (b)   All notices, advertisements, posters, signs, handbills, or placards of
any kind or description in violation of this section shall be removed by the
department or division which has the care, custody, or control of the City
property where the violation is found and the director of the appropriate
department shall charge the responsible party fifty dollars ($50.00) per sign
to cover the cost of removal. It shall be the duty and power of the directors
of the departments and of the commissioners of the divisions of the City to
carry out the mandate of the preceding sentence with regard to City property
under their care, custody, or control.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unauthorized placing of
notices or signs on public property, a minor misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 1001-06. Passed 6-12-06, eff. 6-16-06)
§ 623.131 Banners Prohibited Over Certain Highways
   (a)   No person shall hang any banner of any kind over Interstate Route 71,
77, 90 or 480 or over the Cleveland Memorial Shoreway from the Inner Belt to
Lake Road. Any banner hung in violation of this section is a public nuisance
which may be removed by the authority having jurisdiction over the highway over
which the banner hangs.
   (b)   For purposes of this section, “banner” shall mean a piece of cloth or
other material upon which a message, logo or both is imprinted, painted or
otherwise affixed.
   (c)   Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 1375-90. Passed 6-18-90, eff. 6-27-90)
§ 623.14 Removal of Political Signs
   (a)   No person shall place or cause to be placed or permit to remain upon
any public property, or private property which is vacant or unoccupied or
private property any unauthorized poster, placard or sign advertising,
publicizing or containing thereon information concerning any event, ballot
issue, organization or candidate for office.
   (b)   Removal of any unauthorized poster, placard or sign shall be the
responsibility of the candidate whose name appears on such poster, placard or
sign, or the sponsor, chairman or secretary of the committee proposing action
on the issue which is the subject of the poster, placard or sign. The Director
of Public Safety shall serve notice upon the candidate, sponsor, chairman or
secretary responsible for the removal of the unauthorized poster, placard or
sign at the address listed thereon or at the usual address of the organization
or organizations listed on such poster, placard or sign. The notice shall
contain the location of the unauthorized sign and shall order removal of the
sign within forty-eight (48) hours of the receipt of the notice. If, after such
time, the poster, placard or sign has not been removed, the Director of Public
Service or the Director of Parks and Recreation shall have it removed and a
charge in the amount of fifteen dollars ($15.00) shall be imposed upon the
responsible party for each poster, placard or sign removed, and the name of the
responsible person shall be published in the City Record until the poster,
placard or sign has been removed or in the event a fine is assessed, until such
fine has been paid.
(Ord. No. 2095-92. Passed 2-22-93, eff. 3-4-93)
§ 623.15 Criminal Damage to Swimming Pools
   (a)   No person shall:
      (1)   Without privilege to do so, deposit or throw into any swimming pool
owned and operated by the City of Cleveland any object or substance not
customarily used or found in swimming pools, including, but not limited to,
glass, dirt, nails or wood.
      (2)   Without privilege to do so, recklessly deface, damage, destroy or
otherwise tamper with the physical facilities, structures or equipment at any
swimming pool owned and controlled by the City of Cleveland.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal damage to swimming
pools, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If a violation of this section
creates a risk of physical harm to any person, criminal damage to swimming
pools is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(Ord. No. 2218-88. Passed 6-12-89, eff. 6-19-89)
§ 623.16 Ethnic Intimidation
   (a)   No person shall violate RC 2903.21, 2903.22, 2909.06, 2909.07 or
2917.21(A)(3) to (5) or Sections
621.06,
621.07,
621.10(a)(3) to (5),
623.02 or
623.03 of the General Offenses Code by reason of the race, religion, color,
sex, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, national origin, age,
disability, ethnic group or Vietnam-era or disabled veteran status, of another
person or group of persons.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of ethnic intimidation. Ethnic
intimidation is an offense of the next higher degree than the offense the
commission of which is a necessary element of ethnic intimidation.
(Ord. No. 1445-13. Passed 11-17-14, eff. 11-19-14)
§ 623.161 Intimidation of a Homeless Person
   (a)   As used in this section, “homeless person” means either of the
following:
      (1)   An individual who lacks a fixed, regular and adequate night-time
residence;
      (2)   An individual who has a primary nighttime residence that meets any
of the following criteria:
         A.   A supervised publicly or privately operated shelter designed to
provide temporary living accommodations;
         B.   An institution that provides a temporary residence for
individuals intended to be institutionalized;
         C.   A public or private place not designed for, or ordinarily used
as, a regular accommodation for human beings.
   (b)   No person shall violate RC 2903.05, 2903.13, 2903.14, 2903.21,
2903.22, 2903.211, 2903.31, 2905.03, 2905.12, 2907.06, 2909.03, 2909.06,
2909.07, 2913.01, 2913.02 or Sections
619.04,
621.01,
621.03,
621.04,
621.06,
621.07,
621.071,
621.08,
621.09,
621.14,
623.01,
623.02,
623.03,
625.01,
625.05 of the Codified Ordinances if the offender commits the violation with
the intent to cause harm to any victim of the violation because that victim is
a homeless person.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of intimidation of a homeless
person. Intimidation of a homeless person is an offense of the next higher
degree than the offense the commission of which is a necessary element of
intimidation of a homeless person. If the offense committed under section (b)
is a misdemeanor of the first degree, Intimidation of a Homeless Person is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(Ord. No. 830-08. Passed 8-6-08, eff. 8-12-08)
§ 623.17 Criminal Damage to Parks and Recreational Facilities
   (a)   No person shall without privilege to do so remove, destroy, break,
injure, mutilate, deface, damage or otherwise tamper with any structure,
monument, statue, vase, fountain, wall, fence, railing, vehicle, equipment,
plant material or other property in, upon or about any park, parkway, or
recreational facility owned and controlled by the City.
   (b)   As used in this section “recreational facility” includes playground,
ballfield, tennis court, skating rink, recreation center and model airplane
field.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal damage to parks
and recreational facilities, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If a violation
of this section creates a risk of physical harm to any person, criminal damage
to parks and recreational facilities is a misdemeanor of the first degree. In
either case whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and sentenced to not less than thirty (30)
days’ imprisonment. The minimum fine to be imposed by the court for a violation
of the provisions of this section is mandatory. The court shall not suspend all
or any portion of said minimum fine; provided that in lieu of all or a portion
of the sentence of imprisonment required hereunder, the court may require the
offender to perform supervised community service work pursuant to division (H)
of RC 2951.02.
   (d)   In addition to the penalty provided in division (c) of this section,
whenever an unmarried child under the age of eighteen (18) violates this
section, the Director of Parks and Recreation shall refer the matter to the
Director of Law for civil action against the parents who have custody and
control of the child, pursuant to RC 2307.70 and/or 3109.09.
(Ord. No. 1562-90. Passed 4-8-91, eff. 4-15-91; Renumbered by Ord. No. 1196-91.
Passed 5-13-91, eff. 5-22-91)
CHAPTER 625 – THEFT AND FRAUD
625.01   Definitions
625.02   Application of Provisions
625.03   Valuation of Property
625.04   Property Exceptions as Felony Offenses
625.05   Petty Theft
625.06   Unauthorized Use of a Vehicle
625.07   Motor Vehicle Trespass
625.08   Criminal Tools
625.09   Reserved
625.10   Unauthorized Use of Property
625.11   Passing Bad Checks
625.12   Misuse of Credit Cards
625.13   Making or Using Slugs
625.14   Tampering with Coin Machines
625.15   Defrauding a Livery or Hostelry
625.16   Tampering with Records
625.17   Securing Writings by Deception
625.18   Defrauding Creditors
625.19   Deceptive Securities Publication
625.20   False Memorandum of Securities Purchase or Sale
625.21   Receiving Stolen Property
625.22   Tampering with Manhole Covers
625.23   Possessing, Selling or Purchasing Manhole Covers
625.24   Defrauding Library
625.25   Defrauding Restaurants
625.26   Defrauding Fire and Damage Victims
625.27   Trafficking In or Illegal Use of “WIC” Coupons
Cross-reference:
   Cheating, CO
611.07
   Copying police and fire uniforms, CO
615.14
   Deception to obtain matter harmful to juveniles, CO
619.13
   Deceptive advertising, CO
Ch. 653
   Deceptive measurements prohibited, CO
555.19
   Falsification, CO
615.02
   Impersonating a law enforcement officer, CO
615.09
   Property defined, CO
601.01
Statutory reference:
   See sectional histories for similar State law
§ 625.01 Definitions
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   “Deception” means knowingly deceiving another or causing another to be
deceived, by any false or misleading representation, by withholding
information, by preventing another from acquiring information, or by any other
conduct, act or omission which creates, confirms or perpetuates a false
impression in another, including a false impression as to law, value, state of
mind, or other objective or subjective fact.
   (b)   “Defraud” means to knowingly obtain, by deception, some benefit for
oneself or another, or to knowingly cause, by deception, some detriment to
another.
   (c)   “Deprive” means to:
      (1)   Withhold property of another permanently, or for such period as to
appropriate a substantial portion of its value or use, or with purpose to
restore it only upon payment of a reward or other consideration;
      (2)   Dispose of property so as to make it unlikely that the owner will
recover it;
      (3)   Accept, use or appropriate money, property or services, with
purpose not to give proper consideration in return therefor, and without
reasonable justification or excuse for not giving proper consideration.
   (d)   “Owner” means any person, other than the actor, who is the owner of,
or who has possession or control of, or any license or interest in property or
services, even though such ownership, possession, control, license or interest
is unlawful.
   (e)   “Services” include labor, personal services, professional services,
public utility services, common carrier services, and food, drink,
transportation, entertainment and cable television services.
   (f)   “Writing” means any computer software, document, letter, memorandum,
note, paper, plate, data, film or other thing having in or upon it any written,
typewritten or printed matter, and also means any token, stamp, seal, credit
card, badge, trademark, label or other symbol of value, right, privilege,
license or identification.
   (g)   “Forge” means to fabricate or create, in whole or in part and by any
means any spurious writing, or to make, execute, alter, complete, reproduce or
otherwise purport to authenticate any writing, when such writing in fact is not
authenticated thereby.
   (h)   “Utter” means to issue, publish, transfer, use, put or send into
circulation, deliver or display.
   (i)   “Coin machine” means any mechanical or electronic device designed to
do both of the following:
      (1)   Receive a coin or bill, or token made for that purpose;
      (2)   In return for the insertion or deposit of a coin, bill or token,
automatically dispense property, provide a service or grant a license.
   (j)   “Slug” means an object which, by virtue of its size, shape,
composition or other quality, is capable of being inserted or deposited in a
coin machine as an improper substitute for a genuine coin, bill or token made
for that purpose.
   (k)   “Theft offense” means any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of Sections
611.05,
625.05,
625.06,
625.10 to
625.18 or
625.21 of the General Offenses Code;
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of
this or any other state or the United States substantially equivalent to any
section listed in division (k)(1) of this section;
      (3)   An offense under an existing or former municipal ordinance or law
of this or any other state or the United States involving robbery, burglary,
breaking and entering, theft, embezzlement, wrongful conversion, forgery,
counterfeiting, deceit or fraud;
      (4)   A conspiracy or attempt to commit, or complicity in committing any
offense under division (k)(1), (2) or (3) of this section.
   (l)   “Computer services” includes, but is not limited to, the use of a
computer system, computer network, computer program, data that is prepared for
computer use or data that is contained within a computer system or computer
network.
   (m)   “Computer” means an electronic device that performs logical,
arithmetic and memory functions by the manipulation of electronic or magnetic
impulses. “Computer” includes, but is not limited to, all input, output,
processing, storage, computer program or communication facilities that are
connected or related, in a computer system or network to such an electronic
device.
   (n)   “Computer system” means a computer and related devices, whether
connected or unconnected, including, but not limited to, data input, output and
storage devices, data communications links, and computer programs and data that
make the system capable of performing specified special purpose data processing
tasks.
   (o)   “Computer network” means a set of related and remotely connected
computers and communication facilities that includes more than one (1) computer
system that has the capability to transmit among the connected computers and
communication facilities through the use of computer facilities.
   (p)   “Computer program” means an ordered set of data representing coded
instructions or statements that when executed by a computer cause the computer
to process data.
   (q)   “Computer software” means computer programs, procedures and other
documentation associated with the operation of a computer system.
   (r)   “Data” means a representation of information, knowledge, facts,
concepts or instructions that are being or have been prepared in a formalized
manner and that are intended for use in a computer system or computer network.
   (s)   “Cable television service” means any services provided by or through
the facilities of any cable television system or other similar closed circuit
coaxial cable communications system, or any microwave or similar transmission
service used in connection with any cable television system or other similar
closed circuit coaxial cable communications system.
   (t)   “Gain access” means to approach, instruct, communicate with, store
data in, retrieve data from or otherwise make use of any resources of a
computer, computer system or computer network.
   (u)   “Credit card” includes, but is not limited to, a card, code, device or
other means of access to a customer’s account for the purpose of obtaining
money, property, labor or services on credit, or for initiating an electronic
fund transfer at a point-of-sale terminal, an automated teller machine or a
cash dispensing machine. “Electronic fund transfer” has the same meaning as in
92 Stat. 3728, 15 U.S.C. 1693a, as amended.
(RC 2913.01; Ord. No. 2823-89. Passed 3-19-90, eff. 3-22-90)
§ 625.02 Application of Provisions
   (a)   Any person having been previously convicted of a theft offense under
this Code or the Ohio Revised Code shall, on a subsequent offense, be
prosecuted pursuant to the provisions of RC Title 29.
   (b)   This section shall not apply to Sections
625.10,
625.13,
625.16,
625.17 or
625.18.
(Ord. No. 54-74. Passed 3-25-74, eff. 4-1-74)
§ 625.03 Valuation of Property
   (a)   When a person is charged with a theft offense involving property or
services valued at three hundred dollars ($300.00) or more, the jury or court
trying the accused shall determine the value of such property or services as of
the time of the offense and, if a guilty verdict is returned, shall return the
finding of value as part of the verdict. In any such case it is unnecessary to
find and return exact value, and it is sufficient if the finding and return is
to the effect that the value of the property or services involved was less than
three hundred dollars ($300.00) or was three hundred dollars ($300.00) or more.
   (b)   Where more than one (1) item of property or services is involved in a
theft offense, the value of the property or services involved for the purpose
of determining the value as required by subsection (a) hereof, is the aggregate
value of all property or services involved in the offense.
   (c)   When a series of offenses under Section
625.05 is committed by the offender in his or her same employment, capacity or
relationship to another, all such offenses shall be tried as a single offense,
and the value of the property or services involved for the purpose of
determining the value as required by subsection (a) hereof, is the aggregate
value of all property and services involved in all offenses in the series. In
prosecuting a single offense under this section, it is not necessary to
separately allege and prove each offense in the series. It is sufficient to
allege and prove that the offender, within a given span of time committed one
(1) or more theft offense in his or her same employment, capacity or
relationship to another.
   (d)   The following criteria shall be used in determining the value of
property or services involved in a theft offense:
      (1)   The value of an heirloom, memento, collector’s item, antique,
museum piece, manuscript, document, record or other thing which has intrinsic
worth to its owner and which is either irreplaceable or is replaceable only on
the expenditure of substantial time, effort or money, is the amount which would
compensate the owner for its loss;
      (2)   The value of personal effects and household goods, and of
materials, supplies, equipment and fixtures used in the profession, business,
trade, occupation or avocation of its owner, which property is not covered
under subsection (d)(1) hereof, and which retains substantial utility for its
purpose regardless of its age or condition, is the cost of replacing such
property with new property of like kind and quality;
      (3)   The value of any property, real or personal, not covered under
subsection (d)(1) or (2) hereof, and the value of services, is the fair market
value of such property or services. As used in this section “fair market value”
is the money consideration which a buyer would give and a seller would accept
for property or services, assuming that the buyer is willing to buy and the
seller is willing to sell, that both are fully informed as to all facts
material to the transaction and that neither is under any compulsion to act.
   (e)   Without limitation on the evidence which may be used to establish the
value of property or services involved in a theft offense:
      (1)   When the property involved is personal property held for sale at
wholesale or retail, the price at which such property was held for sale is
prima facie evidence of its value;
      (2)   When the property involved is a security or commodity traded on an
exchange, the closing price or, if there is no closing price, the asked price,
given in the latest market quotation prior to the offense, is prima facie
evidence of the value of such security or commodity;
      (3)   When the property involved is livestock, poultry or raw
agricultural products for which a local market price is available, the latest
local market price prior to the offense is prima facie evidence of the value of
such livestock, poultry or product;
      (4)   When the property involved is a negotiable instrument, the face
value is prima facie evidence of the value of such instrument;
      (5)   When the property involved is a warehouse receipt, bill of lading,
pawn ticket, claim check or other instrument entitling the holder or bearer to
receive property, the face value or, if there is no face value, the value of
the property covered by the instrument less any payment necessary to receive
the property, is prima facie evidence of the value of the instrument;
      (6)   When the property involved is a ticket of admission, ticket for
transportation, coupon, token, or other instrument entitling the holder or
bearer to receive property or services, the face value or, if there is no face
value, the value of the property or services which may be received thereby, is
prima facie evidence of the value of such instrument;
      (7)   When the services involved are gas, electricity, water, telephone,
transportation, shipping or other services for which the rate is established by
law, the duly established rate is prima facie evidence of the value of such
services;
      (8)   When the services involved are services for which the rate is not
established by law, and the offender has been notified prior to the offense of
the rate for such services, either in writing or orally, or by posting in a
manner reasonably calculated to come to the attention of potential offenders,
the rate contained in such notice is prima facie evidence of the value of such
services.
(RC 2913.61; Ord. No. 90-96. Passed 3-18-96, eff. 3-26-96)
§ 625.04 Property Exceptions as Felony Offenses
   Regardless of the value of the property involved, and regardless of whether
the offender has previously been convicted of a theft offense, the provisions
of Section
625.05 or
625.21 do not apply if the property involved is any of the following:
   (a)   A credit card;
   (b)   A printed form for a check or other negotiable instrument, which on
its face identifies the drawer or maker for whose use it is designed or
identifies the account on which it is to be drawn, and which has not been
executed by the drawer or maker or on which the amount is blank;
   (c)   A firearm or dangerous ordnance as defined in Section
627.01;
   (d)   A motor vehicle as defined in RC 4501.01 or the proceeds of a motor
vehicle insurance policy;
   (e)   A motor vehicle identification license plate as prescribed by RC
4503.22, a temporary license placard or windshield sticker as prescribed by RC
4503.182, or any comparable license plate, placard or sticker as prescribed by
the applicable law of another state or the United States;
   (f)   A blank form for a certificate of title or a manufacturer’s or
importer’s certificate to a motor vehicle as prescribed by RC 4505.07;
   (g)   A blank form for any license listed in division (A) of RC 4507.01;
   (h)   Any dangerous drug.
(RC 2913.71; Ord. No. 834-03. Passed 6-10-03, eff. 6-12-03)
§ 625.05 Petty Theft
   (a)   No person, with purpose to deprive the owner of property or services,
shall knowingly obtain or exert control over either the property or services in
any of the following ways:
      (1)   Without the consent of the owner or person authorized to give
consent;
      (2)   Beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of the owner or
person authorized to give consent;
      (3)   By deception;
      (4)   By threat;
      (5)   By intimidation.
   (b)   This section shall not apply if the value of the property involved is
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more, or is any of the property listed in
Section
625.04.
   (c)   This section shall not apply if the victim of the offense is an
elderly person or disabled adult.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of petty theft, a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
(RC 2913.02; Ord. No. 1094-13. Passed 9-23-13, eff. 9-27-13)
§ 625.06 Unauthorized Use of a Vehicle
   (a)   No person shall knowingly use or operate an aircraft, motor vehicle,
motorcycle, motorboat or other motor-propelled vehicle without the consent of
the owner or person authorized to give consent.
   (b)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under this section:
      (1)   At the time of the alleged offense, the actor, though mistaken,
reasonably believed that he or she was authorized to use or operate the
property;
      (2)   At the time of the alleged offense, the actor reasonably believed
that the owner or person empowered to give consent would authorize the actor to
use or operate the property.
   (c)   This section shall not apply if the offender removes the vehicle from
this State or retains possession of it for more than forty-eight (48) hours.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unauthorized use of a
vehicle, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(RC 2913.03; Ord. No. 54-74. Passed 3-25-74, eff. 4-1-74)
§ 625.07 Motor Vehicle Trespass
   (a)   No person by force, stealth or deception shall trespass in or attempt
to trespass in a locked motor vehicle or any locked compartment of any motor
vehicle with purpose to commit any theft offense.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly enter into or upon a motor vehicle,
motorcycle or other motor-propelled vehicle without the consent of the owner or
person authorized to give consent.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of motor vehicle trespass.
Violation of subsection (a) hereof is a misdemeanor of the first degree, and
violation of subsection (b) hereof is a minor misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 1020-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
§ 625.08 Criminal Tools
   (a)   No person shall knowingly possess or have under his or her control any
device, instrument or article including but not limited to those listed herein,
with purpose to use it criminally:
      (1)   Bump key;
      (2)   Detached ignition switch;
      (3)   Jumper wire device;
      (4)   Key cutter;
      (5)   Slidehammer;
      (6)   An electric media device when information from the device, obtained
pursuant to law, indicates that the device was intended for criminal use;
      (7)   Any other device, instrument or article commonly used, designed or
specially adapted for criminal use.
   (b)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Bump key” means a specially-cut key that is designed to defeat a
pin tumbler lock using a technique in which the key is inserted into the lock
and struck or bumped with a hammer or other object to cause the pins in the
tumbler to separate to allow the lock to open.
      (2)   “Detached ignition switch” means any ignition cylinder capable of
completing the electrical circuit in the ignition system of an automobile.
      (3)   “Jumper wire device” means any electrical connecting device
designed to complete the electrical circuit in the ignition of an automobile.
      (4)   “Key cutter” means any key-making device capable of cutting or
punching out keys.
      (5)   “Slidehammer” or “slaphammer” means a device with a movable
weighted sleeve on a rod used to remove automobile locks.
      (6)   “Electronic media device” means media that uses electronics or
electromechanical energy for the end-user (audience) to access the content sent
by any equipment used in the electronic communication process, including but
not limited to, two (2) way radio, telephone, desktop computer, and handheld
device, and used interactively between two (2) or more people.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possession of criminal
tools, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(Ord. No. 1393-11. Passed 12-5-11, eff. 12-9-11 without the signature of the
Mayor)
§ 625.09 Reserved
(Ord. No. 2823-89. Passed 3-19-90, eff. 3-22-90)
§ 625.10 Unauthorized Use of Property
   (a)   No person shall knowingly use or operate the property of another
without the consent of the owner or person authorized to give consent.
   (b)   The affirmative defenses contained in division (b) of Section
625.06 are affirmative defenses to a charge under this section.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unauthorized use of
property. If the offense involves a violation of division (a) of this section
and does not involve any computer, computer system, computer network, computer
software or data, unauthorized use of property is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(RC 2913.04; Ord. No. 2823-89. Passed 3-19-90, eff. 3-22-90)
§ 625.11 Passing Bad Checks
   (a)   No person, with purpose to defraud, shall issue, transfer or cause to
be issued or transferred a check or other negotiable instrument, knowing that
it will be dishonored.
   (b)   For purposes of this section, a person who issues or transfers a check
or negotiable instrument is presumed to know that it will be dishonored, if
either of the following occurs:
      (1)   The drawer had no account with the drawee at the time of issue or
the stated date, whichever is later;
      (2)   The check or other negotiable instrument was properly refused
payment for insufficient funds upon presentment within thirty (30) days after
issue or the stated date, whichever is later, and the liability of the drawer,
endorser or any party who may be liable thereon is not discharged by payment or
satisfaction within ten (10) days after receiving notice of dishonor.
   (c)   For purposes of this section, a person who issues or transfers a
check, bill of exchange, or other draft is presumed to have the purpose to
defraud if the drawer fails to comply with RC 1349.16 by doing any of the
following when opening a checking account intended for personal, family, or
household purposes at a financial institution:
      (1)   Falsely stating that the drawer has not been issued a valid
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card issued under RC
4507.50;
      (2)   Furnishing such license or card, or another identification document
that contains false information;
      (3)   Making a false statement with respect to the drawer’s current
address or any additional relevant information reasonably required by the
financial institution.
   (d)   This section shall not apply if the check or other negotiable
instrument is for payment of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or more.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of passing bad checks, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(RC 2913.11; Ord. No. 834-03. Passed 6-10-03, eff. 6-12-03)
§ 625.12 Misuse of Credit Cards
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Practice deception for the purpose of procuring the issuance of a
credit card, when a credit card is issued in actual reliance thereon;
      (2)   Knowingly buy or sell a credit card from or to a person other than
the issuer.
   (b)   No person, with purpose to defraud, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Obtain control over a credit card as security for a debt;
      (2)   Obtain property or services by the use of a credit card, in one (1)
or more transactions, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that such
card has expired or been revoked, or was obtained, is retained or is being used
in violation of law;
      (3)   Furnish property or services upon presentation of a credit card,
knowing that such card is being used in violation of law;
      (4)   Represent or cause to be represented to the issuer of a credit card
that property or services have been furnished, knowing that such representation
is false.
   (c)   No person, with purpose to violate this section, shall receive,
possess, control or dispose of a credit card.
   (d)   Divisions (b)(1) or (2) of this section shall not apply if the victim
of the offense is an elderly person or disabled adult.
   (e)   Divisions (b)(1) or (2) of this section shall not apply if the debt
for which the card is held as security or the cumulative retail value of the
property or services involved in the violations is more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00).
   (f)   Divisions (b)(2), (3) or (4) of this section shall not apply if the
cumulative retail value of the property and services involved in one (1) or
more violations of divisions (b)(2), (3), or (4) of this section which
violations involve one (1) or more credit card accounts and occur within a
period of ninety (90) consecutive days commencing on the date of the first
violation, is five hundred dollars ($500.00) or more.
   (g)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of misuse of credit cards.
Abuse of credit cards is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(RC 2913.21; Ord. No. 834-03. Passed 6-10-03, eff. 6-12-03)
§ 625.13 Making or Using Slugs
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Insert or deposit a slug in a coin machine, with purpose to
defraud;
      (2)   Make, possess or dispose of a slug, with purpose of enabling
another to defraud by inserting or depositing it in a coin machine.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making or using slugs, a
misdemeanor of the second degree.
(RC 2913.33; Ord. No. 54-74. Passed 3-25-74, eff. 4-1-74)
§ 625.14 Tampering with Coin Machines
   (a)   No person, with purpose to commit theft or to defraud, shall knowingly
enter, force an entrance into, tamper with or insert any part of an instrument
into any coin machine.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of tampering with coin
machines, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(RC 2911.32; Ord. No. 54-74. Passed 3-25-74, eff. 4-1-74)
§ 625.15 Defrauding a Livery or Hostelry
   (a)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she is
facilitating a fraud, shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Hire an aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat, sailboat,
camper, trailer, horse or buggy, or keep or operate any of the same which has
been hired;
      (2)   Engage accommodations at a hotel, motel, inn, campground or other
hostelry.
   (b)   It is prima facie evidence of purpose to defraud if the offender does
any of the following:
      (1)   Uses deception to induce the rental agency to furnish the offender
with any of the property listed in subsection (a)(1) hereof, or uses deception
to induce the hostelry to furnish him or her with accommodations;
      (2)   Hires any of the property named in subsection (a)(1) hereof, or
engages accommodations knowing he or she is without sufficient means to pay the
hire or rental;
      (3)   Absconds without paying the hire or rental;
      (4)   Knowingly fails to pay the hire or rental as required by the
contract of hire or rental, without reasonable excuse for such failure;
      (5)   Knowingly fails to return hired property as required by the
contract of hire, without reasonable excuse for such failure.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of defrauding a livery or
hostelry, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(RC 2913.41; Ord. No. 90-96. Passed 3-18-96, eff. 3-26-96)
§ 625.16 Tampering with Records
   (a)   No person, knowing he or she has no privilege to do so, and with
purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she is facilitating a fraud, shall do
any of the following:
      (1)   Falsify, destroy, remove, conceal, alter, deface or mutilate any
writing data or record;
      (2)   Utter any writing or record, knowing it to have been tampered with
as provided in division (a)(1) of this section.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of tampering with records, a
misdemeanor of the first degree, if the violation does not involve data and if
the writing or record is not a will unrevoked at the time of the offense or not
a record kept by or belonging to a governmental agency.
(RC 2913.42; Ord. No. 2823-89. Passed 3-19-90, eff. 3-22-90)
§ 625.17 Securing Writings by Deception
   (a)   No person, by deception, shall cause another to execute any writing
which disposes of or encumbers property, or by which a pecuniary obligation is
incurred.
   (b)   This section shall not apply if the value of the property or the
obligation involved is five hundred dollars ($500.00) or more.
   (c)   This section shall not apply if the victim of the offense is an
elderly person or disabled adult.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of securing writings by
deception, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(RC 2913.43; Ord. No. 834-03. Passed 6-10-03, eff. 6-12-03)
§ 625.18 Defrauding Creditors
   (a)   No person, with purpose to defraud one (1) or more of his or her
creditors, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Remove, conceal, destroy, encumber, convey or otherwise deal with
any of his or her property;
      (2)   Misrepresent or refuse to disclose to a fiduciary appointed to
administer or manage his or her affairs or estate, the existence, amount or
location of any of his or her property, or any other information regarding such
property which he or she is legally required to furnish to the fiduciary.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of defrauding creditors, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(RC 2913.45; Ord. No. 54-74. Passed 3-25-74, eff. 4-1-74)
§ 625.19 Deceptive Securities Publication
   (a)   No person, with purpose to deceive, shall make, publish, or cause to
be made or published, a report of any transaction in securities, when no such
transaction has taken place.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(Ord. No. 54-74. Passed 3-25-74, eff. 4-1-74)
§ 625.20 False Memorandum of Securities Purchase or Sale
   (a)   No person shall deliver any memorandum of purchase or sale of
securities, knowing that such memorandum is false in any material respect.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(Ord. No. 54-74. Passed 3-25-74, eff. 4-1-74)
§ 625.21 Receiving Stolen Property
   (a)   No person shall receive, retain or dispose of property of another,
knowing or having reasonable cause to believe it has been obtained through
commission of a theft offense.
   (b)   This section shall not apply if the value of the property involved is
three hundred dollars ($300.00) or more, or is any of the property listed in
Section
625.04.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of receiving stolen property,
a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(RC 2913.51; Ord. No. 304-85. Passed 4-15-85, eff. 4-17-85)
§ 625.22 Tampering with Manhole Covers
   (a)   No person, firm or corporation, except an authorized agent or employee
of the City, or an authorized public utility which has obtained permission from
the City, shall wilfully in any manner displace, loosen, open or remove any
manhole cover, which is the property of the City, which has been placed in any
street, alley, public way or public park.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(Ord. No. 907-A-74. Passed 7-8-74, eff. 7-9-74)
§ 625.23 Possessing, Selling or Purchasing Manhole Covers
   (a)   No person, firm or corporation shall have in his or her possession or
under his or her control, or receive, sell, purchase or otherwise dispose of
any manhole cover, which is the property of the City, without authority of the
proper officials of the City, or pursuant to any authorized sale by the City as
provided by law, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that it has been
obtained through the commission of an offense listed in Section
625.22.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
   (c)   In addition to the fines and penalties herein imposed, the City may
suspend or revoke any junk dealer or second-hand dealer license, where the
violation involves junk or second-hand dealers, pursuant to the authority
contained in Section
676.12.
(Ord. No. 907-A-74. Passed 7-8-74, eff. 7-9-74)
§ 625.24 Defrauding Library
   (a)   No person shall wilfully or negligently detain or fail to return to a
public library any book, magazine, pamphlet, manuscript, picture, clipping or
other property belonging to such library, or pay the reasonable value thereof,
within thirty (30) days from the date of the posting by registered mail of a
notice addressed to such person at the last address furnished the public
library. Such notice may be given at any time after the date on which such
person should have returned the loaned property.
   (b)   No person shall give a fictitious or incorrect name or address at any
public library in order to obtain possession or use of any book, pamphlet,
magazine, newspaper, clipping or picture, the property of such library, or
practice any deceit to conceal or mislead in respect to identity, address or
place of employment.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of defrauding a library, a
minor misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 1020-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
§ 625.25 Defrauding Restaurants
   (a)   No person, with intent to defraud, shall obtain food in any restaurant
or other eating place licensed by the City.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of defrauding a restaurant, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(Ord. No. 1020-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
§ 625.26 Defrauding Fire and Damage Victims
   (a)   No person, firm or corporation, or the employees or agents thereof,
shall falsely identify himself or herself in any manner to the owner or tenant
of any premises damaged by fire, hurricane, tornado or other disaster or
accident as an officer or employee of the City, or falsely represent in any
manner to such owner or tenant the contents of laws of the State or the
Codified Ordinances of the City as an inducement to obtain the signature of
such owner or tenant upon a contract for the repair of the damaged premises.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of defrauding fire and damage
victims, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(Ord. No. 90-96. Passed 3-18-96, eff. 3-26-96)
§ 625.27 Trafficking In or Illegal Use of “WIC” Coupons
   (a)   Definitions. The following terms as used in this section are used as
defined in OAC 3701-42-01:
      (1)   “WIC program” means the special supplemental food program for
women, infants, and children established under the “Child Nutrition Act of
1966,” 80 Stat. 885, 42 U.S.C. 1786, as amended, and administered in Ohio by
the Ohio Department of Health under RC 3701.132.
      (2)   “Coupon” means a document issued by the Ohio Department of Health
that may be exchanged by a participant or proxy for authorized foods at a WIC
retail vendor store location.
      (3)   “Participant” means a pregnant, postpartum, or breastfeeding woman,
or an infant or child who is receiving supplemental foods or coupons under the
WIC program, and the breastfed infants of participant breastfeeding women.
      (4)   “Proxy” means an individual who is designated as the parent,
guardian, or alternate shopper and who is listed on the “State of Ohio WIC
Program Identification and Verification of Certification Coupon Holder” issued
to the participant by the Ohio Department of Health as being authorized to
receive and negotiate coupons on behalf of the participant.
      (5)   “WIC retail vendor” or “vendor” means an individual or business
entity that operates one (1) or more grocery stores or pharmacies and that is
authorized to redeem coupons under a retail vendor contract executed under
paragraph (f) of 7 C.F.R. 246.12 and paragraph (A) of OAC 3701-42-03.
(OAC 3701-42-01)
   (b)   No participant or proxy in the WIC program, or WIC retail vendor, or
individual, shall knowingly possess, buy, sell, use, alter, accept, or transfer
WIC coupons in any manner not authorized by the “Child Nutrition Act of 1966,”
80 Stat. 885, 42 U.S.C. 1786, as amended, and administered in Ohio by the Ohio
Department of Health under RC 3701.132, or by OAC Chapter 3701-42.
   (c)   No WIC retail vendor shall:
      (1)   Knowingly allow an employee to sell, transfer, or trade items or
services, the purchase of which is prohibited by the “Child Nutrition Act of
1966,” 80 Stat. 885, 42 U.S.C. 1786, as amended, and administered in Ohio by
the Ohio Department of Health under RC 3701.132, or by OAC Chapter 3701-42;
      (2)   Negligently allow an employee to sell, transfer, or exchange WIC
coupons in any manner unauthorized by 42 U.S.C. 1786, as amended, and
administered in Ohio under RC 3701.132, or by OAC Chapter 3701-42.
   (d)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of trafficking
in WIC coupons, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (e)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of illegal use
of WIC coupons, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(Ord. No. 90-96. Passed 3-18-96, eff. 3-26-96)
   Note: Section
625.27 was enacted by Ord. No. 2213-92, passed 2-8-92, eff. 2-16-92.
CHAPTER 627 – WEAPONS
627.01   Definitions
627.02   Carrying Concealed Weapons
627.03   Reserved
627.04   Using Weapons While Intoxicated
627.05   Improperly Handling Firearms in a Motor Vehicle
627.06   Failure to Secure Dangerous Ordnance
627.07   Improperly Providing Access to Firearms to a Minor
627.08   Underage Purchase of Handgun
627.09   Improperly Discharging a Firearm on or near Prohibited Premises
627.10   Prohibited Weapons on School Property; Duty to Notify Police
627.11   Possessing Certain Weapons at or about Public Places
627.12   Seizure and Confiscation of Deadly Weapon
627.13   Reporting Transfers of Firearms
627.14   Defacing Identification Marks of Firearms; Possessing Defaced Firearm
627.15   Unlawful Transactions in Weapons
627.16   Prohibition Against Transferring Firearms or Dangerous Ordnance to a
Felon or Intoxicated Person
627.17   Voluntary Surrender of Firearms and Dangerous Ordnance
627.18   Reporting Lost or Stolen Firearms
627.19   Facsimile Firearms
627.20   Conveyance or Possession of an Object Indistinguishable from a Firearm
in a School Safety Zone
627.21   Sale of Long-bladed Pocket Knives
627.22   Sale or Possession of Sling Shots and Pea Shooters
627.23   Unlawful Display of Weapons
627.24   Possession or Use of Stench Bombs
627.25   Tear Gas Guns
627.26   Containers of Combustibles
627.27   Jump Traps
   Note: This chapter was replaced in its entirety by Ordinance No. 931-14,
passed 4-20-15 and effective 4-21-15.
Cross-reference:
   Property destruction by tear gas device, etc., CO
623.03
   Reporting gunshot and stab wounds, CO
615.04
   Use of firearms and explosives at airports restricted, CO
571.20
   Use of firearms in parks prohibited, CO
559.40
Statutory reference:
   See sectional histories for similar State law
   License or permit to possess dangerous ordnance, RC 2923.18
§ 627.01 Definitions
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   "Automatic firearm" means any firearm designed or specially adapted to
fire a succession of cartridges with a single function of the trigger.
   (b)   "Ballistic knife" means a knife with a detachable blade that is
propelled by a spring-operated mechanism.
   (c)   "Concealed handgun license" or "license to carry a concealed handgun"
means:
      (1)   Subject to this section, a license or temporary emergency license
to carry a concealed handgun issued under RC 2923.125 or RC 2923.1213 or a
license to carry a concealed handgun issued by another state with which the
attorney general has entered into a reciprocity agreement under RC 109.69.
      (2)   A reference in any provision of this Code to a concealed handgun
license issued under RC 2923.125 or a license to carry a concealed handgun
issued under RC 2923.125 means only a license of the type that is specified in
that section. A reference in any provision of this Code to a concealed handgun
license issued under RC 2923.1213, a license to carry a concealed handgun
issued under RC 2923.1213, or a license to carry a concealed handgun on a
temporary emergency basis means only a license of the type that is specified in
RC 2923.1213. A reference in any provision of this Code to a concealed handgun
license issued by another state or a license to carry a concealed handgun
issued by another state means only a license issued by another state with which
the attorney general has entered into a reciprocity agreement under RC 109.69.
   (d)   "Dangerous ordnance":
      (1)   Means any of the following, except as otherwise provided in this
section:
         A.   Any automatic or sawed-off firearm, zip-gun, or ballistic knife;
         B.   Any explosive device or incendiary device:
         C.   Nitroglycerin, nitrocellulose, nitrostarch, PETN, cyclonite, TNT,
picric acid, and other high explosives; amatol, tritonal, tetrytol, pentolite,
pecretol, cyclotol, and other high explosive compositions; plastic explosives;
dynamite, blasting gelatin, gelatin dynamite, sensitized ammonium nitrate,
liquid-oxygen blasting explosives, blasting powder, and other blasting agents;
and any other explosive substance having sufficient brisance or power to be
particularly suitable for use as a military explosive, or for use in mining,
quarrying, excavating, or demolitions;
         D.   Any firearm, rocket launcher, mortar, artillery piece, grenade,
mine, bomb, torpedo, or similar weapon, designed and manufactured for military
purposes, and the ammunition for that weapon;
         E.   Any firearm muffler or silencer;
         F.   Any combination of parts that is intended by the owner for use in
converting any firearm or other device into a dangerous ordinance.
      (2)   Does not include any of the following:
         A.   Any firearm, including a military weapon and the ammunition for
that weapon, and regardless of its actual age, that employs a percussion cap or
other obsolete ignition system, or that is designed and safe for use only with
black powder;
         B.   Any pistol, rifle, or shotgun, designed or suitable for sporting
purposes, including a military weapon as issued or as modified, and the
ammunition for that weapon, unless the firearm is an automatic or sawed-off
firearm;
         C.   Any cannon or other artillery piece that, regardless of its
actual age, is of a type in accepted use prior to 1887, has no mechanical,
hydraulic, pneumatic, or other system for absorbing recoil and returning the
tube into battery without displacing the carriage, and is designed and safe for
use only with black powder;
         D.   Black powder, priming quills, and percussion caps possessed and
lawfully used to fire a cannon on a type defined in this division during
displays, celebrations, organized matches or shoots, and target practice, and
smokeless and black powder, primers, and percussion caps possessed and lawfully
used as a propellant or ignition device in small-arms or small-arms ammunition;
         E.   Dangerous ordnance that is inoperable or inert and cannot readily
be rendered operable or activated, and that is kept as a trophy, souvenir,
curio, or museum piece.
         F.   Any device that is expressly excepted from the definition of a
destructive device pursuant to the "Gun Control Act of 1968," 82 Stat. 1213, 18
U.S.C. 921(a)(4), as amended, and regulations issued under that act.
   (e)   "Deadly weapon" means any instrument, device or thing capable of
inflicting death, and designed or specially adapted for use as a weapon, or
possessed, carried, or used as a weapon.
   (f)   "Explosive" means any chemical compound, mixture, or device, the
primary or common purpose of which is to function by explosion. "Explosive"
includes all materials that have been classified as division 1.1, division 1.2,
division 1.3, or division 1.4 explosives by the United States Department of
Transportation in its regulations and includes, but is not limited to,
dynamite, black powder, pellet powders, initiating explosives, blasting caps,
electric blasting caps, safety fuses, fuse igniters, squibs, cordeau detonant
fuses, instantaneous fuses, and igniter cords and igniters. "Explosive" does
not include "fireworks," as defined in RC 3743.01, or any substance or material
otherwise meeting the definition of explosive set forth in this section that is
manufactured, sold, possessed, transported, stored, or used in any activity
described in RC 3743.80, provided the activity is conducted in accordance with
all applicable laws, rules, and regulations, including, but not limited, the
provisions of RC 3743.80 and the rules of the fire marshal adopted pursuant to
RC 3737.82.
   (g)   "Explosive device" means any device designed or specially adapted to
cause physical harm to persons or property by means of an explosion, and
consisting of an explosive substance or agency and a means to detonate it.
"Explosive device" includes without limitation any bomb, any explosive
demolition device, any blasting cap or detonator containing an explosive
charge, and any pressure vessel that has been knowingly tampered with or
arranged so as to explode.
   (h)   (1)   "Firearm" means any deadly weapon capable of expelling or
propelling one (1) or more projectiles by the action of an explosive or
combustible propellant. "Firearm" includes an unloaded firearm, and any firearm
that is inoperable but that can readily be rendered operable.
      (2)   When determining whether a firearm is capable of expelling or
propelling one (1) or more projectiles by the action of an explosive or
combustible propellant, the trier of fact may rely upon circumstantial
evidence, including, but not limited to, the representations and actions of the
individual exercising control over the firearm.
   (i)   "Handgun" means any of the following:
      (1)   Any firearm that has a short stock and is designed to be held and
fired by the use of a single hand;
      (2)   Any combination of parts from which a firearm of a type described
in this division can be assembled.
   (j)   "Incendiary device" means any firebomb, and any device designed or
specially adapted to cause physical harm to persons or property by means of
fire, and consisting of an incendiary substance or agency and a means to ignite
it.
   (k)   "Sawed-off-firearm" means a shotgun with a barrel less than eighteen
(18) inches long, or a rifle with a barrel less than sixteen (16) inches long,
or a shotgun or rifle less than twenty-six (26) inches long overall.
   (l)   "Semi-automatic firearm" means any firearm designed or specially
adapted to fire a single cartridge and automatically chamber a succeeding
cartridge ready to fire, with a single function of the trigger.
   (m)   "Valid concealed handgun license" or "valid license to carry a
concealed handgun" means a concealed handgun license that is currently valid,
that is not under a suspension under division (A)(1) of RC 2923.128, under RC
2923.1213, or under a suspension provision of the state, other than this state
in which the license was issued, and that has not been revoked under division
(B)(1) of RC 2923.128, under RC 2923.1213, or under a revocation provision of
the state other than this state in which the license was issued.
   (n)   "Zip-gun" means any of the following:
      (1)   Any firearm of crude and extemporized manufacture;
      (2)   Any device, including without limitation a starter's pistol, that
is not designed as a firearm, but that is specially adapted for use as a
firearm;
      (3)   Any industrial tool, signaling device, or safety device, that is
not designed as a firearm, but that as designed is capable of use as such, when
possessed, carried, or used as a firearm.
(Ord. No. 1263-16. Passed 6-5-17, eff. 6-7-17)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see RC 2923.11
§ 627.02 Carrying Concealed Weapons
   (a)   No person shall knowingly carry or have, concealed on the person's
person or concealed ready at hand, any of the following:
      (1)   A deadly weapon other than a handgun;
      (2)   A handgun other than a dangerous ordnance;
      (3)   A dangerous ordnance.
   (b)   No person who has been issued a concealed handgun license shall do any
of the following:
      (1)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose and is
carrying a concealed handgun, fail to promptly inform any law enforcement
officer who approaches the person after the person has been stopped that the
person has been issued a concealed handgun license and that the person then is
carrying a concealed handgun;
      (2)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose and is
carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly fail to keep the person's hands in
plain sight at any time after any law enforcement officer begins approaching
the person while stopped and before the law enforcement officer leaves, unless
the failure is pursuant to and in accordance with directions given by a law
enforcement officer;
      (3)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose and is
carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly disregard or fail to comply with any
lawful order of any law enforcement officer given while the person is stopped,
including, but not limited to, a specific order to the person to keep the
person's hands in plain sight.
   (c)   (1)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
         A.   An officer, agent, or employee of this or any other state or the
United States, or to a law enforcement officer, who is authorized to carry
concealed weapons or dangerous ordnance or is authorized to carry handguns and
is acting within the scope of the officer's agent's, or employee's duties;
         B.   Any person who is employed in this state, who is authorized to
carry concealed weapons or dangerous ordnance or is authorized to carry
handguns, and who is subject to and in compliance with the requirements of RC
109.801, unless the appointing authority of the person has expressly specified
that the exemption provided in this section does not apply to the person;
         C.   A person's transportation or storage of a firearm, other than a
firearm described in divisions (b), (d), (f), (g), (j) and (n) of Section
627.01 of this Code, in a motor vehicle for any lawful purpose if the firearm
is not on the actor's person;
         D.   A person's storage or possession of a firearm, other than a
firearm described in divisions (b), (d), (f), (g), (j) and (n) of Section
627.01 of this Code, in the actor's own home for any lawful purpose.
      (2)   Division (a)(2) of this section does not apply to any person who,
at the time of the alleged carrying or possession of a handgun, is carrying a
valid concealed handgun license, unless the person knowingly is in a place
described in division (B) of RC 2923.126.
   (d)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section of
carrying or having control of a weapon other than a handgun and other than a
dangerous ordnance that the actor was not otherwise prohibited by law from
having the weapon and that any of the following applies:
      (1)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the actor for
defensive purposes while the actor was engaged in or was going to or from the
actor's lawful business or occupation, which business or occupation was of a
character or was necessarily carried on in a manner or at a time or place as to
render the actor particularly susceptible to criminal attack, such as would
justify a prudent person in going armed.
      (2)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the actor for
defensive purposes while the actor was engaged in a lawful activity and had
reasonable cause to fear a criminal attack upon the actor, a member of the
actor's family, or the actor's home, such as would justify a prudent person in
going armed.
      (3)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the actor for any
lawful purpose and while in the actor's own home.
   (e)   No person who is charged with a violation of this section shall be
required to obtain a concealed handgun license as a condition for the dismissal
of the charge.
   (f)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of carrying concealed
weapons. Except as otherwise provided in this division or division (f)(2) of
this section, carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (a)(1) and
(a)(2) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. This section shall
not apply in any case in which the conduct constitutes a felony under the laws
of the State of Ohio.
      (2)   If a person being arrested for a violation of division (a)(2) of
this section promptly produces a valid concealed handgun license, and if at the
time of the violation the person was not knowingly in a place described in
division (B) of RC 2923.126, the officer shall not arrest the person for a
violation of that division. If the person is not able to promptly produce any
concealed handgun license and if the person is not in a place described in that
section, the officer may arrest the person for a violation of that division,
and the offender shall be punished as follows:
         A.   The offender shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor if both of
the following apply:
            1.   Within ten (10) days after the arrest, the offender presents a
concealed handgun license, which license was valid at the time of the arrest to
the law enforcement agency that employs the arresting officer.
            2.   At the time of the arrest, the offender was not knowingly in a
place described in division (B) of RC 2923.126.
         B.   The offender shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined
five hundred dollars ($500.00) if all of the following apply:
            1.   The offender previously had been issued a concealed handgun
license, and that license expired within the two (2) years immediately
preceding the arrest.
            2.   Within forty-five (45) days after the arrest, the offender
presents a concealed handgun license to the law enforcement agency that
employed the arresting officer, and the offender waives in writing the
offender's right to a speedy trial on the charge of the violation that is
provided in RC 2945.71.
            3.   At the time of the commission of the offense, the offender was
not knowingly in a place described in division (B) of RC 2923.126.
         C.   If neither division (f)(2)A. nor (f)(2)B. of this section
applies, the offender shall be punished under division (f)(1) of this section.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, carrying concealed
weapons in violation of division (b)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree, and, in addition to any other penalty or sanction imposed for a
violation of division (b)(1) of this section, the offender's concealed handgun
license shall be suspended pursuant to division (A)(2) of RC 2923.128. If, at
the time of the stop of the offender for a law enforcement purpose that was the
basis of the violation, any law enforcement officer involved with the stop had
actual knowledge that the offender has been issued a concealed handgun license,
carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (b)(1) of this section is a
minor misdemeanor, and the offender's concealed handgun license shall not be
suspended pursuant to division (A)(2) of RC 2923.128.
      (4)   Carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (b)(2) or (b)
(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. In addition to any
other penalty or sanction imposed for misdemeanor violation of division (b)(2)
or (b)(3) of this section, the offender's concealed handgun license shall be
suspended pursuant to division (A)(2) of RC 2923.128.
   (g)   If a law enforcement officer stops a person to question the person
regarding a possible violation of this section, for a traffic stop, or for any
other law enforcement purpose, if the person surrenders a firearm to the
officer, either voluntarily or pursuant to a request or demand of the officer,
and if the officer does not charge the person with a violation of this section
or arrest the person for any offense, the person is not otherwise prohibited by
law from possessing the firearm, and the firearm is not contraband, the officer
shall return the firearm to the person at the termination of the stop. If a
court orders a law enforcement officer to return a firearm to a person pursuant
to the requirement set forth in this division, division (B) of RC 2923.163
applies.
(Ord. No. 931-14. Passed 4-20-15, eff. 4-21-15)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see RC 2923.12
§ 627.03 Reserved
(Ord. No. 931-14. Passed 4-20-15, eff. 4-21-15)
§ 627.04 Using Weapons While Intoxicated
   (a)   No person, while under the influence of alcohol or any drug of abuse,
shall carry or use any firearm or dangerous ordnance.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of using weapons while
intoxicated, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(RC 2923.15; Ord. No. 931-14. Passed 4-20-15, eff. 4-21-15)
§ 627.05 Improperly Handling Firearms in a Motor Vehicle
   (a)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a firearm in a motor
vehicle, unless the person may lawfully possess that firearm under applicable
law of this state or the United States, the firearm is unloaded, and the
firearm is carried in one (1) of the following ways:
      (1)   In a closed package, box, or case;
      (2)   In a compartment that can be reached only by leaving the vehicle;
      (3)   In plain sight and secured in a rack or holder made for the
purpose;
      (4)   If the firearm is at least twenty-four (24) inches in overall
length as measured from the muzzle to the part of the stock furthest from the
muzzle and if the barrel is at least eighteen (18) inches in length, either in
plain sight with the action open or the weapon stripped, or if the firearm is
of a type on which the action will not stay open or which cannot easily be
stripped, in plain sight.
   (b)   No person who has been issued a concealed handgun license, who is the
driver or an occupant of a motor vehicle that is stopped as a result of a
traffic stop or a stop for another law enforcement purpose or is the driver or
an occupant of a commercial motor vehicle that is stopped by an employee of the
motor carrier enforcement unit for the purposes defined in RC 5503.34, and who
is transporting or has a loaded handgun in the motor vehicle or commercial
motor vehicle in any manner, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Fail to promptly inform any law enforcement officer who approaches
the vehicle while stopped that the person has been issued a concealed handgun
license and that the person then possesses or has a loaded handgun in the motor
vehicle;
      (2)   Fail to promptly inform the employee of the unit who approaches the
vehicle while stopped that the person has been issued a concealed handgun
license and that the person then possesses or has a loaded handgun in the
commercial motor vehicle;
      (3)   Knowingly fail to remain in the motor vehicle while stopped or
knowingly fail to keep the person's hands in plain sight at any time after any
law enforcement officer begins approaching the person while stopped and before
the law enforcement officer leaves, unless the failure is pursuant to and in
accordance with directions given by a law enforcement officer;
      (4)   Knowingly disregard or fail to comply with any lawful order of any
law enforcement officer given while the motor vehicle is stopped, including,
but not limited to, a specific order to the person to keep the person's hands
in plain sight.
   (c)   (1)   Divisions (a) and (b) of this section do not apply to any of the
following:
         A.   An officer, agent, or employee of this or any other state or the
United States, or a law enforcement officer, when authorized to carry or have
loaded or accessible firearms in motor vehicles and acting within the scope of
the officer's, agent's, or employee's duties;
         B.   Any person who is employed in this state, who is authorized to
carry or have loaded or accessible firearms in motor vehicles, and who is
subject to and in compliance with the requirements of RC 109.801, unless the
appointing authority of the person has expressly specified that the exemption
provided in this division does not apply to the person.
      (2)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to a person who
transports or possesses a handgun in a motor vehicle if, at the time of that
transportation or possession, both of the following apply:
         A.   The person transporting or possessing the handgun is carrying a
valid concealed handgun license.
         B.   The person transporting or possessing the handgun is not
knowingly in a place described in division (B) of RC 2923.126.
      (3)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to a person if all of
the following apply:
         A.   The person possesses a valid electric-powered all-purpose vehicle
permit issued under RC 1533.103 by the Chief of the Division of Wildlife.
         B.   The person is on or in an electric-powered all-purpose vehicle as
defined in RC 1531.01 or a motor vehicle during the open hunting season for a
wild quadruped or game bird.
         C.   The person is on or in an electric-powered all-purpose vehicle as
defined in RC 1531.01 or a motor vehicle that is parked on a road that is owned
or administered by the Division of Wildlife, provided that the road is
identified by an electric-powered all-purpose vehicle sign.
   (d)   (1)   The affirmative defenses authorized in divisions (d)(1) and (d)
(2) of Section
627.02 are affirmative defenses to a charge under division (a) of this section
that involves a firearm other than a handgun.
      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (a) of this
section of improperly handling firearms in a motor vehicle that the actor
transported or had the firearm in the motor vehicle for any lawful purpose and
while the motor vehicle was on the actor's own property, provided that this
affirmative defense is not available unless the person, immediately prior to
arriving at the actor's own property, did not transport or possess the firearm
in a motor vehicle in a manner prohibited by division (a) of this section while
the motor vehicle was being operated on a street, highway, or other public or
private property used by the public for vehicular traffic.
   (e)   No person who is charged with a violation of division (a) of this
section shall be required to obtain a concealed handgun license as a condition
for the dismissal of the charge.
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of improperly handling
firearms in a motor vehicle. Violation of division (a) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, a violation of division (b)(1) or (b)(2) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree, and, in addition to any other penalty or
sanction imposed for the violation, the offender's concealed handgun license
shall be suspended pursuant to division (A)(2) of RC 2923.128. If at the time
of the stop of the offender for a traffic stop, for another law enforcement
purpose, or for a purpose defined in RC 5503.34 that was the basis of the
violation any law enforcement officer involved with the stop or the employee of
the motor carrier enforcement unit who made the stop had actual knowledge of
the offender's status as a licensee, a violation of division (b)(1) or (b)(2)
of this section is a minor misdemeanor, and the offender's concealed handgun
license shall not be suspended pursuant to division (A)(2) of RC 2923.128. A
violation of division (b)(3) or (b)(4) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. In addition to any other penalty or sanction imposed for a
misdemeanor violation of division (b)(3) or (b)(4) of this section, the
offender's concealed handgun license shall be suspended pursuant to division
(A)(2) of RC 2923.128.
   (g)   If a law enforcement officer stops a motor vehicle for a traffic stop
or any other purpose, if any person in the motor vehicle surrenders a firearm
to the officer, either voluntarily or pursuant to a request or demand of the
officer, and if the officer does not charge the person with a violation of this
section or arrest the person for any offense, the person is not otherwise
prohibited by law from possessing the firearm, and the firearm is not
contraband, the officer shall return the firearm to the person at the
termination of the stop. If a court orders a law enforcement officer to return
a firearm to a person pursuant to the requirement set forth in this division,
division (B) of RC 2923.163 applies.
   (h)   As used in this section:
      (1)   "Motor vehicle", "street," and "highway" have the same meanings as
in RC 4511.01.
      (2)   "Unloaded" means:
         A.   With respect to a firearm other than a firearm described in
division (h)(3) of this section, that no ammunition is in the firearm in
question, no magazine or speed loader containing ammunition is inserted into
the firearm in question, and one (1) of the following applies:
            1.   There is no ammunition in a magazine or speed loader that is
in the vehicle in question and that may be used with the firearm in question.
            2.   Any magazine or speed loader that contains ammunition and that
may be used with the firearm in question is stored in a compartment within the
vehicle in question that cannot be accessed without leaving the vehicle or is
stored in a container that provides complete and separate enclosure.
         B.   For the purposes of division (h)(2)A.2. of this section, a
"container that provides complete and separate enclosure" includes, but is not
limited to, any of the following:
            1.   A package, box, or case with multiple compartments, as long as
the loaded magazine or speed loader and the firearm in question either are in
separate compartments within the package, box, or case, or, if they are in the
same compartment, the magazine or speed loader is contained within a separate
enclosure in that compartment that does not contain the firearm and that closes
using a snap, button, buckle, zipper, hook and loop closing mechanism, or other
fastener that must be opened to access the contents or the firearm is contained
within a separate enclosure of that nature in that compartment that does not
contain the magazine or speed loader;
            2.   A pocket or other enclosure on the person of the person in
question that closes using a snap, button, buckle, zipper, hook and loop
closing mechanism, or other fastener that must be opened to access the
contents.
         C.   For the purposes of division (h)(2)A. and (h)(2)B. of this
section, ammunition held in stripper-clips or in en-bloc clips is not
considered ammunition that is loaded into a magazine or speed loader.
      (3)   "Unloaded" means, with respect to a firearm employing a percussion
cap, flintlock, or other obsolete ignition system, when the weapon is uncapped
or when the priming charge is removed from the pan.
      (4)   "Commercial motor vehicle" has the same meaning as in division (A)
of RC 4506.25.
      (5)   "Motor carrier enforcement unit" means the motor carrier
enforcement unit in the Department of Public Safety, Division of State Highway
Patrol, that is created by RC 5503.34.
   (i)   Divisions (h)(2)A. and (h)(2)B. of this section do not affect the
authority of a person who is carrying a valid concealed handgun license to have
one (1) or more magazines or speed loaders containing ammunition anywhere in a
vehicle, without being transported as described in those divisions, as long as
no ammunition is in a firearm, other than a handgun, in the vehicle other than
as permitted under any other provision of this chapter. A person who is
carrying a valid concealed handgun license may have one (1) or more magazines
or speed loaders containing ammunition anywhere in a vehicle without further
restriction, as long as no ammunition is in a firearm, other than a handgun, in
the vehicle other than as permitted under any provision of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 931-14. Passed 4-20-15, eff. 4-21-15)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see RC 2923.16
§ 627.06 Failure to Secure Dangerous Ordnance
   (a)   No person, in acquiring, possessing, carrying, or using any dangerous
ordnance shall negligently fail to take proper precautions:
      (1)   To secure the dangerous ordnance against theft or against its
acquisition or use by any unauthorized or incompetent person;
      (2)   To insure the safety of persons and property.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to secure dangerous
ordnance, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(RC 2923.19; Ord. No. 931-14. Passed 4-20-15, eff. 4-21-15)
§ 627.07 Improperly Providing Access to Firearms to a Minor
   (a)   No person shall leave a firearm so as to allow access to the firearm
by a person who is under eighteen (18) years of age, except for lawful hunting,
sporting, or educational purposes, including, but not limited to, instruction
in firearm or handgun safety, care, handling, or marksmanship under the
supervision and control of a responsible adult.
   (b)   A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree, and shall be fined one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and
imprisoned one hundred and eighty (180) days. The Court shall not suspend all
or any portion of the fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. No. 931-14. Passed 4-20-15, eff. 4-21-15)
§ 627.08 Underage Purchase of Handgun
   (a)   No person under twenty-one (21) years of age shall purchase or attempt
to purchase a handgun, provided that this division does not apply to the
purchase or attempted purchase of a handgun by a person eighteen years (18) of
age or older and under twenty-one (21) years of age if either of the following
apply:
      (1)   The person is a law enforcement officer who is properly appointed
or employed as a law enforcement officer and has received firearms training
approved by the Ohio Peace Officer Training Council or equivalent firearms
training.
      (2)   The person is an active or reserve member of the armed services of
the United States or the Ohio National Guard, or was honorably discharged from
military service in the active or reserve armed services of the United States
or the Ohio National Guard, and the person has received firearms training from
the armed services or the national guard or equivalent firearms training.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of underage purchase of a
handgun, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
(Ord. No. 931-14. Passed 4-20-15, eff. 4-21-15)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see RC 2923.211
§ 627.09 Improperly Discharging a Firearm on or near Prohibited Premises
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Without permission from the proper officials and subject to
division (b)(4) of this section, discharge a firearm upon or over a cemetery or
within one hundred (100) yards of a cemetery;
      (2)   Subject to division (b)(5) of this section, discharge a firearm on
a lawn, park, pleasure ground, orchard, or other ground appurtenant to a
schoolhouse, church, or inhabited dwelling, the property of another, or a
charitable institution;
      (3)   Discharge a firearm upon or over a public road or highway;
      (4)   Discharge a firearm within five hundred (500) feet of the grounds
of any park, playground, or recreation center owned by the City.
   (b)   This section does not apply to the following:
      (1)   A person acting in self-defense or otherwise with privilege to do
so;
      (2)   A law enforcement or corrections officer acting within the course
and scope of the officer's employment or official duties;
      (3)   Security personnel acting within the course and scope of their
employment;
      (4)   A person who, while on the person's own property, discharges a
firearm; and
      (5)   A person who owns any type of property described in division (a)(2)
and who, while on the person's own enclosure, discharges a firearm.
   (c)   Any person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree and shall be fined one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and imprisoned
for one hundred and eighty (180) days.
(Ord. No. 931-14. Passed 4-20-15, eff. 4-21-15)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see RC 2923.162
§ 627.10 Prohibited Weapons on School Property; Duty to Notify Police
   (a)   Subject to division (b) of this section, any school official or
employee who discovers a prohibited weapon upon school grounds or in a school
building shall immediately notify the Chief of Police or his or her designee
and request the assistance of the Division of Police.
   (b)   Division (a) of this section shall not apply:
      (1)   To any school official or employee who has personal knowledge that
the notification required by division (a) has already been given with respect
to a particular discovery of a particular prohibited weapon; or
      (2)   When the prohibited weapon is in the possession of an officer,
agent or employee of this or any other state or the United States, members of
the armed forces of the United States or the organized militia of this or any
other state, or law enforcement officers, as defined in division (k) of Section
601.01, to the extent that any such person is authorized to possess a
prohibited weapon and is acting within the scope of his or her duties.
   (c)   Any school official or employee who fails to comply with division (a)
of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (d)   For purposes of this section, a "prohibited weapon" is any weapon
defined, described, or listed in any division of Section
627.01, Section
627.15, Section
627.21, Section
627.22, Section
627.24, or Section
627.25.
(Ord. No. 931-14. Passed 4-20-15, eff. 4-21-15)
§ 627.11 Possessing Certain Weapons at or about Public Places
   (a)   No person shall knowingly carry, have in his or her possession or
ready at hand any BB gun, pellet gun, knife having a blade two and one-half (2-
1/2) inches in length or longer, brass knuckles, cestus, billy, karate stick,
blackjack, sword or saber while at or about a public place.
   (b)   As used in this section, "public place" means any place to which the
general public has access and a right to resort for business, entertainment or
other lawful purpose, but does not necessarily mean a place devoted solely to
the uses of the public. It also includes the front or immediate area of any
store, shop, restaurant, tavern or other place of business and any grounds,
areas or parks where persons would congregate.
   (c)   This section does not apply to officers, agents or employees of this
or any other state or the United States, to law enforcement officers authorized
to carry or possess deadly weapons or to persons with private or special police
commissions, and acting within the scope of their duties.
   (d)   This section shall not apply if any weapon in division (a) of this
section was part of a public weapon display, show or exhibition, or was in the
possession of a person participating in an organized match, competition or
practice session.
   (e)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that the
actor was not otherwise prohibited by law from possessing the weapon, and that
the weapon was kept ready at hand by the actor for defense purposes, while he
or she was engaged in his or her lawful business or occupation, which business
or occupation was of such character or at such a place as to render the actor
particularly susceptible to criminal attack, such as would justify a prudent
person in having the weapon ready at hand.
   (f)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that the
actor was not otherwise prohibited by law from possessing a knife having a
blade two and one-half (2-1/2) inches in length or longer, and that either (i)
the actor at the time was engaged in a lawful business or pursuit and that
business or pursuit requires a knife having a blade two and one-half (2-1/2)
inches in length or longer as a tool of trade or pursuit, or (ii) the knife
having a blade two and one-half (2-1/2) inches in length or longer was kept
ready at hand by the actor for defense purposes, while he or she was engaged in
his or her lawful business or occupation, which business or occupation was of
such character or at such a place as to render the actor particularly
susceptible to criminal attack, such as would justify a prudent person in
having such a knife ready at hand.
   (g)   Notwithstanding the provisions of Section
601.13 and division (a) of Section
601.99, whoever violates this section is guilty of possessing certain weapons
on or about public places, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(Ord. No. 931-14. Passed 4-20-15, eff. 4-21-15)
§ 627.12 Seizure and Confiscation of Deadly Weapon
   (a)   In any situation where a deadly weapon is present and a person has
been drinking or disturbing the peace, threatening bodily harm or causing or
threatening a disturbance or violence, and there is reasonable cause for the
investigating police officer to believe that such deadly weapon may be used to
cause bodily harm, such deadly weapon may be seized by the police and kept in
the custody of the Chief of Police.
   (b)   After confiscation, any deadly weapon seized by a police officer shall
be promptly returned to the person from whom it was seized if no complaint,
indictment, or charge is issued against the person. However, any deadly weapon
seized which has been reported stolen shall be returned to the owner thereof,
unless possession by the owner would constitute a violation of any provision of
these Codified Ordinances or of state or federal law.
   (c)   Any deadly weapon seized by a police officer upon the arrest of any
person, firm or corporation charged with a violation of any of the provisions
of this chapter, or any felony or misdemeanor involving the use of a deadly
weapon or the use of force or violence or the threat of the use of force or
violence against the person of another, shall be confiscated by the Division of
Police subject to the provisions of RC 2981.04.
   (d)   If the deadly weapon is a firearm, the Division of Police shall
maintain the integrity and identity of the firearm in such a manner so that if
the firearm subsequently is to be returned to the person it can be identified
and returned to the person in the same condition it was in when it was seized.
(Ord. No. 931-14. Passed 4-20-15, eff. 4-21-15)
§ 627.13 Reporting Transfers of Firearms
   (a)   Effective November 1, 2015, except for transfers involving a licensed
gun dealer, or taking place at an event held by a non-profit corporation
organized under the laws of the state of Ohio for the purpose of hosting gun
collectors in a venue with a minimum of one hundred (100) participants, no
person shall sell or transfer a firearm without reporting the sale or transfer
to the Division of Police. The Director of Public Safety may promulgate rules
and regulations governing the reporting process.
   (b)   Effective November 1, 2015, a person who violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(Ord. No. 931-14. Passed 4-20-15, eff. 4-21-15)
§ 627.14 Defacing Identification Marks of Firearms; Possessing Defaced Firearm
   (a)   No person shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Change, alter, remove, or obliterate the name of the manufacturer,
model, manufacturer's serial number, or other mark of identification on a
firearm.
      (2)   Possess a firearm knowing or having reasonable cause to believe
that the name of the manufacturer, model, manufacturer's serial number, or
other mark of identification on the firearm has been changed, altered, removed,
or obliterated.
   (b)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a)(1) of this section is guilty of
defacing identification marks of a firearm. Except as otherwise provided in
this division, defacing identification marks of a firearm is a misdemeanor of
the first degree if the offender has not previously been convicted of or
pleaded to guilty to a violation of division (a)(1) of this section.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (a)(2) of this section is guilty of
possessing a defaced firearm. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
possessing a defaced firearm is a misdemeanor of the first degree if the
offender has not previously been convicted of or pleaded to guilty to a
violation of division (a)(2) of this section.
   (c)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to any firearm on which no
manufacturer's serial number was inscribed at the time of its manufacture.
(RC 2923.201; Ord. No. 1263-16. Passed 6-5-17, eff. 6-7-17)
§ 627.15 Unlawful Transactions in Weapons
   (a)   No person shall:
      (1)   Manufacture, possess for sale, sell or furnish to any person other
than a law enforcement agency for authorized use in police work, any brass
knuckles, cestus, billy, blackjack, sandbag, switchblade knife, springblade
knife, gravity knife or spring-loaded weapon capable of propelling a knife or
knifelike projectile, including, but not limited to, a ballistic knife
(sometimes referred to commonly as a KGB knife) or similar weapon and/or
advanced martial arts weapons, including, but not limited to shurikan (throwing
star), nunchuck, sword, knife, staff, Tonfa, Kama, and Sai and/or other similar
weapons. This paragraph does not apply to the possession and/or use of advanced
martial arts weapons on the premises of a recognized martial arts school or
during the time such weapons are being transported directly to or from such
premises.
      (2)   As used in paragraph (a)(1) hereof, the following designated
martial arts weapons are defined as follows:
         A.   "Nunchuck" – two (2) pieces of hardwood sticks, generally equal
in size and weight, held together by a piece of string, leather or chain.
         B.   "Sword" – a weapon with a long blade for cutting or thrusting
designed, manufactured or marketed as a martial arts weapon.
         C.   "Knife" – a weapon consisting of a single- or double-edged short
blade for cutting or throwing and designed, manufactured or marketed as a
martial arts weapon.
         D.   "Staff" – a hardwood stick the size of which can vary from two
(2) to six (6) feet in length which can be used to strike, to block, to jab, to
hold and throw an opponent.
         E.   "Tonfa" – a hardwood shaft which measures about seventeen (17)
inches in length with a handle approximately four and one-half (4-1/2) inches
in length affixed to the shaft.
         F.   "Kama" – an instrument consisting of a handle with a long curved
single-edged blade affixed at the end of the handle.
         G.   "Sai" – a piece of steel or heavy metal that is approximately
twelve (12) inches in length with a pointed or blunted end and two (2) prongs
that extend down from the blade to form a handle and a protection for strikes.
      (3)   When transferring any dangerous ordnance to another, negligently
fail to require the transferee to exhibit such identification, license or
permit showing him or her to be authorized to acquire dangerous ordnance
pursuant to RC 2923.17, or negligently fail to take a complete record of the
transaction and forthwith forward a copy of such record to the sheriff of the
county or safety director or police chief of the municipality where the
transaction takes place;
      (4)   Knowingly fail to report to law enforcement authorities forthwith
the loss or theft of any firearm or dangerous ordnance in the person's
possession or under the person's control.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful transactions in
weapons. Violation of subsection (a)(1) or (a)(3) hereof is a misdemeanor of
the second degree. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section
601.13 or division (a) of
601.99, violation of subsection (a)(4) is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(Ord. No. 931-14. Passed 4-20-15, eff. 4-21-15)
§ 627.16 Prohibition Against Transferring Firearms or Dangerous Ordnance to a
Felon or Intoxicated Person
   (a)   No person shall negligently sell, lend, give, or furnish any firearm
to any person prohibited by RC 2923.13 or RC 2923.15 from acquiring or using a
firearm, or negligently sell, lend, give, or furnish any dangerous ordnance to
any person prohibited by RC 2923.13, RC 2923.15, or RC 2923.17 from acquiring
or using any dangerous ordnance.
   (b)   A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(Ord. No. 931-14. Passed 4-20-15, eff. 4-21-15)
§ 627.17 Voluntary Surrender of Firearms and Dangerous Ordnance
   (a)   No person who acquires, possesses, or carries a firearm or dangerous
ordnance in violation of RC 2923.13 or RC 2923.17 shall be prosecuted for such
violation, if he or she reports his or her possession of firearms or dangerous
ordnance to any law enforcement authority, describes the firearms or dangerous
ordnance in his or her possession and where they may be found, and voluntarily
surrenders the firearms or dangerous ordnance to the law enforcement authority.
A surrender is not voluntary if it occurs when the person is taken into custody
or during a pursuit or attempt to take the person into custody under
circumstances indicating that the surrender is made under threat of force.
   (b)   Any firearm or dangerous ordnance, declared to be illegal under the
provisions of RC 2923.20 may be disposed of by presenting the firearm or
dangerous ordnance by the person owning or possessing it, at any district
police station in the City of Cleveland, at the Central Police Station or the
Detective Bureau of the Division of Police.
   (c)   No person disposing of a firearm or dangerous ordnance in the manner
and at the places herein designated shall be required to make any written or
oral statement or report concerning the firearm or dangerous ordnance or the
circumstances surrounding its acquisition, possession or present or past
ownership. Receipt can be made available upon request.
(Ord. No. 931-14. Passed 4-20-15, eff. 4-21-15)
§ 627.18 Reporting Lost or Stolen Firearms
   (a)   No person who resides in the City shall fail to report to the Division
of Police the theft or loss of a firearm he or she owns or possesses within
forty-eight (48) hours of the time he or she knew or should have known that the
firearm had been stolen or lost.
   (b)   The report under division (a) shall contain such information as
required by the Division of Police which may include the following information:
      (1)   The name, address and social security number of the person owning
or having possession of the firearm;
      (2)   The model, caliber, serial number and manufacturer of the firearm;
      (3)   Any registration number for the firearm;
      (4)   The date and place of the theft or loss; and
      (5)   A complete statement of the facts and circumstances surrounding the
theft or loss.
   (c)   This section does not apply to:
      (1)   Any law enforcement or corrections agency, or law enforcement or
corrections officer acting within the course and scope of the officer's
employment or official duties; or
      (2)   A United States Marshall or member of the Armed Forces of the
United States or the National Guard, or a federal or state official, who is
required to possess a firearm in the operation of his or her official duties.
   (d)   No person shall knowingly provide false or misleading information
pertaining to the loss or theft of a firearm that they own.
   (e)   Any person who violates division (a) or (d) of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
(Ord. No. 931-14. Passed 4-20-15, eff. 4-21-15)
§ 627.19 Facsimile Firearms
   (a)   (1)   "Firearm" shall have the same meaning as used in Section
627.01 of this chapter.
      (2)   "Replica or facsimile of a firearm" shall mean any device or object
made of plastic, wood, metal or any other material which is a replica,
facsimile or toy version of, or is otherwise recognizable as, a pistol,
revolver, shotgun, sawed-off shotgun, rifle, machine gun, rocket launcher or
any other firearm. As used in this section, "replica or facsimile of a firearm"
shall include, but is not limited to, toy guns, movie props, hobby models
(either in kit form or fully assembled), starter pistols, air guns, firearms
that are inoperable and cannot readily be rendered operable, or any other
device which might reasonably be perceived to be a real firearm.
   (b)   No person shall display, market for sale or sell any replica or
facsimile of a firearm in the City. The provisions of this subsection shall not
apply to any replica or facsimile firearm which, because of its distinct color,
exaggerated size, or other design feature, cannot reasonably be perceived to be
a real firearm.
   (c)   Except in self-defense, no person shall draw, exhibit or brandish a
replica or facsimile of a firearm or simulate a firearm in a rude, angry or
threatening manner, with the intent to frighten, vex, harass or annoy or with
the intent to commit an act which is a crime under the laws of the City, state
or federal government against any other person.
   (d)   No person shall draw, exhibit or brandish a replica or facsimile of a
firearm or simulate a firearm in the presence of a law enforcement officer,
fire fighter, emergency medical technician or paramedic engaged in the
performance of his or her duties, when the person committing such brandishing
knows or has reason to know that such law enforcement officer, fire fighter,
emergency medical technician or paramedic is engaged in the performance of his
or her duties.
   (e)   (1)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of
unlawful sale of a replica firearm, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of
brandishing a replica firearm, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (d) of this section is guilty of
brandishing a replica firearm in the presence of a public safety officer, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(Ord. No. 931-14. Passed 4-20-15, eff. 4-21-15)
§ 627.20 Conveyance or Possession of an Object Indistinguishable from a Firearm
in a School Safety Zone
   (a)   No person shall knowingly possess an object in a school safety zone if
both of the following apply:
      (1)   The object is indistinguishable from a firearm, whether or not the
object is capable of being fired.
      (2)   The person indicates that the person possesses the object and that
it is a firearm, or the person knowingly displays or brandishes the object and
indicates that it is a firearm.
   (b)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to premises upon which
home schooling is conducted. Division (a) of this section also does not apply
to a school administrator, teacher, or employee who possesses an object that is
indistinguishable from a firearm for legitimate school purposes during the
course of employment, a student who uses an object that is indistinguishable
from a firearm under the direction of a school administrator, teacher, or
employee, or any other person who with the express prior approval of a school
administrator possesses an object that is indistinguishable from a firearm for
a legitimate purpose, including the use of the object in a ceremonial activity,
a play, reenactment, or other dramatic presentation, or a ROTC activity or
another similar use of the object.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of illegal
possession of an object indistinguishable from a firearm in a school safety
zone. Except as otherwise provided in this division, illegal possession of an
object indistinguishable from a firearm in a school safety zone is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (d)   As used in this section:
      (1)   "Object that is indistinguishable from a firearm" means an object
made, constructed, or altered so that, to a reasonable person without
specialized training in firearms, the object appears to be a firearm.
      (2)   "School safety zone" consists of a school, school building, school
premises, school activity, and school bus.
      (3)   "School", "school building", and "school premises" have the same
meaning as in RC 2925.01.
      (4)   "School activity" means any activity held under the auspices of a
board of education of a city, local, exempted village, joint vocational, or
cooperative education school district; a governing authority of a community
school established under RC Chapter 3314; a governing board of an educational
service center, or the governing body of a school for which the state board of
education prescribed minimum standards under RC 3301.07.
      (5)   "School bus" has the same meaning as in RC 4511.01.
(Ord. No. 931-14. Passed 4-20-15, eff. 4-21-15)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see RC 2923.122
§ 627.21 Sale of Long-Bladed Pocket Knives
   (a)   No person shall give or sell a pocket knife having a blade of two and
one-half (2-1/2) inches in length or longer, without first requiring a
purchaser to properly identify himself or herself and register in a book kept
for such purpose giving his or her name, address and age. The register shall be
subject to inspection by any officer of the law upon demand.
   (b)   No person shall give, sell or exhibit for sale to a minor a knife
having a blade two and one-half (2-1/2) inches in length or longer.
   (c)   Every person, firm or corporation dealing in the sale of knives shall
post a copy of this section in a conspicuous place in such place of business.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful pocket knife sale,
a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(Ord. No. 931-14. Passed 4-20-15, eff. 4-21-15)
§ 627.22 Sale or Possession of Sling Shots and Pea Shooters
   (a)   No person shall carry on or about his or her person, sell or exhibit
for sale a sling shot, commonly consisting of a forked stick with an elastic
band attached, or a piece of elastic such as rubber, with a bag attached for
shooting of projectiles.
   (b)   No person shall carry on or about his or her person, sell or exhibit
for sale a pea shooter, commonly consisting of a hollow cylindrical object made
of one (1) or more materials through which an object may be propelled by
blowing air through the same.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful sale or possession
of sling shots or pea shooters, a minor misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 931-14. Passed 4-20-15, eff. 4-21-15)
§ 627.23 Unlawful Display of Weapons
   (a)   No person, firm or corporation shall exhibit for sale in showcases or
show windows any daggers, stilettoes, brass or iron knuckles and billies, or
display any signs, posters, cartoons or display cards, suggesting the sale of
such weapons.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful display of
weapons, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(Ord. No. 931-14. Passed 4-20-15, eff. 4-21-15)
§ 627.24 Possession or Use of Stench Bombs
   (a)   No person shall possess or use a tear gas device, stink bomb, smoke
generator or other device releasing a substance which is harmful or offensive
to persons exposed or which tends to cause public alarm. This section does not
apply to law enforcement agents in the discharge of official duty.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful possession or use
of stench bombs, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(Ord. No. 931-14. Passed 4-20-15, eff. 4-21-15)
§ 627.25 Tear Gas Guns
   (a)   No person not being a law enforcement officer acting in the line of
duty or a person engaged in repelling robbers, thieves, murderers or other law
violators in the defense and protection of his or her home or place of
business, shall aim and discharge at any person a weapon or device of any kind
which impels by compressed air, spring release or other means a projectile
containing any liquid or gas which is dangerous to the safety or health of such
person, or which otherwise discharges any such liquid or gas upon the person of
another.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful tear gas gun use,
a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(Ord. No. 931-14. Passed 4-20-15, eff. 4-21-15)
§ 627.26 Containers of Combustibles
   (a)   No person shall make, use, have on or about his or her person or under
his or her control any device or container, having a combustible material or
substance which can be used as a means of igniting such device or container
attached thereto as a fuse and containing therein any flammable or combustible
material or substance, which device or container can be used as a firebomb by
igniting the fuse or igniting the fuse and breaking the device or container by
dropping, tossing or throwing such device or container against or upon an
object. However, this section does not apply to any person using, making or
having such device or container in his or her possession or under his or her
control in the course of a legitimate business, employment or occupation.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful manufacture,
possession or use of combustible container, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(Ord. No. 931-14. Passed 4-20-15, eff. 4-21-15)
§ 627.27 Jump Traps
   (a)   No person shall use or permit the use within the City of any steel
jump animal trap or similar device with spring activated jaws of the types
commonly used for the trapping of fur bearing animals, which is capable of
inflicting cruelty upon dogs or cats or which constitutes a hazard to small
children.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful jump trap use, a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(Ord. No. 931-14. Passed 4-20-15, eff. 4-21-15)
CHAPTER 627A – POSSESSION OF FIREARMS BY CHILDREN
627A.01   Definitions – Repealed
627A.02   Access to Firearms – Repealed
627A.03   Responsibility of Firearms Dealer – Repealed
627A.99   Penalties – Repealed
§ 627A.01 Definitions – Repealed
(Ord. No. 931-14. Passed 4-20-15, eff. 4-21-15)
§ 627A.02 Access to Firearms – Repealed
(Ord. No. 931-14. Passed 4-20-15, eff. 4-21-15)
§ 627A.03 Responsibility of Firearms Dealer – Repealed
(Ord. No. 931-14. Passed 4-20-15, eff. 4-21-15)
§ 627A.99 Penalties – Repealed
(Ord. No. 931-14. Passed 4-20-15, eff. 4-21-15)
CHAPTER 628 – GUN OFFENDER REGISTRY
628.01   Definitions
628.02   Duty to Register
628.03   Initial and Annual Registration
628.04   Registration Period
628.05   Duty to Report Change of Information
628.06   Creation of Gun Registry
628.07   Sharing Registration Information
628.08   Cooperation with Other Agencies
628.09   Rules and Regulations
628.10   Offense; False Information
628.99   Penalty
   Note: This chapter was replaced in its entirety by Ordinance No. 931-14,
passed 4-20-15 and effective 4-21-15. Section 5 of Ordinance No. 931-14
provides that this chapter shall take effect and be in force on November 1,
2015.
§ 628.01 Definitions
   For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply:
   (a)   "Convicted" or "conviction" means:
      (1)   Having been found guilty of a gun offense by a jury or judicial
officer; or
      (2)   The acceptance of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere for a gun
offense.
   (b)   "Director" means the Director of Public Safety or the Director's
designee.
   (c)   "Gun offender" or "offenders" means any person convicted of a gun
offense. "Gun offender" does not include a person whose conviction has been
reversed on appeal, expunged or sealed pursuant to a court order, or otherwise
set aside pursuant to law.
   (d)   "Gun offense" means:
      (1)   A violation of any of the following Revised Code sections or any
substantially equivalent Codified Ordinance section that involves a firearm:
         RC 1547.69   Firearms prohibitions
         RC 2909.08   Endangering aircraft or airport operations
         RC 2923.12   Carrying concealed weapons
         RC 2923.121   Possession of firearm in beer liquor permit premises -
prohibition, exceptions
         RC 2923.122   Illegal conveyance or possession of deadly weapon or
dangerous ordnance or of object indistinguishable from firearm in school safety
zone
         RC 2923.123   Illegal conveyance of deadly weapon or dangerous
ordnance into courthouse - illegal possession or control in courthouse
         RC 2923.13   Having weapons while under disability
         RC 2923.15   Using weapons while intoxicated
         RC 2923.16   Improperly handling firearms in a motor vehicle
         RC 2923.161   Improperly discharging firearm at or into a habitation,
in a school safety zone or with intent to cause harm or panic to persons in a
school building or at a school function
         RC 2923.162   Discharge of firearm on or near prohibited premises
         RC 2923.20   Unlawful transaction in weapons
         RC 2923.201   Possessing a defaced firearm
         RC 2923.21   Improperly furnishing firearms to minor
      (2)   Any offense where the indictment or information charging the
offense specifies that the offender had a firearm on or about the offender's
person or under the offender's control while committing the offense.
(Ord. No. 931-14. Passed 4-20-15, eff. 4-21-15)
§ 628.02 Duty to Register
   (a)   A gun offender who (1) resides in the City; and (2) on or after the
effective date of this section is convicted of a gun offense shall register
with the Director within five (5) days of either: (a) release, if the gun
offender receives a sentence of imprisonment; or (b) the time sentence is
imposed, if the sentence does not include imprisonment.
   (b)   Notwithstanding division (a), any gun offender who did not register in
the time set forth in division (a) because, following the gun offender's
discharge or release from a federal, state or local correctional facility, the
gun offender was confined to a residential treatment center, hospital or other
institution, shall register within five (5) days of the offender's discharge or
release from such institution.
   (c)   A gun offender who did not reside in the City at the time when
registration would have otherwise been required under this chapter, and
subsequent to that time becomes a resident of the City, shall register within
five (5) days of becoming a resident of the City.
   (d)   The form and manner of registration shall be as provided in rules and
regulations promulgated by the Director.
   (e)   The registration shall include the following information:
      (1)   The gun offender's name, date of birth, and sex;
      (2)   The address where the gun offender resides, and any home or mobile
phone number regularly used by the gun offender;
      (3)   Any other legal name or alias of the gun offender;
      (4)   A copy of the driver's license or non-driver's photo identification
card, or other document to establish proof of residence acceptable to the
Director;
      (5)   A photograph of the gun offender;
      (6)   A description of the gun offense for which the offender was
convicted;
      (7)   The name, address and phone number of the offender's place of work;
      (8)   The name and address of any educational institution which the gun
offender attends; and
      (9)   Any other information that the Director shall find reasonably
necessary to effect the purposes of this chapter.
   (f)   The gun offender shall submit to fingerprinting in accordance with
rules and regulations promulgated by the Director.
   (g)   This chapter shall not apply to any person who:
      (1)   Can demonstrate that the person's conviction for a gun offense was
(i) reversed on appeal or otherwise set aside pursuant to law, including
receiving a pardon; or (ii) based on a law that was invalidated or held to be
unconstitutional or otherwise invalid; or (iii) expunged or sealed pursuant to
a court order; or
      (2)   Was adjudicated a juvenile delinquent for an offense that, if
committed by an adult, would not constitute a conviction for a gun offense.
(Ord. No. 931-14. Passed 4-20-15, eff. 4-21-15)
§ 628.03 Initial and Annual Registration
   (a)   For the initial registration, a gun offender shall report in person at
such place as the Director may direct.
   (b)   After the initial registration, the gun offender shall report in
person at such place as the Director may direct no later than one (1) year
after the date of the initial registration and thereafter no later than one (1)
year after the date of each annual registration, until such time that the gun
offender is no longer required to register.
(Ord. No. 931-14. Passed 4-20-15, eff. 4-21-15)
§ 628.04 Registration Period
   A gun offender shall comply with the requirements of this chapter, including
the registration requirement, for a period of four (4) years after the date of
the offender's first registration.
(Ord. No. 931-14. Passed 4-20-15, eff. 4-21-15)
§ 628.05 Duty to Report Change of Information
   A gun offender shall report any change in information required by this
chapter within five (5) days of the change, in a manner and in a form
prescribed by the Director.
(Ord. No. 931-14. Passed 4-20-15, eff. 4-21-15)
§ 628.06 Creation of Gun Registry
   The Director shall collect the information provided under this chapter and
create and maintain a list of registered gun offenders.
(Ord. No. 931-14. Passed 4-20-15, eff. 4-21-15)
§ 628.07 Sharing Registration Information
   The Director may make the information collected under this chapter available
to federal, state and local law enforcement agencies.
(Ord. No. 931-14. Passed 4-20-15, eff. 4-21-15)
§ 628.08 Cooperation with Other Agencies
   The Director shall cooperate with federal, state and local law enforcement
agencies and the judiciary to facilitate implementation of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 931-14. Passed 4-20-15, eff. 4-21-15)
§ 628.09 Rules and Regulations
   The Director shall promulgate rules and regulation for the implementation of
this chapter and to prescribe all forms and information required.
(Ord. No. 931-14. Passed 4-20-15, eff. 4-21-15)
§ 628.10 Offense; False Information
   (a)   No person who is a gun offender shall fail to register or fail to
renew the offender's registration as provided in this chapter.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly provide false or misleading information
pertaining to the offender's registration information.
(Ord. No. 931-14. Passed 4-20-15, eff. 4-21-15)
§ 628.99 Penalty
   (a)   Any person who violates Section
628.10 is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (b)   Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense.
(Ord. No. 931-14. Passed 4-20-15, eff. 4-21-15)
CHAPTER 629 – SAFETY AND SANITATION
629.01   Venting of Heaters and Burners
629.02   Abandoned Refrigerators and Airtight Containers
629.03   Adulterating of or Furnishing Adulterated Food or Confection
629.04   Entertainment Distracting Traffic
629.05   Model Airplane Operation; Permit
629.06   Barbed Wire Fences – Repealed
629.07   Nonsmoking Areas in Places of Public Assembly
629.08   Distribution of Tobacco Products
Cross-reference:
   Adulterated or misbranded food, CO
241.22
   Littering, CO
Ch. 613
   Tampering with safety devices, CO
623.03
Statutory reference:
   See sectional histories for similar State law
   Nuisances, RC Ch. 3767
§ 629.01 Venting of Heaters and Burners
   (a)   A brazier, salamander, space heater, room heater, furnace, water
heater or other burner or heater using wood, coal, coke, fuel oil, kerosene,
gasoline, natural gas, liquid petroleum gas or similar fuel, and tending to
give off carbon monoxide or other harmful gases:
      (1)   When used in living quarters, or in any enclosed building or space
in which persons are usually present, shall be used with a flue or vent so
designed, installed and maintained as to vent the products of combustion
outdoors; except in storage, factory, or industrial buildings which are
provided with sufficient ventilation to avoid the danger of carbon monoxide
poisoning;
      (2)   When used as a portable or temporary burner or heater at a
construction site, or in a warehouse, shed or structure in which persons are
temporarily present, shall be vented as provided in division (a)(1) of this
section, or used with sufficient ventilation to avoid the danger of carbon
monoxide poisoning.
   (b)   This section does not apply to domestic ranges, laundry stoves, gas
logs installed in a fireplace with an adequate flue, or hot plates, unless the
same are used as space or room heaters.
   (c)   No person shall negligently use, or, being the owner, person in
charge, or occupant of premises, negligently permit the use of a burner or
heater in violation of the standards for venting and ventilation provided in
this section.
   (d)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to any kerosene-fired
space or room heater that is equipped with an automatic extinguishing tip-over
device, or to any natural gas-fired or liquid petroleum gas-fired space or room
heater that is equipped with an oxygen depletion safety shutoff system, and
that has its fuel piped from a source outside of the building in which it is
located, that are approved by an authoritative source recognized by the State
Fire Marshal in the State Fire Code adopted by him or her under RC 3737.82.
   (e)   The State Fire Marshal may make rules to ensure the safe use of
unvented kerosene, natural gas or liquid petroleum gas heaters exempted from
division (a) of this section when used in assembly buildings, business
buildings, high hazard buildings, institutional buildings, mercantile buildings
and type R-1 and R-2 residential buildings, as these groups of buildings are
defined in rules adopted by the Board of Building Standards under RC 3781.10.
No person shall negligently use, or, being the owner, person in charge or
occupant of premises, negligently permit the use of a heater in violation of
any rules adopted under this division.
   (f)   The State Fire Marshal may make rules prescribing standards for
written instructions containing ventilation requirements and warning of any
potential fire hazards that may occur in using a kerosene, natural gas or
liquid petroleum gas heater. No person shall sell or offer for sale any
kerosene, natural gas or liquid petroleum gas heater unless the manufacturer
provides with the heater written instructions that comply with any rules
adopted under this division.
   (g)   No product labeled as a fuel additive for kerosene heaters and having
a flash point below one hundred degrees Fahrenheit (100°F) or thirty-seven and
eight-tenths degrees Centigrade (37.8°C) shall be sold, offered for sale or
used in any kerosene space heater.
   (h)   No device that prohibits any safety feature on a kerosene, natural gas
or liquid petroleum gas space heater from operating shall be sold, offered for
sale or used in connection with any kerosene, natural gas or liquid petroleum
gas space heater.
   (i)   No person shall sell or offer for sale any kerosene-fired, natural gas
or liquid petroleum gas-fired heater that is not exempt from division (a) of
this section unless it is marked conspicuously by the manufacturer on the
container with the phrase “Not Approved For Home Use”.
   (j)   No person shall use a cabinet-type, liquid petroleum gas-fired heater
having a fuel source within the heater, inside any building, except as
permitted by the State Fire Marshal in the State Fire Code adopted by him or
her under RC 3737.82.
(RC 3701.82)
   (k)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(RC 3701.99(C); Ord. No. 90-96. Passed 3-18-96, eff. 3-26-96)
§ 629.02 Abandoned Refrigerators and Airtight Containers
   (a)   No person shall abandon, discard or knowingly permit to remain on
premises under his or her control, in a place accessible to children, any
abandoned or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other airtight or semi-airtight
container which has a capacity of one and one-half (1-1/2) cubic feet or more
and an opening of fifty (50) square inches or more and which has a door or lid
equipped with hinge, latch or other fastening device capable of securing such
door or lid, without rendering such equipment harmless to human life by
removing such hinges, latches or other hardware which may cause a person to be
confined therein. This section shall not apply to an icebox, refrigerator or
other airtight or semi-airtight container located in that part of a building
occupied by a dealer, warehouseman or repairman.
(RC 3767.29)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of abandoning, a misdemeanor
of the fourth degree.
(RC 3767.99(B); Ord. No. 1020-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
§ 629.03 Adulterating of or Furnishing Adulterated Food or Confection
   (a)   No person shall do either of the following, knowing or having
reasonable cause to believe that any person may suffer physical harm or be
seriously inconvenienced or annoyed thereby:
      (1)   Place a pin, needle, razor blade, glass, laxative, drug of abuse or
other harmful or hazardous object or substance in any food or confection;
      (2)   Furnish to any person any food or confection which has been
adulterated in violation of subsection (a)(1) hereof.
(RC 3716.11)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of adulterating foods, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(RC 3716.99(C); Ord. No. 1020-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
§ 629.04 Entertainment Distracting Traffic
   (a)   No owner or person in charge of any premises where entertainment is
provided or public dancing is permitted shall allow any person to entertain or
perform or to dance in any area located within twenty- five (25) feet of a
public right-of-way unless such area where the entertainment or performance or
dancing is occurring is located or screened so that the entertainers,
performers or dancers are not visible to pedestrians or motorists using such
public right-of-way.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of permitting entertainment to
distract traffic, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(Ord. No. 1020-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
§ 629.05 Model Airplane Operation; Permit
   (a)   No person shall operate or cause to be operated, or permit the
operation of any model aircraft equipped with a gas engine in, over or upon any
of the streets, highways or public places within the City. However, permits for
the operation of such model aircraft may be granted by the Commissioner of
Recreation, which shall be limited to such portions of the public parks as the
Director of Public Properties shall designate and equip for such purposes. The
permit shall be subject to such rules and conditions as the Director imposes,
and shall be subject to immediate revocation for violation of any such rule or
condition.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful model airplane
operation, a minor misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 1020-76. Passed 6-14-76, eff. 6-18-76)
§ 629.06 Barbed Wire Fences – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1811-2000. Passed 2-12-01, eff. 2-20-01)
§ 629.07 Nonsmoking Areas in Places of Public Assembly
   (a)   As used in this section, “place of public assembly” means:
      (1)   Enclosed theaters, except the lobby; opera houses; auditoriums;
classrooms; elevators; rooms in which persons are confined as a matter of
health care, including but not limited to a hospital room and a room in a
residential care facility serving as the residence of a person living in the
residential care facility;
      (2)   All buildings and other enclosed structures owned by the State, its
agencies or political subdivisions, including but not limited to hospitals and
State institutions for the mentally retarded and the mentally ill; university
and college buildings, except rooms within those buildings used primarily as
the residence of students or other persons affiliated with the university or
college; office buildings; libraries; museums; and vehicles used in public
transportation. That portion of a building or other enclosed structure that is
owned by the State, a State agency or a political subdivision and that is used
primarily as a food service establishment is not a place of public assembly;
      (3)   Each portion of a building or enclosed structure that is not
included in subsection (a)(1) or (2) hereof is a place of public assembly if it
has a seating capacity of fifty (50) or more persons and is available to the
public. Restaurants, food service establishments, dining rooms, cafes,
cafeterias or other rooms used primarily for the service of food, as well as
bowling alleys and places licensed by the Department of Liquor Control to sell
intoxicating beverages for consumption on the premises, are not places of
public assembly.
   (b)   For the purpose of separating persons who smoke from persons who do
not smoke for the comfort and health of persons not smoking, in every place of
public assembly there shall be an area where smoking is not permitted, which
shall be designated a no smoking area. Provided that, no more than one-half (1/
2) of the rooms in any health care facility in which persons are confined as a
matter of health care may be designated as smoking areas in their entirety. The
designation shall be made before the place of public assembly is made available
to the public. In places included in division (a)(1) of this section the local
fire authority having jurisdiction shall designate the no smoking area. In
places included in division (a)(2) of this section that are owned by the
Municipality, Council shall designate an officer who shall designate the area.
In places included in division (a)(3) of this section, the person having
control of the operations of the place of public assembly shall designate the
no smoking area. In places included in division (a)(2) of this section which
are also included in division (a)(1) of this section, the officer who has
authority to designate the area in places in division (a)(2) of this section
designate the no smoking area. A no smoking area may include the entire place
of public assembly. Designations shall be made by the placement of signs
clearly visible and that state “NO SMOKING”. No person shall remove signs from
areas designated as no smoking areas.
   (c)   No person shall smoke in any area designated as a no smoking area in
accordance with division (b) of this section of RC 3791.031.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(RC 3791.031; Ord. No. 1631-05. Passed 3-20-06, eff. 3-24-06)
§ 629.08 Distribution of Tobacco Products
   (a)   As used in this section, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings ascribed by this division.
      (1)   “Chewing tobacco” means any leaf tobacco that is not intended to be
smoked.
      (2)   “Cigar” means any roll of tobacco wrapped in leaf tobacco or in any
substance containing tobacco (other than any roll of tobacco which is a
cigarette within the meaning of division (a)(3)B.
      (3)   “Cigarette” means:
         A.   Any roll of tobacco wrapped in paper or in any substance not
containing tobacco; and
         B.   Any roll of tobacco wrapped in any substance containing tobacco
which, because of its appearance, the type of tobacco used in the filler, or
its packaging and labeling, is likely to be offered to, or purchased by
consumers as a cigarette described in division (a)(3)A.
      (4)   “Pipe tobacco” means any tobacco which, because of its appearance,
type, packaging, or labeling, is suitable for use and likely to be offered to,
or purchased by, consumers as tobacco to be smoked in a pipe.
      (5)   “Smokeless tobacco” means any snuff or chewing tobacco.
      (6)   “Snuff” means any finely cut, ground, or powdered tobacco that is
not intended to be smoked.
      (7)   “Tobacco products” means cigars, cigarettes, smokeless tobacco, and
pipe tobacco.
   (b)   No manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler or retailer of
tobacco products, or any agent, employee, or representative of a manufacturer,
producer, distributor, wholesaler or retailer of tobacco products shall
distribute at no charge tobacco products in or upon any sidewalk, street or
public park.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of distribution of tobacco
products, a minor misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 223-90. Passed 5-21-90, eff. 5-29-90)
CHAPTER 630 – CRIMINAL ACTIVITY NUISANCES
630.01   Criminal Activity Nuisances Declared
630.02   Action to Abate Nuisances; Costs of Enforcement
630.03   Failure to Abate Nuisance Activity – Repealed
630.04   Other Legal Actions Not Affected
630.05   Severability
§ 630.01 Criminal Activity Nuisances Declared
   (a)   Activities, as defined in any of the following Codified Ordinances,
occurring on properties in the City, and engaged in by an owner, occupant,
invitee of the owner or occupant of the property, or person associated with the
property are declared to be nuisance activities.
      (1)   Any animal violation under Sections
603.01 (Animals or Fowl at Large),
603.02 (Unmuzzled Dogs at Large),
603.04 (Dog Nuisances),
603.07 (Killing or Injuring Animals),
603.072 (Illegal Fights between Animals),
603.08 (Poisoning Animals),
603.09 (Cruelty to Animals),
603.091 (Neglect of Animals),
603.11 (Large Cats),
603A.03 (Keeping an Exotic Animal Without a Permit),
603A.08 (Care and Treatment of Exotic Animal Held Under Permit),
603A.14 (Facilities Housing Reptiles),
603A.17 (Snakes in Multi-Family Residences Prohibited),
604.03 (Control of Vicious and Dangerous Dogs) of the Codified Ordinances;
      (2)   Any disorderly conduct or disorderly activity violation under
Sections
605.01 (Riot),
605.02 (Failure to Disperse),
605.03 (Disorderly Conduct; Intoxication),
605.05 (Misconduct at an Emergency),
605.06 (Inducing Panic),
605.07 (Making False Alarms),
605.071 (Improper Use of 9-1-1 Telephone System),
605.10 (Unnecessary Noise),
605.14 (Minor's Curfew) of the Codified Ordinances;
      (3)   Any drug abuse violation under
Chapter 607 of the Codified Ordinances or any violation under R.C Chapter 2925;
      (4)   Any family offense violation under Sections
609.04 (Endangering Children),
609.10 (Contributing to Unruliness or Delinquency of a Child) of the Codified
Ordinances;
      (5)   Any gambling violation under
Chapter 611 of the Codified Ordinances;
      (6)   Any littering violation under
Chapter 613 of the Codified Ordinances;
      (7)   Any liquor control violation under Sections
617.02 (Sales to and Use by Minors; Securing Public Accommodations),
617.021 (Purchase, Consumption or Possession by Minor; Misrepresentation),
617.03 (Sales to Intoxicated Persons),
617.05 (Permit Required),
617.06 (Printed Warnings to be Posted),
617.08 (Hours of Sale or Consumption),
617.09 (Bottle Clubs) of the Codified Ordinances;
      (8)   Any obscenity and sex offenses violation under Sections
619.03 (Corruption of a Minor),
619.04 (Sexual Imposition),
619.05 (Importuning),
619.08 (Procuring),
619.09 (Soliciting),
619.10 (Prostitution),
619.12 (Disseminating Material Harmful to Juveniles),
619.14 (Possession of Obscene Material Involving Minor),
619.15 (Possession of Sexually-Oriented Material Involving Minor),
619.16 (Possession of Nudity-Oriented Material Involving Minor),
619.161 (Displaying Matter Harmful to Juveniles),
619.17 (Prohibited Conduct) of the Codified Ordinances;
      (9)   Any offense against another person under Sections
621.03 (Assault),
621.031 (Assault by a Minor; Parental Duty Imposed),
621.04 (Negligent Assault),
621.06 (Aggravated Menacing),
621.07 (Menacing),
621.08 (Unlawful Restraint),
621.09 (Coercion),
621.10 (Telephone Harassment),
621.11 (Threatening or Harassing Phone Calls),
621.14 (Hazing) of the Codified Ordinances;
      (10)   Any offense against property under Sections
623.02 (Criminal Damaging or Endangering),
623.03 (Criminal Mischief) of the Codified Ordinances;
      (11)   Any theft violation under Sections
625.05 (Petty Theft),
625.08 (Criminal Tools),
625.10 (Unauthorized Use of Property),
625.21 (Receiving Stolen Property),
625.27 (Trafficking In or Illegal Use of "WIC" Coupons) of the Codified
Ordinances;
      (12)   Any weapons and explosives violation under Sections
627.04 (Using Weapons While Intoxicated),
627.06 (Failure to Secure Dangerous Ordnance),
627.07 (Improperly Providing Access to Firearms to a Minor),
627.09 (Improperly Discharging a Firearm on or near Prohibited Premises),
627.12 (Seizure and Confiscation of Deadly Weapon),
627.16 (Prohibition Against Transferring Firearms or Dangerous Ordnance to a
Felon or Intoxicated Person),
627.15 (Unlawful Transactions in Weapons),
627.19 (Facsimile Firearms),
627.21 (Sale of Long Bladed Pocket Knives),
627.22 (Sale or Possession of Sling Shots and Pea Shooters),
627.23 (Unlawful Display of Weapons),
627.24 (Possession or Use of Stench Bombs),
627.25 (Tear Gas Guns),
627.26 (Containers of Combustibles),
627.27 (Jump Traps) of the Codified Ordinances;
      (13)   Any sound devices violation under Section
683.01 (Playing of Sound Devices Prohibited) and Section
683.02 (Playing of Sound Devices in Motor Vehicles Prohibited; When) of the
Codified Ordinances;
      (14)   Any massage establishment violation under
Chapter 683A of the Codified Ordinances;
      (15)   Any explosives violation under
Chapter 387 of the Codified Ordinances;
      (16)   Any open burning violation under Section
277.09 of the Codified Ordinances;
      (17)   Any safety and equipment violations under Sections
437.19 (Horn, Sirens, and Warning Devices) and
437.20 (Muffler; Muffler Cutout; Excessive Smoke, Gas or Noise) of the Codified
Ordinances;
      (18)   Any reckless operation offense under Section
433.07 (Street Racing, Stunt Driving, and Street Takeover Prohibited) of the
Codified Ordinances; and
      (19)   Any parking violations under Sections
451.22 (Between Sidewalk and Setback Line),
451.23 (Tree Lawn and Private Driveway),
451.241 (Parking Vehicles on Vacant Lots Prohibited), and
451.251 (Prohibition Against Abandonment of Junk Motor Vehicle).
   (b)   To be a nuisance activity, a criminal conviction, citation, or arrest
is not necessary. There must be probable cause to believe that the activity
occurred. A member of the Division of Police may rely on a witness’s statement
(s) to find that there is probable cause that the nuisance activity occurred.
“Property or premises” means a platted lot or part thereof, or unplatted lot or
parcel of land, or plot of land either occupied or unoccupied by any building
or structure, equipment, or property of any kind. “Owner” means any person,
for-profit or not-for-profit corporation, partnership, limited partnership,
joint venture, unincorporated association, estate, trust or other commercial or
legal entity who alone or jointly with others, who is in possession of or has
any control of any property, or is listed as the owner of a property on the
records of the Cuyahoga County Fiscal Officer. “Person associated with” means
any person who, whenever engaged in a nuisance or nuisance activity, enters,
patronizes, or visits; attempts to enter, patronize or visit; or waits to
enter, patronize, or visit, a property or person present on a property,
including any officer, director, customer, agent, employee, or independent
contractor of an owner.
(Ord. No. 704-2025. Passed 7-9-25, eff. 7-14-25)
§ 630.02 Action to Abate Nuisances; Costs of Enforcement
   (a)   Notice That Property May Be Declared a Nuisance. The Director of
Public Safety or his or her designee, upon finding that three (3) or more
nuisance activities as defined in Section
630.01 have occurred on separate calendar days within any twelve (12) month
period on the same property, may cause a written notice and order to be served
on the owner of the property warning that the property is in danger of being
declared a nuisance. Any notice provided for in
Chapter 630 is a lawful order. Each directive contained in a notice is a
separate lawful order, and failure to obey any directive is subject to
penalties pursuant to Section
630.02(d). The notice shall be deemed properly delivered if sent by first class
mail to the address for the owner listed on the records of the Cuyahoga County
Fiscal Office. If the notice is returned as undeliverable, the notice shall be
deemed properly delivered if it is either posted on the front door of the
premises that is the subject of the notice or if it is delivered in person to
the owner. The notice shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The street address or legal description sufficient for
identification of the premises;
      (2)   A description of the nuisance activities that have occurred at the
premises, including the dates of the nuisance activities;
      (3)   A statement that the premises owner shall respond to the Director
of Public Safety or his or her designee within fourteen (14) days of the date
of the notice with a written plan to abate the nuisance activities;
      (4)   A statement that the requirement that the owner provide a written
plan to abate the nuisance is a lawful order, and that failure to provide a
written plan could subject the owner to penalties pursuant to Section
630.02(d); and
      (5)   A statement that the cost of future enforcement at the premises as
a result of nuisance activities may be billed to the premises owner and could
become a lien against the property if not paid.
   (b)   Determination That Property Is a Nuisance. If the Director of Public
Safety or his or her designee determines that a fourth or subsequent nuisance
activity as defined in Section
630.01 occurs later than seventeen (17) days after the date of the initial
written notice that the property may be declared a nuisance and within twelve
(12) months after the date of the third or any subsequent nuisance activity,
the City may declare the property a nuisance, provide such notice, and proceed
to abate the nuisance activity by using administrative and law enforcement
actions, and the costs of the abatement may be charged to the owner of the
property and, if not paid, may be certified by the Commissioner of Assessments
and Licenses to the County Fiscal Officer to be placed on the nuisance property
as a lien to be collected as other taxes and returned to the City. The cost to
abate the nuisance activity shall be calculated as set forth in division (c).
The City shall provide notice to the owner of the nuisance property of the
City’s decision to charge the cost of abatement. If the costs are not paid by
the owner, the City shall notify the owner at least thirty (30) days before the
costs are certified to the County Fiscal Officer. The notice shall contain a
street address or legal description of the property, a description of the
nuisance activities and the cost to abate. All notices in this division shall
be served as set forth in division (a) of this section. The Director of Law may
take any other action necessary to collect the costs of abatement.
   (c)   Costs of Abatement. Costs of abatement shall be determined based on
the time required to respond to the nuisance activity multiplied by an hourly
rate based upon the wages and benefits of a police officer, dispatch costs,
vehicle and equipment costs, and supervisory and administrative costs. The
hourly rate may be adjusted based on the number of police officers required to
abate the nuisance.
   (d)   Civil Fine. If the Director of Public Safety or his or her designee
determines that a property owner failed to provide a written plan to abate the
nuisance activity within fourteen (14) days of the date of the notice, the
property owner shall be charged one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day until a
written plan is provided. If the Director of Public Safety, or his or her
designee, declares the property a nuisance pursuant to division (b) of this
section, the property owner shall be charged two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00). If the Director of Public Safety or his or her designee declares the
property a nuisance pursuant to division (b) of this section and provides
notice, then for any fifth or subsequent nuisance activity as defined in
Section
630.01 that occurs within twelve (12) months after the date of such notice, a
property owner shall be charged five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a fifth
nuisance activity, seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for a sixth nuisance
activity and one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for a seventh or any subsequent
nuisance activity occurring on the same property. Any fine is in addition to
the costs of abatement that may be charged and, if the fine is not paid, shall
be certified to the County Fiscal Officer as set forth in division (b) of this
section. Fines are subject to appeal as set forth in division (e) of this
section.
   (e)   Appeal. The owner of a nuisance property who receives a notice
declaring the owner's property to be a nuisance property, a notice charging the
cost of abating nuisance activity, a notice that the cost of abatement shall be
certified to the County Fiscal Officer, a notice charging a fine for failing to
provide a written plan to abate the nuisance activity, a notice charging a fine
for being the owner of a property that has been declared a nuisance property, a
notice charging a fine for a fifth or subsequent nuisance activity, or a notice
that a fine shall be certified to the County Fiscal Officer, may appeal the
notice by submitting a written request to the City official who issued the
notice within ten (10) days of the date of the notice. If, after a decision on
that appeal, the owner disagrees with the decision, the owner may appeal the
decision of the City official to the Board of Zoning Appeals. An appeal to the
Board of Zoning Appeals shall be made within fifteen (15) days of the postmark
date of the decision from the City official denying the appeal. The Board shall
conduct a hearing and render a decision in accordance with City ordinances and
regulations governing its conduct and procedure. An appeal to the Board of
Zoning Appeals shall not stay any actions by the City to abate any subsequent
nuisance activity. In any appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals, the City must
show by a preponderance of the evidence that there was probable cause to
believe that each nuisance activity stated in the notice being appealed has
occurred, and that the declaration of the property as a nuisance property is
justified, or that the charging of abatement costs and fines, if applicable, or
the certification of abatement costs and fines, if applicable, is justified.
The owner may prevail on appeal of any notice if the owner demonstrates by a
preponderance of the evidence that:
      (1)   He or she was not the owner at the time of any of the nuisance
activity that is the basis of the notice; or
      (2)   He or she had knowledge of the nuisance activity, but promptly and
vigorously took all actions necessary to abate the nuisance activity including,
without limitation, compliance with the requirements of RC 5321.17(C) and RC
5321.04(A)(9); or
      (3)   He or she had no knowledge of the nuisance activity and could not,
with reasonable care and diligence, have known of the nuisance activity; and
upon receipt of the notice of the declaration of the property as a nuisance
property, he or she promptly took all actions necessary to abate the nuisance
including, without limitation, compliance with the requirements of RC 5321.17
(C) and RC 5321.04(A)(9).
   (f)   Notification to Council. The Director of Public Safety shall provide
electronic notification to the member of Council in whose ward the property is
located when any of the following events occur: a notice that property may be
declared a nuisance is issued, a determination is made that a property is a
nuisance, and an owner appeals a decision to the City’s Board of Zoning
appeals, as described under subsections (a), (b) and/or (e) of this Section
630.02.
(Ord. No. 704-2025. Passed 7-9-25, eff. 7-14-25)
§ 630.03 Failure to Abate Nuisance Activity – Repealed
(Ord. No. 574-18. Passed 5-14-18, eff. 5-15-18)
§ 630.04 Other Legal Actions Not Affected
   The declaration of a nuisance property, an order to abate a nuisance, or the
charging or assessment of costs by the City on a property under this chapter,
do not affect or limit the City’s right or authority to bring criminal
prosecution or other legal action against any person for violation of the
City’s ordinances, including legal action brought under Sections
619.24 and
619.25 of the Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 141-09. Passed 3-30-09, eff. 4-2-09)
§ 630.05 Severability
   If any clause, sentence, paragraph or part of this chapter, or its
application to any person or circumstance, shall for any reason be adjudged by
a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not
affect, impair or Invalidate the remainder of this chapter nor the application
of such clause, sentence, paragraph or part to other persons or circumstances
but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph or
part and to the persons or circumstances directly involved in the controversy
in which such judgment shall have been rendered. It is declared to be the
legislative intent that this chapter would have been adopted had such
provisions not been included or such persons or circumstances been expressly
excluded from their coverage.
(Ord. No. 141-09. Passed 3-30-09, eff. 4-2-09)
CHAPTER 631 – RAILROADS
631.01   Maximum Speed; Crossing Safety Protection
631.02   Engines Emitting Smoke or Steam
631.03   Nonobservance of Signals or Gates
631.04   Minimum Distance from Track after Warning
631.05   Use of Bell on Locomotive
631.06   Unnecessary Obstruction of Streets
631.07   Operation on Drawbridges
631.08   Rules and Regulations for Railroads
631.09   Installation of Automatic Gates and Flash Signals
631.10   Enforcement
631.11   Crossing Signs
631.12   Occupied Streets to be Cleaned by Railroads
631.13   Permit to Establish Crossings
631.14   Roadway Maintenance near Tracks
631.15   Notice; Removal of Tracks
631.16   Lighting Crossings at Grade
631.17   Manner and Time of Lighting
631.18   Lighting of Bridges, Structures and Underpasses
631.19   Notice to Install Lights
631.20   Evidence of Compliance with Lighting Regulations
631.21   Conditions when Railroad Relieved of Lighting Requirements
631.22   Crossings Regulated
631.23   Railroad or Switch Track Construction Permit Application and Fee
631.24   Permit for More than One Year Granted by Ordinance; Bond
631.25   Permit for Temporary Use; Bond
631.26   Crossing Frogs
631.27   Failure to Pay Fine
631.99   Penalty
   Note: The legislative history of this chapter, except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 63410-A, passed
September 22, 1924.
Cross-reference:
   Criminal mischief, CO
623.03
   Driving across grade crossing, CO
431.39,
439.06
   Locomotive air contaminant emissions regulated, CO
265.01
   Stopping at grade crossing, CO
431.40
   Vehicular homicide, CO
621.02
Statutory reference:
   See sectional histories for similar State law
   Lighting railroads, RC 723.33 et seq.
   Power to regulate train speed, RC 723.48
§ 631.01 Maximum Speed; Crossing Safety Protection
   No person shall move any locomotive or railroad car over a street crossing
within the limits of the City at a speed greater than thirty-five (35) miles
per hour, unless such crossings are protected by safety gates or warning
devices, such as electrically operated wig-wag or flash signals provided with
red signal lights. Crossings protected by gates shall be properly attended by
competent persons to operate the gates, and all such gates, devices, signals
and attendants shall be to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Service.
Wig-wag or flash signals may be substituted for safety glass at existing
crossings when authority and consent therefor have been obtained from the Ohio
Public Utilities Commission. In no event shall any person move any locomotive
or car at a speed greater than thirty-five (35) miles per hour at any point
where the track is parallel and abutting or through any street. No person shall
run any railroad locomotive or engine or switching engine within the limits of
the City, with or without cars attached, at a speed greater than thirty-five
(35) miles per hour.
(Ord. No. 87724. Passed 7-29-29)
§ 631.02 Engines Emitting Smoke or Steam
   On and after January 1, 1932, no railway or railroad company or corporation
shall operate trains within the limits of the City by the use of locomotive
engines propelled by steam power, or by the use of any other power producing
machine or device which emits smoke or steam.
(Ord. No. 87724. Passed 7-29-29)
§ 631.03 Nonobservance of Signals or Gates
   Whenever a signal has been given to let down the gates or other contrivances
located at the crossing of any street by a steam railway track in the City, or
whenever gates or contrivances are in fact down for the approach of any engine,
train or handcar which is crossing or about to cross any such street, no person
shall go or stand within the enclosure made by such gates or contrivances so
let down or about to be let down, and nor shall any person ride, push, draw,
back, lift, place or drive any horse, cart, wagon, velocipede, bicycle or other
vehicle within the enclosure made as aforesaid, or upon or against the gates or
contrivances after such signal has been given or the gates or contrivances are
in the act of being let down, or are in fact down.
§ 631.04 Minimum Distance from Track after Warning
   Whenever a warning or protective device, such as electrically operated wig-
wag or flash signals located at the crossing of any street by steam railway
tracks in the City, is in operation, no person shall go or stand within ten
(10) feet of the nearest rail of the tracks or ride, push, draw, back, lift,
place or drive any horse, cart, vehicle, velocipede, bicycle, automobile or
other vehicle within ten (10) feet of the nearest rail.
(Ord. No. 87724. Passed 7-29-29)
§ 631.05 Use of Bell on Locomotive
   Every railroad company having the ownership or control of any locomotive
running within the City limits, shall furnish such locomotive with a bell. Any
engineer or other person having in charge a locomotive running within the City
limits shall have the bell rung, while running between the Cuyahoga River and
any railroad depot north of Front Street, or while crossing any of the streets
or alleys of the City, which streets or alleys are used by vehicles or
pedestrians.
§ 631.06 Unnecessary Obstruction of Streets
   (a)   No railroad company, conductor, engineer or other person in the employ
of any railroad company shall permit any locomotive car or train of cars, to
stand on any street, lane or alley of the City, for a period of time longer
than five (5) minutes when such street, lane or alley is at a railroad crossing
used by vehicles or pedestrians, except that they may be permitted to stand on
the northerly half of Front Street. No railroad company shall keep standing on
any track or sidetrack, empty or loaded cars or engine, nearer than fifty (50)
feet from the nearest side line of streets so crossed by railroad company
tracks. However, this requirement shall not interfere with the necessary
stoppage when attached to an engine engaged in the actual work of switching
cars and making up and dividing trains and the handling of freight therein, nor
with such cars of engines when unloading or loading passengers, freight, fuel
or water at any established place of business, fuel stand or water tank.
   (b)   No railroad company, conductor, engineer or other person in the employ
of any railroad company shall obstruct, or permit to be obstructed, a public
street, road or highway or a private road used as the primary means of ingress
and egress by a landowner or business enterprise by permitting a railroad car,
locomotive, or other obstruction to remain upon or across it for a continuous
period of more than twenty- five (25) minutes.
   (c)   No railroad company, conductor, engineer or other person in the employ
of any railroad company shall permit any locomotive to stand for longer than
thirty (30) minutes within one hundred (100) feet of the property line of any
residential parcel while its engine is running or idling.
   (d)   This section does not apply to obstruction of a public street, road,
or highway by a continuously moving through train or when the obstruction is
caused by circumstances wholly beyond the control of the railroad company, but
does apply to other obstructions, including without limitation those caused by
stopped trains and trains engaged in switching, loading or unloading
operations.
(Ord. No. 551-2000. Passed 7-17-00, eff. 7-25-00)
§ 631.07 Operation on Drawbridges
   No person in charge of any train of cars, part of a train, car or locomotive
shall permit the same to remain stationary upon any drawbridge, or upon any
device or appliance controlling or affecting the opening or closing of any such
bridge. No such train of cars, part of a train, car or locomotive shall, while
crossing such bridge, or passing over or upon any such device or appliance
aforesaid, be permitted to come to a stop unless necessary. Whenever in such
case any such train of cars or part of a train, car or locomotive for any
reason cannot continue in a forward direction across and off such bridge,
device or appliance, such train of cars, part of a train, car or locomotive
shall be immediately backed off of such bridge, device or appliance; and
provided further, that after the proper signals for the opening of any such
bridge have been given, no more than one (1) train of cars, part of a train,
car or locomotive going in the same direction shall be passed over any such
bridge, device or appliance, until such bridge, device or appliance has been
moved and returned to its position.
§ 631.08 Rules and Regulations for Railroads
   All railroad companies having a track or tracks within the City, together
with their employees, shall be governed by the following rules and regulations:
   (a)   No locomotive, car or train of cars shall cross or enter upon any
street within the City limits at a greater speed than thirty-five (35) miles an
hour, nor at a less rate of speed than three (3) miles per hour;
   (b)   No train of cars shall cross any of the streets within the City
without sufficient motive power attached, to start and stop the train without
delay, nor shall any train of cars or locomotive be stopped across the streets,
except as provided in Section
631.06. When any train or cars shall, by unavoidable accident, be stopped
across any street, the train shall be at once cut, so as to clear the crossing;
   (c)   No engine shall run across any street with open cylinder cocks, nor
shall cylinder cocks be opened while any engine is on a street;
   (d)   After one (1) locomotive, train of cars or section of a train, has
crossed any street, no other locomotive or cars shall be permitted to cross
until all detained persons have had full time to cross, as may be determined by
the police in the neighborhood;
   (e)   Safety gates shall not be lowered nor protective devices placed in
operation, nor flags, targets or lights exhibited upon crossings until the
approaching train has arrived within two thousand five hundred (2,500) feet of
the crossing; provided that such gates shall be lowered or protective devices
put in operation before the engine or train reaches a point one thousand
(1,000) feet from the nearest side line of the street or crossing;
   (f)   All locomotives operated within the limits of the City shall be
equipped as necessary with screens or other devices sufficient to prevent the
escape of sparks from the engine.
(Ord. No. 89178. Passed 2-17-30)
§ 631.09 Installation of Automatic Gates and Flash Signals
   (a)   Each of the following railroad companies, their successors and assigns
shall install and maintain at their own cost and expense proper automatic gates
or flash signals, or both, at the crossings of such railroad companies, and the
streets and avenues as herein set forth, all to the satisfaction of the
Director of Public Safety:
      (1)   Penn Central Railroad:
         E. 38th St.;
         E. 40th St.;
         E. 49th St.;
         E. 53rd St.;
         Marquette Ave. and E. 70th St.;
         E. 72nd St.;
         E. 99th St.;
         Fischer Rd.;
         Coit Rd.;
         Eddy Rd.;
         Lakewood Heights Blvd.;
         Puritas Ave.;
         Puritas Springs Rd.;
         W. 140th St.;
         W. 150th St.
      (2)   Norfolk and Western Railroad Company:
         Broadway Ave.;
         E. 75th St.;
         Jennings Rd.
      (3)   Erie-Lackawanna Railroad Company:
         E. 65th St.;
         E. 116th St.;
         Lee Rd.;
         Columbus Rd.
      (4)   Nickel Plate Railroad Company:
         W. 110th St.;
         W. 117th St.
      (5)   Baltimore and Ohio Railroad Company:
         Jennings Rd.
   (b)   The Director shall see that the requirements of this section are fully
complied with. Upon failure of any of the foregoing railroad companies to
comply with the provisions contained herein within thirty (30) days after
notice thereof, the Director is hereby authorized to install or order the same
done and charge the cost thereof, as well as the cost of maintenance, to such
company. Such cost shall be made a lien upon the property of the company as
provided by law.
(Ord. No. 1132-46. Passed 6-10-46)
§ 631.10 Enforcement
   All police officers are authorized and shall enforce the rules and
regulations contained in this chapter.
§ 631.11 Crossing Signs
   Each railroad company whose track is located within the limits of the City,
shall place at the crossings of all streets designated by the Director of
Public Service, and within thirty (30) days after receiving notice to that
effect from the Director, a conspicuous painted sign, calling attention to the
passing of cars and locomotives while the bell is ringing.
§ 631.12 Occupied Streets to be Cleaned by Railroads
   All railroad companies occupying in whole or in part any street within the
limits of the City, are required to clean all such streets so occupied at least
three (3) times per year, or more often if required by the Director of Public
Service. Upon failure of any railroad company to comply with this section, the
Commissioner of Streets is hereby authorized to clean any street so occupied,
at such company’s expense.
§ 631.13 Permit to Establish Crossings
   For the construction of tracks crossing any street by any railroad company,
the permission to cross such street as granted by the City shall conform to the
requirements and conditions contained in this chapter, and such other
conditions as Council may impose.
§ 631.14 Roadway Maintenance near Tracks
   Every railroad company to which a permit has been issued to occupy or cross
any street by its tracks shall be required to maintain the area of such street
so occupied or crossed, including a space one (1) foot beyond each rail or the
outer rail in case of more than one (1) track, in a state of repair equal to
that maintained upon the street in the vicinity of such tracks. Upon failure to
undertake to make any repairs ordered in writing by the Director of Public
Service, within ten (10) days after receipt of such notice by any railroad
company, the Director shall cause such repairs to be made forthwith at the
expense of the railroad company.
(Ord. No. 2479-45. Passed 12-17-45)
§ 631.15 Notice; Removal of Tracks
   Every railroad company to which a permit has been issued to occupy or cross
any street by its tracks, upon written notice from the Director of Public
Service, pursuant to an ordinance or resolution of Council that such permit has
been revoked, shall proceed within ten (10) days thereafter to undertake to
remove such tracks. Upon failure to do so, the Director shall forthwith proceed
with the removal of the tracks at the expense of the railroad company.
(Ord. No. 2479-45. Passed 12-17-45)
§ 631.16 Lighting Crossings at Grade
   Any railroad company operating within the City within twenty (20) days after
service of notice as provided for in Section
631.19, shall light that portion of its railroad where the same intersects
public streets or thoroughfares at grade.
(Ord. No. 307-A-44. Passed 10-2-44)
§ 631.17 Manner and Time of Lighting
   The manner of lighting shall be by electric street lights, consisting of the
installation of proper wiring, standards, luminaries and lamp sizes of the
ordinary kind maintained by the Bureau of Street Lighting at the particular
locations, or such deviation therefrom as may be requested by the railroad
company and consented to by the Director of Public Properties. The lights shall
be kept lighted during all of the hours provided in the City schedule for
lighting public street lights.
(Ord. No. 307-A-44. Passed 10-2-44)
§ 631.18 Lighting of Bridges, Structures and Underpasses
   If, as a result of elimination of a crossing at grade, the contract between
the City and the railroad company provides for lighting the underpass, bridge
or other structure resulting from such grade elimination, the railroad company
shall maintain such lighting as provided in Section
631.17 and in accordance with such contract. Every contract hereafter made for
the elimination of grade crossings shall contain a provision requiring the
railroad company to light, at its own expense, all underpasses, bridges and
structures resulting from the elimination of such crossing at grade.
(Ord. No. 307-A-44. Passed 10-2-44)
§ 631.19 Notice to Install Lights
   If any railroad company operating within the City fails to provide the
lights provided for herein within twenty (20) days from written notice thereof,
then the Director of Public Properties shall install the lights or order the
same done and charge the cost thereof to such company. Such cost shall be made
a lien upon the property of the company as provided by law.
(Ord. No. 307-A-44. Passed 10-2-44)
§ 631.20 Evidence of Compliance with Lighting Regulations
   As evidence of compliance, any railroad company operating within the City
shall cause to be filed with the Director of Public Properties, a copy of each
and every contract, duly authenticated, made for the lighting of crossings at
grade, underpasses, bridges and other structures within the City, and shall
submit such other and additional proof that provision has been made therefor as
the Director may require.
(Ord. No. 307-A-44. Passed 10-2-44)
§ 631.21 Conditions when Railroad Relieved of Lighting Requirements
   The Director of Public Properties may, upon written petition, exonerate a
railroad company from the necessity of complying with the provisions of
Sections
631.16 to
631.18, if the volume of travel over the crossing or the presence of the bridge
or crossing does not constitute a substantial hazard to the general public, or
when lighting or additional lighting will not promote the safety of the general
public. Nothing herein shall authorize the Director to relieve the railroad
company from the duty to light where a grade crossing has been eliminated and
the lighting thereof provided for by contract.
(Ord. No. 307-A-44. Passed 10-2-44)
§ 631.22 Crossings Regulated
   No person, firm or corporation shall construct, maintain or use any railroad
or switch track, in, on or across any street, alley or other public way of the
City, except in compliance with the requirements of Sections
631.22 to
631.25. However, such sections shall not be held to apply to any street
railroad tracks included within the terms of any franchise to which the City is
a party.
(Ord. No. 76084. Passed 11-23-26)
§ 631.23 Railroad or Switch Track Construction Permit Application and Fee
   Every person, firm or corporation desiring to construct, maintain or operate
any railroad or switch track in, on or across any street, alley or other public
way shall file an application with the Director of Public Service, setting
forth the place or places at which it is desired to construct such railroad
tracks, the number of tracks to be laid, the period of time during which it is
desired to maintain such tracks and such other information as may be required
by the Director. Such application shall be accompanied by a drawing, in
triplicate, showing the proposed construction to the satisfaction of the
Director. Each application shall be accompanied by a fee of fifty dollars
($50.00). This section shall not be construed to require the filing of plans
and the payment of fees for permanent railroad and switch tracks existing at
the time of its enactment.
(Ord. No. 76084. Passed 11-23-26)
§ 631.24 Permit for More than One Year Granted by Ordinance; Bond
   No permit for the construction, maintenance or use of any railroad or switch
track in, on or across any street, alley or other public way shall be granted
for longer than one (1) year except by ordinance, particularly describing the
streets, alleys or other public ways to be occupied thereunder, setting forth
terms and conditions of such permit, including provisions for its forfeiture or
revocation in case of switch tracks or temporary tracks, if any bond is to be
required, fixing the amount and conditions of bond to be given to secure the
maintenance and safe operation of such tracks and the restoration of the street
upon the termination of the permit, and to indemnify the City against any loss
by reason of the construction, maintenance or operation of such railroad or
switch track.
(Ord. No. 76084. Passed 11-23-26)
§ 631.25 Permit for Temporary Use; Bond
   When the application provided for in Section
631.23 is for temporary use of a street, alley or other public way, by
constructing, maintaining and using a railroad or switch track in, on or across
the same for a period of not more than one (1) year, the Director of Public
Service may issue a permit therefor, subject to such conditions and
specifications in the interest of the public safety and convenience as he or
she shall in each instance deem necessary. Each permit shall be subject to
forfeiture or revocation at any time by the Director of Public Service, either
by reason of any violation of its terms or of other considerations in the
public interest. No permit shall be issued until the applicant has filed with
the City a proper bond, signed by a surety company authorized to do business in
the State, approved by the Director of Law, and conditioned to save the City
harmless from any claims for damages to person or property by reason of the
construction, maintenance or operation of such railroad or switch tracks, and
indemnifying the City for any costs incurred by it in the maintenance of any
part of the street, alley or other public way occupied by such railroad or
switch tracks, and for the cost of restoring such street, alley or other public
way to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Service, upon the termination
of such permit, in such amount not less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00)
as the Director of Public Service estimates and requires. The Director of
Public Service may at any time increase the amount of the bond so required, and
if such increase is not furnished within a reasonable time, he or she shall
thereupon revoke such permit. Any permit granted for a period of less than one
(1) year may be extended by the Director of Public Service for a period ending
not more than one (1) year from its original issuance, without additional fees.
Any temporary permit, the purposes of which have not been completed within one
(1) year from its original issuance, may upon the payment by the applicant of
fees as on the original application, be renewed once and no more, for an
additional period of not more than one (1) year, by the Director of Public
Service.
(Ord. No. 76084. Passed 11-23-26)
§ 631.26 Crossing Frogs
   Where any steam railroad and street railroad cross each other at grade, the
persons or companies operating the same shall, at their joint expense, put in
crossing frogs of the most improved pattern and keep the same in good
condition. A violator, in default of so doing after twenty (20) days’ notice in
writing on the order of the Director of Public Service, shall be subject to the
penalties provided in Section
631.99(h).
(Ord. No. 551-2000. Passed 7-17-00, eff. 7-25-00)
§ 631.27 Failure to Pay Fine
   No railroad company shall fail to pay a fine imposed pursuant to a violation
of division (b) of Section
631.06 within one hundred twenty (120) days of the date set by the court for
the payment of the fine. Each additional day beyond the one hundred twentieth
day of failure to pay a fine imposed under that section is a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 551-2000. Passed 7-17-00, eff. 7-25-00)
§ 631.99 Penalty
   (a)   Whoever violates Section
631.02 shall be fined five hundred dollars ($500.00). The employee or agent of
any corporation or company in charge of any locomotive or other device operated
in violation of Section
631.02 shall be subject to a like fine.
   (b)   Whoever violates Section
631.03 or
631.04 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and fined not less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) nor more than two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00).
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a) of Section
631.06 or Section
631.07 shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00).
   (d)   Whoever violates division (b) or division (c) of Section
631.06 shall be fined for a first offense five hundred dollars ($500.00) plus
an additional one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each minute that the violation
exceeds twenty five (25) minutes, except that the total amount of the fine for
a first offense shall not exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). Whoever
violates division (b) or division (c) of Section
631.06 shall be fined for a second or subsequent offense one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) plus an additional two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each minute
that the violation exceeds twenty five (25) minutes, except that the total
amount of the fine for a second or subsequent offense shall not exceed twenty
thousand dollars ($20,000.00). In addition to the fines specified above,
whoever violates division (b) or division (c) of Section
631.06 as a third or subsequent offense shall be sentenced to not less than ten
(10) days nor more than thirty (30) days imprisonment, or both.
   (e)   Whoever violates Section
631.09 shall be fined not less than seven hundred and fifty dollars ($750.00)
nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
   (f)   Any railroad company or any officer or employee of a railroad company
violating any of the provisions of Sections
631.01 to
631.12, for which no specific penalty is provided, shall be fined not less than
two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00).
   (g)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
Section
631.22 to
631.25 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and fined not more than seven hundred
and fifty dollars ($750.00) for a first offense, and not more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) for each subsequent offense.
   (h)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with Section
631.26 shall he or she fined not more than two hundred and fifty dollars
($250.00) for each offense, and one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each day the
offense is continued.
   (i)   If any person is found guilty of a first offense for violation of
Section
631.01 upon a finding that he or she operated a train within the City limits
faster than thirty-five (35) mph, such person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
of the fourth degree. On each subsequent offense within one (1) year after the
first offense, such person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
   (j)   Whoever violates Section
631.27 shall be fined ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for a first offense and
shall be fined twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) for a second or subsequent
offense.
(Ord. No. 551-2000. Passed 7-17-00, eff. 7-25-00)
CHAPTER 633 – OBSTRUCTION MARKING AND LIGHTING
633.01   Definitions
633.02   Installation Required; Notification Required; Federal Regulation
633.03   Governmental Agency Cooperation
633.04   Enforcement
633.99   Penalty
§ 633.01 Definitions
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   “Crane” shall mean a construction crane, derrick, rig or other
construction equipment with parts that extend or may be elevated to a height of
fifty (50) or greater.
   (b)   “Lighting” means use of lighting systems that meet specified
intensities, beam patterns, color, and flash rates as specified in the Federal
Aviation Administration Advisory Circular currently applicable.
   (c)   “Marking” means painting or coloring of an obstruction, as specified
in the Federal Aviation Administration Advisory Circular currently applicable.
   (d)   “Obstruction” shall mean a tower, antenna, or any temporary or
permanent object, including all appurtenances and roof structures, that reaches
an overall height of between one hundred and fifty (150) and two hundred (200)
feet above ground level or that exceeds any obstruction standard for objects
over two hundred (200) feet contained in 14 C.F.R. Part 77, Subpart C.
   (e)   “Operator” means contractor or construction company directly in
control of the crane or construction equipment.
(Ord. No. 2110-2000. Passed 2-12-01, eff. 2-20-01)
§ 633.02 Installation Required; Notification Required; Federal Regulation
   (a)   No person shall own or construct a new or existing obstruction that
exceeds an overall height of between one hundred and fifty (150) and two
hundred (200) feet without aviation safety marking and obstruction lighting.
Such aviation safety marking and obstruction lighting shall be consistent with
the current applicable requirements for structures greater than two hundred
(200) feet above ground level as prescribed by the Federal Aviation
Administration Advisory Circular currently applicable.
   (b)   No owner or operator of a crane shall leave a crane extended into the
air overnight to a height of fifty (50) feet or greater, unless the crane
contains aviation safety marking and obstruction lighting. Such aviation safety
marking and obstruction lighting shall be consistent with the current
applicable requirements for structures greater than two hundred (200) feet
above ground level as prescribed in the Federal Aviation Administration
Advisory Circular currently applicable.
   (c)   This chapter does not apply to towers, antennas, roof structures, or
other obstructions that exceed two hundred (200) feet which are otherwise
regulated by 14 C.F.R. Part 77.
   (d)   Any person applying to the City to own or construct a new or existing
obstruction shall provide written notice to the Director of Public Safety.
(Ord. No. 2110-2000. Passed 2-12-01, eff. 2-20-01)
§ 633.03 Governmental Agency Cooperation
   The Mayor shall annually request such governmental and educational agencies
having obstructions as defined in this chapter within the City of Cleveland to
cooperate and comply with this chapter.
(Ord. No. 1310-96. Passed 12-2-96, eff. 12-10-96)
§ 633.04 Enforcement
   The Commissioner of Building and Housing of the City shall have concurrent
jurisdiction with the Chief of Police to inspect the installation of any
aviation safety marking and obstruction lighting required pursuant to Section
633.02. If, upon inspection, a violation of Section
633.02 is found, the inspector shall issue a written notice of such violation
to the owner requiring the owner to conform to Section
633.02 within twenty-one (21) calendar days of issuance of such notice.
(Ord. No. 1310-96. Passed 12-2-96, eff. 12-10-96)
§ 633.99 Penalty
   Anyone who violates any provisions of Sections
633.02 or
633.03 shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor. For a second offense such person
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. On a third or subsequent
offense, such person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day
of a continuing violation shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 1310-96. Passed 12-2-96, eff. 12-10-96)
TITLE III: CONSUMER PROTECTION
   Chapter
641   Definitions
   Chapter
643   Enforcement, Orders and Penalty
   Chapter
645   Prescription Drug Prices
   Chapter
647   Unit Pricing
   Chapter
649   Gasoline Prices
   Chapter
651   Packaging and Labeling
   Chapter
653   Deceptive Advertising
   Chapter
655   Returns and Refunds
   Chapter
656   Layaway Agreements
   Chapter
657   Motor Vehicle Repairs
   Chapter
659   Predatory Lending
CHAPTER 641 – DEFINITIONS
641.01   Short Title
641.02   Appliances
641.03   Consumer
641.031   Consumer Transaction
641.04   Consumers Council
641.05   Manager
641.06   Goods
641.07   Merchant
641.08   Person
641.09   Services
641.10   Transaction
641.11   Unfair or Deceptive Trade Practices
641.12   Unconscionable Trade Practices
Cross-reference:
   Definitions for prescription drug prices, CO
645.01
   Unfair trade practices prohibited, CO
643.02
   Unit pricing definitions, CO
647.02
§ 641.01 Short Title
   This Title Three shall be known and may be cited as the Cleveland Consumer
Protection Code, and the term “this Code,” wherever used herein, means the
Cleveland Consumer Protection Code.
(Ord. No. 729-72. Passed 6-26-72, eff. 6-29-72)
§ 641.02 Appliances
   “Appliances” means any device or instrument operated by electricity, gas or
otherwise, and designed for personal, family or household use. Appliance
includes but is not limited to vacuum cleaners, televisions, tape recorders,
radios, record players or any other consumer equipment.
(Ord. No. 729-72. Passed 6-26-72, eff. 6-29-72)
§ 641.03 Consumer
   “Consumer” means a person who seeks or acquires real or personal property,
goods or services primarily for personal, family or household purposes.
(Ord. No. 729-72. Passed 6-26-72, eff. 6-29-72)
§ 641.031 Consumer Transaction
   “Consumer transaction” means a sale, lease, assignment, award by chance, or
other transfer of an item of goods, a service, a franchise, or an intangible,
to an individual for purposes that are primarily personal, family, or
household, or solicitation to supply any of these things. “Consumer
transaction” does not include transactions between persons, defined in RC
4905.03, and their customers; transactions between certified public accountants
or public accountants and their clients; transactions between attorneys,
physicians, or dentists and their clients or patients; and transactions between
veterinarians and their patients that pertain to medical treatment but not
ancillary services. “Consumer transaction” also does not include transactions
between persons, defined in RC 5725.01, including FDIC insured depository
institutions and their operating subsidiaries, and their customers unless
otherwise provided by federal or state law, statute, or rule.
(Ord. No. 1345-01. Passed 12-10-01, eff. 12-19-01 without the signature of the
Mayor)
§ 641.04 Consumers Council
   “Consumers Council” means the seven (7) member advisory board whose sole
function is to aid and assist the Director of Consumer Affairs in effectively
protecting the consumer public in the City.
(Ord. No. 729-72. Passed 6-26-72, eff. 6-29-72)
§ 641.05 Manager
   “Manager” means the Manager of the Office of Fair Housing and Consumer
Affairs, whenever used in this Code, unless specifically defined otherwise.
(Ord. No. 1329-10. Passed 12-6-10, eff. 12-6-10)
§ 641.06 Goods
   “Goods” means all movable things, wares, materials, merchandise, and
fixtures whether or not in existence at the time of the transaction except
money, securities and chattel paper, but including merchandise certificates.
(Ord. No. 1345-01. Passed 12-10-01, eff. 12-19-01 without the signature of the
Mayor)
§ 641.07 Merchant
   “Merchant” means a person who regularly deals in real or personal property,
goods or services in a manner which results or is intended to result in
consumer transactions. Merchant includes but is not limited to a seller,
lessor, manufacturer, his or her assigns or successors. Merchant includes all
other persons who are responsible for any act or practice prohibited by this
Code.
(Ord. No. 729-72. Passed 6-26-72, eff. 6-29-72)
§ 641.08 Person
   “Person” means any individual, partnership, partner, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents,
assigns, employees or successors.
(Ord. No. 729-72. Passed 6-26-72, eff. 6-29-72)
§ 641.09 Services
   “Services” means and includes, but is not limited to, work, labor, consumer
transactions privileges and all other accommodations which are primarily for
personal, family or household purposes.
(Ord. No. 1345-01. Passed 12-10-01, eff. 12-19-01 without the signature of the
Mayor)
§ 641.10 Transaction
   “Transaction” means any oral or written agreement, sale or bargain entered
into or intended to be entered into between a merchant and one (1) or more
consumers, whether or not it is a contract enforceable at law.
(Ord. No. 729-72. Passed 6-26-72, eff. 6-29-72)
§ 641.11 Unfair or Deceptive Trade Practices
   Unfair or deceptive trade practices are hereby declared to be unlawful and
prohibited. “Unfair or deceptive trade practices” means any act, omission or
practice undertaken by a merchant which is false, deceptive, fraudulent or
misleading and results in or is intended to result in a consumer transaction.
Unfair or deceptive trade practices include but are not limited to the
following:
   (a)   Passing off goods or services as those of another;
   (b)   Causing likelihood of confusion or of misunderstanding as to the
source, sponsorship, approval or certification of goods or services;
   (c)   Causing likelihood of confusion or of misunderstanding as to
affiliation, connection or association with, or certification by another;
   (d)   Using deceptive representations or designations of geographic origin
in connection with goods or services;
   (e)   Representing that goods or services have sponsorship, approval,
characteristics, ingredients, uses, benefits or quantities that they do not
have or that a person has a sponsorship, approval, status, affiliation or
connection that he or she does not have;
   (f)   Representing that goods are original or new if they are deteriorated,
altered, reconditioned, reclaimed, used or second-hand;
   (g)   Representing that goods or services are of a particular standard,
quality or grade, or that goods are of a particular style or model, if they are
of another;
   (h)   Disparaging the goods, services or business of another by false or
misleading representation of fact;
   (i)   Advertising goods or services with intent not to sell them as
advertised;
   (j)   Advertising goods or services with intent not to supply reasonably
expectable public demand unless the advertisement discloses a limitation of
quantity;
   (k)   Making false or misleading statements of fact concerning reasons for,
existence of or amounts of price reductions;
   (l)   Representing that the consumer transaction confers or involves rights,
remedies or obligations that it does not have or involve or which are
prohibited by law;
   (m)   Representing that a part, replacement or repair service is needed when
it is not;
   (n)   Representing that the subject of a consumer transaction has been
supplied in accordance with a previous representation when it is not;
   (o)   Causing likelihood of confusion or of misunderstanding with respect to
the authority of a salesman, representative or agent to negotiate the final
terms of a transaction with a consumer;
   (p)   Making false or misleading statements relating to determining the
value of real property or manufactured homes in a consumer transaction;
   (q)   Engaging in any other act or practice which similarly creates a
likelihood of deceiving or misleading the consumer;
   (r)   Definitions and specifications of unfair or deceptive trade practices
contained in rules and regulations promulgated by the Director;
   (s)   Any act, omission, or practice inconsistent with laws of the State of
Ohio, federal law, and rules and regulations promulgated under either State or
federal law, and decisions of the Federal Trade Commission, and Federal and
State courts, relating to consumer protection.
(Ord. No. 1345-01. Passed 12-10-01, eff. 12-19-01 without the signature of the
Mayor)
§ 641.12 Unconscionable Trade Practices
   Unconscionable trade practices are hereby declared to be unlawful and
prohibited. “Unconscionable trade practices” means any act, omission or
practice undertaken by a merchant which unfairly takes advantage of the lack of
knowledge, ability, experience or capacity of a consumer; or results in a gross
disparity between the value received by a consumer and the price paid, to the
consumer’s detriment. “Unconscionable trade practices” shall also mean any act
or practice declared unconscionable by statute, by regulation, by decision of a
judicial body or administrative body in the State of Ohio, or by a rule or
regulation promulgated by the regulation promulgated by the Director. In
promulgating such rules and regulations the Director shall consider among other
factors:
   (a)   Knowledge by merchants engaging in the act or practice of the
inability of consumers to receive properly anticipated benefits from the goods
or services involved;
   (b)   Gross disparity between the price of goods or services and their value
measured by the price at which similar goods or services are readily obtained
by other consumers;
   (c)   The fact that the acts or practices may enable merchants to take
advantage of the inability of consumers reasonably to protect their interests
by reason of physical or mental infirmities, illiteracy or inability to
understand the language of the agreement, ignorance or lack of education, or
similar factors;
   (d)   The degree to which terms of the transaction require consumers to
waive legal rights;
   (e)   The degree to which terms of the transaction require consumers to
jeopardize money or property beyond the money or property immediately at issue
in the transaction; and
   (f)   Definitions of unconscionability in statutes, regulations, rulings and
decisions of legislative, administrative or judicial bodies in this State or
elsewhere.
(Ord. No. 1345-01. Passed 12-10-01, eff. 12-19-01 without the signature of the
Mayor)
CHAPTER 643 – ENFORCEMENT, ORDERS AND PENALTY
643.01   Territorial Application
643.02   Unfair, Deceptive and Unconscionable Trade Practices Prohibited
643.03   Waivers and Disclaimers
643.04   Personnel
643.05   Duties of the Director of Consumer Affairs – Repealed
643.06   Rules and Regulations
643.07   Notice of Public Hearing on Proposed Rules
643.08   Tests to Determine Violations
643.09   Right of Entry
643.10   Recovery of Investigative Costs
643.11   Enforcement Actions and Consumer Remedies
643.12   Cease and Desist Orders
643.13   Assurances that Violations Will Cease
643.14   Conflict with Other City Ordinances
643.15   Effect on Other Remedies
643.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Enforcement of prescription drug price regulations, CO
645.04
   Gasoline price posting enforcement, CO
649.03
   Penalty for deceptive advertising, CO
653.99
   Penalty for packaging or labeling violation, CO
651.99
   Penalty for unit pricing violation, CO
647.99
   Penalty for violation of regulations regarding return of merchandise, CO
655.99
   Regulations for posting prescription drug prices, CO
645.03
   Unconscionable trade practices defined, CO
641.12
   Unfair trade practices defined, CO
641.11
§ 643.01 Territorial Application
   This Code applies to all consumer transactions which take place within the
City of Cleveland, regardless of the residence of any of the persons directly
or indirectly affected by such transaction.
(Ord. No. 729-72. Passed 6-26-72, eff. 6-29-72)
§ 643.02 Unfair, Deceptive and Unconscionable Trade Practices Prohibited
   No person shall engage in any unfair, deceptive or unconscionable consumer
trade practice in the sale, lease, rental or loan, or in the offering for sale,
lease, rental or loan of any consumer goods or services.
(Ord. No. 1345-01. Passed 12-10-01, eff. 12-19-01 without the signature of the
Mayor)
§ 643.03 Waivers and Disclaimers
   No agreement, whether oral or in writing, made within the City, may waive or
disclaim the jurisdiction, provisions, rules or regulations of this Code. Any
attempt to so waive or disclaim provisions of this Code is contrary to public
policy, of no effect and is void.
(Ord. No. 729-72. Passed 6-26-72, eff. 6-29-72)
§ 643.04 Personnel
   The Manager of Fair Housing and Consumer Affairs shall supervise such
personnel, as are needed to ensure the successful administration of this Code.
Such personnel shall carry out the direction of the Manager in all matters
relating to the enforcement of this Code and shall aid and assist the Manager
in the efficient discharge of his or her duties.
(Ord. No. 1329-10. Passed 12-6-10, eff. 12-6-10)
§ 643.05 Duties of the Director of Consumer Affairs – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1329-10. Passed 12-6-10, eff. 12-6-10)
§ 643.06 Rules and Regulations
   The Manager of Fair Housing and Consumer Affairs, under the supervision and
direction of the Director of Community Development and after having consulted
with the Consumer’s Council, and after having held a public hearing affording
interested persons an opportunity to be heard, may adopt, amend or alter
written rules and regulations of this Code to protect consumers, including
regulations defining specific unfair and unconscionable trade practices. Such
rules and regulations must be reviewed by the Director of Law and shall not
conflict with nor waive any provisions of this Code or any ordinance of the
City, or be inconsistent with the rules, regulations and decisions of the
Federal Trade Commission, the laws of the State or the decisions of Federal and
state courts relating thereto, nor shall they be the basis for criminal
prosecutions for violations of this Code. Such rules and regulations and
amendments thereto and alterations thereof shall become effective after two (2)
successive publications in the City Record. No rule or regulations shall be
adopted, amended or altered or of any effect without the prior approval and
consent of Council.
(Ord. No. 1329-10. Passed 12-6-10, eff. 12-6-10)
§ 643.07 Notice of Public Hearing on Proposed Rules
   Prior to the adoption, amendment or alteration of any rule or regulation,
the Manager of Fair Housing and Consumer Affairs shall give at least fourteen
(14) days’ notice of his or her intended action by publication in the City
Record setting forth the date, time and place of a public hearing and the
contents of the proposed rules or regulations to be acted upon.
(Ord. No. 1329-10. Passed 12-6-10, eff. 12-6-10)
§ 643.08 Tests to Determine Violations
   The Manager of Fair Housing and Consumer Affairs is authorized to conduct or
cause to be conducted any tests which in his or her judgment may aid in
demonstrating that violations of this Code have been or are likely to be
committed. The Manager shall require that all tests be conducted by reputable,
qualified personnel and that written reports be submitted to him or her for all
such tests. If the report substantiates that a violation of this Code exists,
the person responsible for the violation shall pay all costs for conducting the
tests.
(Ord. No. 1329-10. Passed 12-6-10, eff. 12-6-10)
§ 643.09 Right of Entry
   Any person who in any manner hinders, obstructs, delays, resists, prevents
or interferes with the Director or his or her representative in the performance
of his or her duty by refusing entrance at reasonable hours to any premises to
which this Code applies and is suspect of violation, or refuses to permit
testing, inspection or examination of such premises for the purpose of
enforcement of the provisions, rules or regulations of this Code, shall be
subject to such action as may be provided at law or by the provisions of this
Code.
(Ord. No. 729-72. Passed 6-26-72, eff. 6-29-72)
§ 643.10 Recovery of Investigative Costs
   In any civil action brought by the Director or his or her representative for
violations of this Code, the Director may recover all costs of testing and
investigation if he or she prevails in the action.
(Ord. No. 729-72. Passed 6-26-72, eff. 6-29-72)
§ 643.11 Enforcement Actions and Consumer Remedies
   (a)   All legal actions initiated by the Manager of Fair Housing and
Consumer Affairs to enforce this Code shall be brought by the Director of Law
upon written request by the Manager of Fair Housing and Consumer Affairs. In
addition to recovery of fines as provided by this Code, actions may be brought
for injunctive relief in any court of competent jurisdiction to restrain a
person from violating this Code or the rules or regulations pursuant thereto,
and to restrain a merchant from engaging in unfair, deceptive, fraudulent or
unconscionable conduct with consumers. To establish a cause of action under
this Code it need not be shown that consumers are being or were actually
damaged.
   (b)   The City or any person aggrieved by a violation of Title III, Consumer
Protection Code, may at any time within two (2) years from the date of the
alleged violation or within a reasonable time after the consumer discovers or
should have discovered the violation, whichever is later, may apply to any
court of competent jurisdiction for appropriate relief, including but not
limited to:
      (1)   Injunctive relief or an order otherwise compelling compliance with
this Code;
      (2)   Compensatory damages which may be trebled if the act, omission or
practice violates Sections
641.11 or
641.12, and/or punitive damages;
      (3)   Such other or further relief as is appropriate for the enforcement
of this Code and elimination and prevention of violations thereof.
   (c)   The court may award to the City or the complainant reasonable
attorneys’ fees and costs of litigation, and the City shall recover its
reasonable costs of investigation of the violation.
(Ord. No. 1329-10. Passed 12-6-10, eff. 12-6-10)
§ 643.12 Cease and Desist Orders
   If the Manager has reason to believe that a person has violated this Code,
he or she may order such person subject to this Code to cease and desist from
engaging in such violations or from engaging in unfair, deceptive, fraudulent
or unconscionable conduct. If after the order is made, a written request for
hearing is filed with the Director and no hearing is held within thirty (30)
days thereafter, the order is rescinded. Any determination or order made after
a full hearing by the Director, and any order if no hearing is requested within
thirty (30) days shall become a lawfully made final order and thereafter
subject to judicial review at law.
(Ord. No. 1329-10. Passed 12-6-10, eff. 12-6-10)
§ 643.13 Assurances that Violations Will Cease
   (a)   In lieu of instituting or continuing an action pursuant to this Code,
the Director may accept written assurance of discontinuance of any act or
practice in violation of this Code from the person or persons who have engaged
in such acts or practices. Such assurance may include stipulation for payment
by the violator for the costs of investigation by the Director and may also
include a stipulation for the restitution by the violator to the consumers of
money, property or other things received from them in connection with a
violation of this Code, including money necessarily expended in the course of
making and pursuing a complaint to the Director. All settlements shall be made
a matter of public record.
   (b)   Violation of an assurance entered into pursuant to this section shall
be treated as a violation of this Code, and shall be subject to all the
penalties provided therefor.
(Ord. No. 729-72. Passed 6-26-72, eff. 6-29-72)
§ 643.14 Conflict with Other City Ordinances
   In the event of a conflict between any provision of this Code and any other
ordinances of the City, the provisions of this Code shall prevail with the
exception of ordinances whose standards are more restrictive than those set out
in this Code.
(Ord. No. 729-72. Passed 6-26-72, eff. 6-29-72)
§ 643.15 Effect on Other Remedies
   The remedies in this Code, are in addition to remedies otherwise available
for the same conduct under federal, state or local law.
(Ord. No. 1345-01. Passed 12-10-01, eff. 12-19-01 without the signature of the
Mayor)
§ 643.99 Penalty
   (a)   No person shall violate or participate in the violation of any of the
provisions of this Code or rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto.
   (b)   Whoever violates any provision of this Code, for which no penalty is
otherwise provided and for which state law does not apply an exclusive civil
penalty, shall be fined not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00), nor more
than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) or imprisoned for not more than six (6)
months or both. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues.
   (c)   In addition to the above penalties any person who violates any
provision of this Code or any rules or regulations promulgated pursuant thereto
shall be subject to an order of a court of competent jurisdiction when
appropriate in granting equitable relief to insure justice with regard to the
transaction which is the subject of the violation of this Code or any rule or
regulation promulgated pursuant thereto.
   (d)   In addition to the penalties and remedies above, any person aggrieved
by any violation of this Code may pursue remedies authorized by Section
643.11 of this Code.
(Ord. No. 1345-01. Passed 12-10-01, eff. 12-19-01 without the signature of the
Mayor)
CHAPTER 645 – PRESCRIPTION DRUG PRICES
645.01   Definitions
645.02   Display of Prescription Drug Prices
645.03   Regulations and Exemptions
645.04   Failure to Post Prices; Enforcement
645.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Adulterated or misbranded drugs or cosmetics, CO
241.24
   Penalty, CO
643.99
   Regulations for unit pricing, CO
Ch. 647
   Unconscionable trade practices defined, CO
641.12
§ 645.01 Definitions
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   “Current selling prices” means the price to be paid by the retail
purchaser to the pharmacy for a prescription drug.
   (b)   “Prescription drugs” means any drug which may be dispensed only with a
physician’s prescription.
   (c)   “Pharmacy” means any retail outlet selling prescription drugs within
the City of Cleveland.
(Ord. No. 709-74. Passed 7-29-74, eff. 8-1-74)
§ 645.02 Display of Prescription Drug Prices
   Every pharmacy must post at each counter over which prescription drugs are
sold, a list conspicuously displaying the current selling price of the drugs by
their common generic and brand names designated on a form prescribed for that
purpose by the Office of Fair Housing and Consumer Affairs.
(Ord. No. 1329-10. Passed 12-6-10, eff. 12-6-10)
§ 645.03 Regulations and Exemptions
   The Manager of Fair Housing and Consumer Affairs shall promulgate
regulations, under Section
643.06, designating those prescription drugs which because of the frequency
with which they are prescribed, shall be posted under Section
645.02. The Manager may exempt from such regulation such drugs whenever he or
she finds that, because of the nature of such prescription drugs, compliance
with Section
645.02 is unreasonably burdensome and unnecessary for adequate protection of
consumers. The Manager shall promulgate such other regulations as shall be
necessary to effectuate the purposes of this chapter, including but not limited
to, requirements as to the manner of display of prescription drug prices and
other information related to prescription drugs.
(Ord. No. 1329-10. Passed 12-6-10, eff. 12-6-10)
§ 645.04 Failure to Post Prices; Enforcement
   Failure to post prices, as required in Section
645.02, constitutes an unconscionable trade practice under the provisions of
Section
641.12, and is otherwise subject to all the legal remedies and penalties
available to the Manager, who is authorized to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. No. 1329-10. Passed 12-6-10, eff. 12-6-10)
§ 645.99 Penalty
   (a)   Whoever violates any provisions of this chapter shall be subject to
the penalties provided In Section
643.99.
   (b)   In addition to the penalties above, any person aggrieved by any
violation of this chapter may pursue remedies authorized by Section
643.11 of this Code.
(Ord. No. 1345-01. Passed 12-10-01, eff. 12-19-01 without the signature of the
Mayor)
CHAPTER 647 – UNIT PRICING
647.01   Application
647.02   Definitions
647.03   Terms for Unit Pricing
647.04   Exemptions
647.05   Pricing
647.06   Presentation of Price
647.07   Explanatory Signs Required
647.08   Uniformity
647.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Packaging and labeling meat, CO
Ch. 651
   Prescription drug pricing regulations, CO
Ch. 645
   Unfair trade practices defined, CO
641.11
Statutory reference:
   Marketing standards, RC Ch. 925
§ 647.01 Application
   (a)   No retail establishment is required to provide unit price information.
Any retail establishment providing unit price information for consumer
commodities shall provide such unit price information in the manner required by
this chapter.
   (b)   In the event of a violation of this chapter by a retail establishment,
the manager or individual in charge of the retail establishment at the time of
the violation, and the person employing such manager or individual in charge,
shall both be deemed to be responsible for compliance with the requirements of
this chapter.
(Ord. No. 1061-12. Passed 8-8-12, eff. 10-1-12)
§ 647.02 Definitions
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   "Consumer commodity" or "commodity" means any food, drug, device,
cosmetic, product, or other commodity of any kind or class, that is customarily
necessary, or used, for personal, family, or household use and offered for sale
to an end consumer.
   (b)   "Unit price" or "unit price information" means the price of the
commodity on the basis of a unit of measure.
   (c)   "Infant formula" means a food that is offered for special dietary use
solely as a food for infants by reason of its simulation of human milk or
suitability as a complete or partial substitute for human milk.
   (d)   "Retail establishment" means a person dealing in consumer commodities.
(Ord. No. 1061-12. Passed 8-8-12, eff. 10-1-12)
§ 647.03 Terms for Unit Pricing
   The unit price of a commodity offered for sale by a retail establishment
shall be uniformly and consistently expressed in terms of::
   (a)   Price per kilogram or one hundred grams (100 g), or price per pound or
ounce, if the net quantity of contents of the commodity is in terms of weight.
   (b)   Price per liter or one hundred milliliters (100 ml), or price per dry
quart or dry pint, if the net quantity of contents of the commodity is in terms
of dry measure or volume.
   (c)   Price per liter or one hundred milliliters (100 ml), or price per
gallon, quart, pint, or fluid ounce, if the net quantity of contents of the
commodity is in terms of liquid volume.
   (d)   Price per individual unit or multiple units if the net quantity of
contents of the commodity is in terms of count.
   (e)   Price per square meter, square decimeter, or square centimeter, or
price per square yard, square foot, or square inch, if the net quantity of
contents of the commodity is in terms of area.
(Ord. No. 1061-12. Passed 8-8-12, eff. 10-1-12)
§ 647.04 Exemptions
   Commodities shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter when:
   (a)   Packaged in quantities measuring less than twenty eight grams (28 g)
(one ounce (1 oz)) or twenty nine milliliters (29 ml) (one fluid ounce (1 fl
oz)), or when the total retail price, excluding applicable tax, is fifty cents
($0.50) or less.
   (b)   Only one (1) brand and size of a commodity is offered for sale in the
retail establishment;
   (c)   The commodity is:
      (1)   Infant formula and the unit price is provided on the reconstituted
volume of the product.
      (2)   Medicine sold by prescription only.
      (3)   Beverages subject to packaging or labeling requirements imposed
under the Federal Alcohol Administration Act, as amended.
      (4)   Food sold for consumption on premises.
   (d)   The commodities are required to be marked individually with a unit
price under the laws of this State.
(Ord. No. 1061-12. Passed 8-8-12, eff. 10-1-12)
§ 647.05 Pricing
   (a)   If the unit price is over one dollar ($1.00), it shall be rounded to
the nearest cent.
   (b)   If the unit price is under one dollar ($1.00), it shall be listed to
the:
      (1)   Tenth of a cent; or
      (2)   Whole cent.
   (c)   In providing pricing information a retail establishment shall:
      (1)   Have the option of using division (b)(1) or (b)(2), but shall not
simultaneously implement both methods of pricing; and
      (2)   Accurately and consistently price all commodities using the same
method of rounding up or down to compute the unit price to the whole cent.
(Ord. No. 1061-12. Passed 8-8-12, eff. 10-1-12)
§ 647.06 Presentation of Price
   (a)   Unit price information shall be displayed by means of a sign that
offers the unit price for one (1) or more brands and/or sizes of a given
commodity, by means of a sticker, stamp, sign, label, or tag affixed to the
shelf upon which the commodity is displayed, or by means of a sticker, stamp,
sign, label, or tag affixed to the consumer commodity.
   (b)   Where a sign providing unit price information for one (1) or more
sizes or brands of a given commodity is used, that sign shall be displayed
clearly and in a non-deceptive manner in a central location as close as
practical to all items to which the sign refers.
   (c)   If a single sign or tag includes the unit price information for more
than one (1) brand or size of a given commodity, the following information
shall be provided:
      (1)   The identity and the brand name of the commodity;
      (2)   The quantity of the packaged commodity, if more than one (1)
package size per brand is displayed;
      (3)   The total retail sales price, excluding applicable tax; and
      (4)   The price per appropriate unit, in accordance with Section
647.03.
   (d)   Any stamp, tag, label or sign used to provide unit price information
may include a description of the commodity being sold and other stocking
information, provided that such information does not in any way obscure,
deemphasize or confuse the unit price information as specified in division (c)
of this section.
   (e)   The unit price shall be printed in bold figures which shall be clear,
conspicuous and legible.
(Ord. No. 1061-12. Passed 8-8-12, eff. 10-1-12)
§ 647.07 Explanatory Signs Required
   Any retail establishment providing unit price information shall
conspicuously post at least one (1) sign which shall clearly and legibly
explain the use of unit price information to the consumer. The unit price, as
used in examples on such signs, shall appear in type no smaller than that used
for the selling price in the examples.
(Ord. No. 1061-12. Passed 8-8-12, eff. 10-1-12)
§ 647.08 Uniformity
   (a)   If different brands or package sizes of the same consumer commodity
are offered for sale in different units of measure, the retail establishment
shall unit price the items consistently regardless of the unit of measure of
the package.
   (b)   When metric units appear on the consumer commodity in addition to
other units of measure, the retail establishment may include both units of
measure on any stamps, tags, labels, signs, or lists.
(Ord. No. 1061-12. Passed 8-8-12, eff. 10-1-12)
§ 647.99 Penalty
   (a)   The City or any person aggrieved by a violation of this chapter may
pursue the remedies authorized by Section
643.11 of this Code.
   (b)   The remedies provided by division (a) of this section shall be the
exclusive remedy available under this chapter. Whoever violates any provision
of this chapter shall not be subject to the penalties provided in division (b)
of Section
643.99.
(Ord. No. 1061-12. Passed 8-8-12, eff. 10-1-12)
CHAPTER 649 – GASOLINE PRICES
649.01   Posting of Current Gasoline Prices
649.02   Information Required for Posting
649.03   Failure to Post Prices; Enforcement
649.04   Tire Inflation Equipment
649.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Unconscionable trade practices defined, CO
641.12
   Unfair trade practices defined, CO
641.11
§ 649.01 Posting of Current Gasoline Prices
   Every person, firm, copartnership, association or corporation engaged in the
retail sale of gasoline to the general public, shall post on the premises from
which such gasoline is sold, the then current selling price per gallon of
gasoline for each type and grade thereof. If prices for each type and grade of
gasoline differ within the same premises because of additional charges or
discounts resulting from services available on the premises, self-help of the
purchaser of the gasoline, bonuses or stamps available to consumers for reason
of purchasing their gas on the premises, or any other reason, these different
prices and the reason for the difference shall be posted in the same manner.
(Ord. No. 641-74. Passed 6-24-74, eff. 7-1-74)
§ 649.02 Information Required for Posting
   Posting of prices, as used in Section
649.01 shall include the type and grade of each gasoline sold or offered for
sale, at retail, on the premises, together with the respective prices per
gallon for each type and grade, such as “regular – $0.40 per gallon.” Posting
within the meaning of Section
649.01 shall be deemed accomplished within the meaning of this chapter, where
at least two (2) signs are conspicuously placed on the premises where gasoline
is sold, one (1) of which shall be above each island of gasoline pumps or pump,
as the case may be, or if such is not possible, then as near to the island or
pumps as possible, and one (1) sign secured to the window of the gasoline
service station building, if one (1) is on the premises. Signs shall be clear,
visible and legible to motorists traveling the streets and roadways immediately
adjacent to the gasoline station for a distance of at least one hundred (100)
feet in both directions on such roadways and streets.
(Ord. No. 641-74. Passed 6-24-74, eff. 7-1-74)
§ 649.03 Failure to Post Prices; Enforcement
   Failure to post prices as set forth in Sections
649.01 and
649.02 constitutes an unconscionable trade practice under the provisions of
Section
641.12, otherwise subject to all of the legal remedies and penalties available
to the Manager of Fair Housing and Consumer Affairs, who is authorized to
enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 1329-10. Passed 12-6-10, eff. 12-6-10)
§ 649.04 Tire Inflation Equipment
   Every person, firm, copartnership, association or corporation subject to
Section
649.01, shall, during the hours when such business is open to the general
public, have available on the premises equipment normally and customarily used
for inflating automobile tires, in good working order, and shall permit any
operator of an automobile to use such equipment upon request. Air pumps shall
be located to provide easy access for customer use.
(Ord. No. 1345-01. Passed 12-10-01, eff. 12-19-01 without the signature of the
Mayor)
§ 649.99 Penalty
   (a)   Whoever violates any provisions of this chapter shall be subject to
the penalties provided in Section
643.99.
   (b)   In addition to the penalties above, any person aggrieved by any
violation of this chapter may pursue remedies authorized by Section
643.11 of this Code.
(Ord. No. 1345-01. Passed 12-10-01, eff. 12-19-01 without the signature of the
Mayor)
CHAPTER 651 – PACKAGING AND LABELING
651.01   Standards for Packaging Meats
651.02   Permitted Material for Prepackaged Products; Restrictions
651.03   Enforcement; Exceptions
651.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Adulterated, misbranded and unsafe food, CO
241.23
   Unconscionable trade practices defined, CO
641.12
   Unfair trade practices defined, CO
641.11
Statutory reference:
   Adulterated, misbranded and unsafe food, RC 3715.52, 3715.59 et seq.
   Marketing standards, RC Ch. 925
§ 651.01 Standards for Packaging Meats
   Notwithstanding the provisions of the Consumer Protection Code, it shall not
be unlawful for any owner, manager or supervisor of a retail store or any
independently operated department within such a store to sell or offer for sale
fresh or frozen meat in such a package as is currently used in the industry,
including but not limited to the use of what is generically referred to as
“pulp” and “foam” trays.
(Ord. No. 1294-73. Passed 7-2-73, eff. 7-3-73)
§ 651.02 Permitted Material for Prepackaged Products; Restrictions
   On or after four (4) months from December 10, 1973, no owner, manager or
supervisor of a retail store or any independently operated department within
such a store shall sell, offer for sale or expose for sale at retail, on the
same premises where any fresh or frozen meat, fish, shellfish, poultry or any
produce, all herein after referred to as merchandise, are packaged, without
complying with the following:
   (a)   If the merchandise is packaged in a tray, the top of the package shall
be completely visible, exclusive of labeling, which may occupy not more than
ten percent (10%) of one (1) side of the package or a total of five (5) square
inches, whichever is greater.
   (b)   If the merchandise is packaged in a tray, the tray containing the
merchandise shall be constructed or manufactured so that at least seventy
percent (70%) of the bottom is transparent or open or slotted so as to make the
merchandise therein visible to the buyer. No material shall be used for
wrapping purposes which would otherwise obstruct the visibility of the
merchandise as set forth herein.
   The provisions of this section shall not apply to merchandise packaged at
the request of and in the immediate view of the buyer purchasing the specific
item.
(Ord. No. 2196-73. Passed 12-3-73, eff. 12-10-73)
§ 651.03 Enforcement; Exceptions
   The Manager of Fair Housing and Consumer Affairs shall enforce the
provisions of Section
651.02. The Manager may grant an extension of time for compliance with the
section where a written request supported by evidence of exceptional
circumstances and substantial efforts to comply prior to the effective date
would justify his or her finding that full compliance on or before the
effective date would be impossible or create undue financial hardship in the
particular instance.
(Ord. No. 1329-10. Passed 12-6-10, eff. 12-6-10)
§ 651.99 Penalty
   (a)   Whoever violates any provisions of this chapter shall be subject to
the penalties provided in Section
643.99.
   (b)   In addition to the penalties above, any person aggrieved by any
violation of this chapter may pursue remedies authorized by Section
643.11 of this Code.
(Ord. No. 1345-01. Passed 12-10-01, eff. 12-19-01 without the signature of the
Mayor)
CHAPTER 653 – DECEPTIVE ADVERTISING
653.01   Reserved
653.02   Untrue and Misleading Advertising
653.03   Failure to Advise of Inferior Merchandise
653.04   Defective, Rebuilt or Second-Hand Merchandise
653.99   Penalty
   Note: The legislative history of this chapter, except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 63410-A, passed
September 22, 1924.
Cross-reference:
   Unfair trade practices defined, CO
641.11
   Unconscionable trade practices defined, CO
641.12
Statutory reference:
   Power to regulate advertising, RC 715.65
§ 653.01 Reserved
§ 653.02 Untrue and Misleading Advertising
   No person, with intent to sell or in anywise dispose of goods or service, or
anything offered directly or indirectly to the public for sale or distribution,
or with intent to increase the consumption thereof, or to induce the public in
any manner to enter into any obligation relating thereto, shall make, publish,
disseminate, circulate or place before the public, or cause directly or
indirectly to be made, published, disseminated, circulated or placed before the
public, in the City of Cleveland, an advertisement of any sort regarding goods,
service or representation so offered to the public, which contains any
assertion, representation or statement which is untrue, deceptive or
misleading, or fails to disclose that the quantity is limited, if such is the
case.
(Ord. No. 1345-01. Passed 12-10-01, eff. 12-19-01 without the signature of the
Mayor)
§ 653.03 Failure to Advise of Inferior Merchandise
   (a)   No person, with intent to sell or in anywise dispose of merchandise
which is not of the recognized highest grade for such merchandise, shall fail,
neglect or refuse to advise the public of the exact quality of the merchandise
offered for sale, correctly stated in terms of the trade usage, plainly
discernable upon such merchandise or in or upon the counter, bin or other
receptacle from which it is offered to the public.
   (b)   Without prejudice to the generality of the prohibitions of this
section and the applicability thereof, the advertising or representing of
merchandise as imperfect, without stating the recognized trade designation of
quality, shall be deemed a violation of this section.
(Ord. No. 783-49. Passed 3-6-50)
§ 653.04 Defective, Rebuilt or Second-Hand Merchandise
   No person, firm or corporation, in any newspaper, magazine, circular, form
letter or any open publication, published, distributed or circulated in the
City, or on any billboard, car, label or other advertising medium, or by means
of any other method of advertising, shall advertise, call attention to or give
publicity to the sale of any merchandise, which merchandise is second- hand,
used or rebuilt merchandise, or which merchandise is defective in any manner,
or consists of articles, units or parts known as “seconds,” or blemished
merchandise, or which has been rejected by the manufacturer thereof as not
first class, unless there is conspicuously displayed directly in connection
with the name and description of such merchandise and each specified article,
unit or part thereof, a direct and unequivocal statement, phrase or word which
will clearly indicate that such merchandise or each article, unit or part
thereof so advertised is second-hand, used, rebuilt, defective, consists of
seconds, is blemished merchandise or has been rejected by the manufacturer
thereof, as the fact may be.
§ 653.99 Penalty
   (a)   Whoever violates any provisions of this chapter shall be subject to
the penalties provided in Section
643.99. Each fraudulent advertisement for the sale of such designated items or
materials constitutes a separate offense.
   (b)   In addition to the penalties above, any person aggrieved by any
violation of this chapter may pursue remedies authorized by Section
643.11 of this Code.
(Ord. No. 1345-01. Passed 12-10-01, eff. 12-19-01 without the signature of the
Mayor)
CHAPTER 655 – RETURNS AND REFUNDS
655.01   Regulations for Return of Purchased Merchandise
655.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Deceptive advertising, CO
Ch. 653
   Unfair trade practices defined, CO
641.11
§ 655.01 Regulations for Return of Purchased Merchandise
   No person who has sold any merchandise in any retail store in the City of
Cleveland shall refuse, except for reasons imposed by law, including State or
Municipal health codes, to accept for exchange, credit or refund the return
within five (5) business days of such merchandise, if the merchandise is in its
original condition and has not been altered at the customer’s request, and is
accompanied by the original sales slip, for exchange, credit or refund, unless
such merchandise has been sold pursuant to advertising clearly stating that
such merchandise is sold on final sale and not subject to return, or there is
posted prominently and conspicuously in such establishment a sign stating the
terms under which the nonreturnable merchandise is offered or sold, or both
offered and sold.
(Ord. No. 628-50. Passed 11-20-50)
§ 655.99 Penalty
   (a)   Whoever violates Section
655.01 shall be subject to the penalties provided in Section
643.99.
   (b)   In addition to the penalties above, any person aggrieved by any
violation of this chapter may pursue remedies authorized by Section
643.11 of this Code.
(Ord. No. 1345-01. Passed 12-10-01, eff. 12-19-01 without the signature of the
Mayor)
CHAPTER 656 – LAYAWAY AGREEMENTS
656.01   Definitions
656.02   Execution of Agreement
656.03   Contents of Layaway Agreement
656.04   Duties of Seller
656.05   Default by Buyer; Cancellation of Agreement Before Default
656.99   Penalty
Cross-references:
   Failure to advise of inferior merchandise, CO
653.03
   Unfair trade practices prohibited, CO
643.02
Statutory reference:
   Consumer sales practices, RC Ch. 1345
   Trade practices generally, RC Ch. 1333
§ 656.01 Definitions
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   “Cash price” means the retail selling price for which goods subject to
a layaway agreement may be purchased for cash from the seller by the buyer at
the time of the execution of the layaway agreement.
   (b)   “C.O.D. transaction” means an agreement by which the seller requires
the buyer to pay the full cash price of the goods upon delivery or tender of
delivery by the seller, less any down payment made by the buyer. A C.O.D.
transaction does not include an agreement by which the seller requires the
buyer to pay interim payments before such delivery or tender of delivery.
   (c)   “Consumer” and “buyer” shall have the meaning ascribed to the word
“consumer” in Section
641.03.
   (d)   “Goods” shall have the meaning ascribed in Section
641.06, except for purposes of this chapter, goods shall not include motor
vehicles.
   (e)   “Merchant” and “seller” shall have the meaning ascribed to the word
“merchant” in Section
641.07.
   (f)   “Layaway agreement” means a written contract for the retail sale of
goods negotiated or entered into in the City between a consumer and a merchant,
under this or any other name, under which:
      (1)   Part or all of the layaway price is payable in one (1) or more
payments subsequent to the making of the layaway agreement;
      (2)   The goods are specific existing goods identified from the seller’s
stock or inventory at the time of the making of the layaway agreement;
      (3)   The seller retains possession of such goods until the layaway price
is paid in full.
   “Layaway agreement” includes a “special order transaction,” as defined in
subsection (j) hereof. “Layaway agreement” does not include a bona fide C.O.D.
transaction, as defined in subsection (b) hereof.
   (g)   “Layaway charge” means a charge assessed to the buyer for exercising
the layaway option.
   (h)   “Layaway price” means the sum of the cash price, service charges and
assessed taxes.
   (i)   “Service charge” means any fee charged to the buyer in addition to the
cash price of the goods, excluding taxes.
   (j)   “Special order transaction” means a contract negotiated or entered
into for the retail sale of goods under which such goods:
      (1)   Are ordered by the buyer to his or her unique specifications;
      (2)   Are not carried by the seller, either in the seller’s showroom or
warehouse;
      (3)   Are ordered from a manufacturer or supplier; and
      (4)   Are not resalable by the seller at the sale price negotiated with
the buyer; or
      (5)   Have been altered at the request of the buyer so that the goods are
no longer salable to the general public.
(Ord. No. 2825-90. Passed 12-17-90, eff. 12-21-90)
§ 656.02 Execution of Agreement
   A layaway agreement shall be in writing, contain all of the agreements of
the parties and be signed and dated by all of the parties thereto.
(Ord. No. 1732-85. Passed 10-21-85, eff. 10-23-85)
§ 656.03 Contents of Layaway Agreement
   No merchant shall accept payment from a consumer to be applied to the
purchase of goods on a layaway plan without first clearly and conspicuously
disclosing to the consumer, in a layaway agreement, the following information:
   (a)   The full name and post office address of the seller;
   (b)   A description of the goods to be purchased on the layaway plan,
including, as appropriate, the type of item, the name of the manufacturer, and
the brand name, color, size, style and model number of such goods;
   (c)   The cash price of such goods;
   (d)   A specific itemization of service charges, including, but not limited
to, any layaway charge (not to exceed three percent (3%) of the cash price of
the goods or five dollars ($5.00), whichever is greater) and charges for
delivery, installation, assembly, repair or other services to the goods, which
are separate from the cash price;
   (e)   The layaway price;
   (f)   The amount of the buyer’s down payment, together with a statement of
the respective amounts credited for cash or credits, the agreed value of any
goods to be traded in and a description of such goods;
   (g)   The total sum which remains owing by the buyer to the seller, the
number of installment payments, the amount of such payments, the dates by which
such payments are due, and any penalties for late payment where the buyer is
not in default;
   (h)   A clear and concise statement of circumstances constituting buyer
default and all consequences of such default, including any imposition of
liquidated damages, as permitted under paragraphs (d), (e) and (f) of Section
656.05. The statement shall further include the following:
      (1)   The buyer will not be in default until a required payment remains
unpaid for at least thirty (30) days after the scheduled payment date, as
provided in paragraph (a) of Section
656.05;
      (2)   Where the layaway agreement contains a liquidated damages clause,
the buyer shall not be in default until at least ten (10) days after the seller
mails notice of default to the buyer, as provided in paragraph (b) of Section
656.05;
      (3)   Where the layaway agreement does not contain a liquidated damages
clause, or if the layaway price of the specific goods subject to the layaway
arrangement is one hundred dollars ($100.00) or less, the seller is not
required to mail notice of default as a prerequisite to the buyer’s default, as
provided in paragraph (c) of Section
656.05; and
      (4)   Upon default, the seller may cancel the layaway agreement as
provided in paragraphs (1)-(3) above and in paragraph (d) of Section
656.05; and
   (i)   A clear and conspicuous statement of the buyer’s right to cancel such
layaway agreement as provided in paragraph (f) of Section
656.05.
(Ord. No. 2825-90. Passed 12-17-90, eff. 12-21-90)
§ 656.04 Duties of Seller
   (a)   The seller shall give the buyer an exact copy of the signed layaway
agreement at the time the agreement is executed.
   (b)   Upon execution of a layaway agreement, the seller shall hold for the
buyer, or agree to deliver to the buyer, upon full payment of the layaway
price, goods that are identical in every respect to those originally selected
by the buyer, provided that the buyer complies with all the terms of the
layaway agreement.
   (c)   The seller shall bear the risk of loss or damage while holding the
goods purchased pursuant to a layaway agreement.
   (d)   Whenever a payment is made on a layaway agreement account, the seller
shall give the buyer a dated receipt evidencing such payment.
   (e)   If the buyer requests the status of the layaway account, the seller,
within ten (10) days after such request, shall give the buyer a written
statement setting forth:
      (1)   The total cost of the layaway transaction;
      (2)   The total amount paid by the buyer to date; and
      (3)   The balance due to the seller and the date by which remaining
payments are due.
   (f)   The seller may not increase the layaway price of goods sold under a
layaway agreement.
   (g)   Upon the seller’s breach of any of the seller’s duties, the seller
shall give to the buyer a full refund in cash or by due bill, at the option of
the buyer.
(Ord. No. 1732-85. Passed 10-21-85, eff. 10-23-85)
§ 656.05 Default by Buyer; Cancellation of Agreement Before Default
   (a)   No buyer shall be in default under a layaway agreement until a
required payment remains unpaid for at least thirty (30) days after the
scheduled payment date.
   (b)   If the seller’s layaway agreement includes a liquidated damages clause
as permitted in paragraph (e) of this section, the buyer shall not be in
default until at least ten (10) days after the seller mails a notice of the
default to the last known address of the buyer. The notice shall be mailed
using certified mail, return receipt requested, or by regular mail evidenced by
a properly completed and stamped certificate of mailing by regular mail. Such
notice shall state:
      (1)   The fact that the buyer has failed to comply with the layaway
arrangements;
      (2)   In what manner the buyer has failed to comply with the layaway
arrangement;
      (3)   The date upon which the buyer will be in default should payment not
be forthcoming;
      (4)   The amount of money which must be paid by the buyer to avoid
default; and
      (5)   The exact consequences of the buyer’s default.
   (c)   If the seller’s layaway agreement does not include a liquidated
damages clause, or if the layaway price of the specific goods subject to the
layaway arrangement is one hundred dollars ($100.00) or less, no written notice
need be sent to the buyer as a prerequisite to the buyer’s default.
   (d)   Upon the buyer’s default, the seller may cancel the layaway agreement
and the balance of the monies paid shall be refunded by the seller to the
buyer. Where the layaway agreement contains a liquidated damages provision,
cancellation shall be in accordance with paragraph (b) of this section, and the
seller may recover liquidated damages as permitted in paragraph (e) of this
section.
   (e)   If the buyer defaults under a layaway agreement, and the agreement
contains a liquidated damages provision, the seller may retain as liquidated
damages an amount not to exceed the lesser of twenty- five dollars ($25.00) or
ten per cent (10%) of the cash price of the goods subject to the layaway
agreement. Any balance due to the buyer shall be refunded by the seller in cash
or by due bill at the option of the buyer.
   (f)   The buyer may, at any time before delivery or tender of delivery, and
before default, cancel the layaway agreement. In such event, the seller may
retain from the refund due the buyer liquidated damages in an amount not to
exceed the layaway charge plus the lesser of either twenty-five dollars
($25.00) or ten per cent (10%) of the cash value of the goods subject to the
layaway agreement. The balance shall be refunded by the seller to the buyer in
cash or by due bill at the option of the buyer.
   (g)   Unless otherwise provided in the layaway agreement, paragraphs (d),
(e) and (f) of this section do not apply to a special order transaction.
(Ord. No. 1345-01. Passed 12-10-01, eff. 12-19-01 without the signature of the
Mayor)
§ 656.99 Penalty
   (a)   Whoever violates any provisions of this chapter shall be subject to
the penalties provided in Section
643.99.
   (b)   In addition to the penalties above, any person aggrieved by any
violation of this chapter may pursue remedies authorized by Section
643.11 of this Code.
(Ord. No. 1345-01. Passed 12-10-01, eff. 12-19-01 without the signature of the
Mayor)
CHAPTER 657 – MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIRS
657.01   Definitions
657.02   Maintenance of Records
657.03   Notice of Storage Policy
657.04   Regulations Governing Motor Vehicle Repairs or Services
657.05   Registration of Motor Vehicle Repair Persons; Fee; Renewal
657.99   Penalty
§ 657.01 Definitions
   For purposes of this chapter:
   (a)   “Motor vehicle repair garage” shall mean a business or individual
regularly engaged in the repair of motor vehicles, except:
      (1)   A business which performs motor vehicle servicing solely to the
extent of fueling, checking fluid levels, replacing filters, and other minor
servicing functions;
      (2)   A garage or shop engaged exclusively in repairing the motor
vehicles of its own fleet.
   (b)   “Repair” shall mean mechanical repairs, service, maintenance,
alterations, diagnostic testing or body work, or the addition of equipment,
supplies or parts to a motor vehicle.
   (c)   “Motor vehicle repair person” shall mean any person who performs
repairs, as defined in division (b) of this section, for compensation, other
than a person who performs repairs only on his or her motor vehicle or vehicles
or while in the employ of an entity described in division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of
this section.
(Ord. No. 2297-90. Passed 11-5-90, eff. 11-9-90)
§ 657.02 Maintenance of Records
   Every person who operates a motor vehicle repair garage shall keep records
which shall include all work orders, estimates and invoices of all consumers
for whom motor vehicle repairs have been performed. Such records shall be made
available for inspection and copying by the Director or his or her designee for
not less than two (2) years after their creation. Upon request by a consumer
and payment of a reasonable cost therefor, a motor vehicle repair garage shall
provide the documents maintained by the motor vehicle repair garage which
reflect any transaction to which said consumer was a party.
(Ord. No. 2297-90. Passed 11-5-90, eff. 11-9-90)
§ 657.03 Notice of Storage Policy
   Each motor vehicle repair garage shall give reasonable notice of its policy
on storage charges. It shall be prima facie evidence of such notice if there is
posted in a conspicuous place within the motor vehicle repair garage, a legible
sign stating its storage charge policy; provided that no charge shall accrue or
be due and payable for a period of forty-eight (48) hours (two (2) business
days) from the date of notification to a consumer that the repair of the
consumer’s motor vehicle has been completed.
(Ord. No. 2297-90. Passed 11-5-90, eff. 11-9-90)
§ 657.04 Regulations Governing Motor Vehicle Repairs or Services
   (a)   In connection with a consumer transaction involving a motor vehicle
repair or any service on a motor vehicle where the anticipated cost exceeds
twenty five dollars ($25.00) and there has been face-to- face contact at the
supplier’s place of business during the hours such repairs or services are
offered, between the consumer or his or her representative and the supplier or
his or her representative, prior to the commencement of the repair, no supplier
shall:
      (1)   Fail, at the time of initial face-to-face contact and prior to the
commencement of any repair or service, to provide the consumer with a form
which indicates the date, the identity of the supplier, the consumer’s name and
phone number, the reasonably- anticipated completion date, and, if the consumer
chooses to be provided with a written estimate, the anticipated cost of the
repair or service. The form shall also clearly and conspicuously contain a
disclosure in substantially the following language:
   ESTIMATE
   You have the right to an estimate if the expected cost of repairs or
services will be more than Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00). Your bill will not be
higher than the estimate by more than ten percent (10%) unless you approve a
larger amount before repairs are finished. Initial your choice:
      __________ Written Estimate
      __________ Oral Estimate
      __________ No Estimate
      (2)   Fail to post a sign in a conspicuous place within that area of the
supplier’s place of business to which consumers requesting any repair or
service are directed by the supplier or to give the consumer a separate form at
the time of the initial face to face contact and prior to the commencement of
any repair or service which clearly and conspicuously contains the following
language:
   NOTICE
   IF THE EXPECTED COST OF A REPAIR OR SERVICE IS MORE THAN TWENTY-FIVE DOLLARS
($25.00), YOU HAVE THE RIGHT TO RECEIVE A WRITTEN ESTIMATE OR ORAL ESTIMATE, OR
YOU CAN CHOOSE TO RECEIVE NO ESTIMATE BEFORE WE BEGIN WORK. YOUR BILL WILL NOT
BE HIGHER THAN THE ESTIMATE BY MORE THAN TEN PERCENT (10%) UNLESS YOU APPROVE A
LARGER AMOUNT BEFORE REPAIRS ARE FINISHED. OHIO LAW REQUIRES US TO GIVE YOU A
FORM SO THAT YOU CAN CHOOSE EITHER A WRITTEN, ORAL, OR NO ESTIMATE.
      (3)   Fail, where a consumer requests a written estimate of the
anticipated cost of repairs or services; to make a bona fide effort during the
initial face to face contact to provide the written estimate on the form
required by paragraph (a)(1) of this section;
      (4)   Fail, where a consumer requests a written or oral estimate, to give
the estimate to the consumer before commencing the repair or service.
   (b)   In connection with a consumer transaction involving the performance of
either repairs or any service upon a motor vehicle where there has not been
face-to-face contact between the consumer or his or her representative and the
supplier or his or her representative prior to the commencement of the repair
or service, no supplier shall:
      (1)   Fail to make available to a consumer who makes a supplier-
authorized delivery of a motor vehicle for repair or service at the supplier’s
place of business during non-business hours of the repair or service facility,
a form in duplicate with instructions directing the consumer to retain a copy
which indicates the identity of the supplier. The form shall contain
disclosures in substantially the following language:
   ESTIMATE
   YOU HAVE THE RIGHT TO AN ESTIMATE OF THE COST OF REPAIRS OR SERVICES WHICH
YOU ARE REQUESTING. YOUR BILL WILL NOT BE HIGHER THAN THE ESTIMATE BY MORE THAN
TEN PERCENT (10%) UNLESS YOU APPROVE A LARGER AMOUNT BEFORE REPAIRS ARE
FINISHED. YOU CAN CHOOSE THE KIND OF ESTIMATE YOU WANT TO RECEIVE BY SIGNING
YOUR NAME UNDER ONE OF THE FOLLOWING CHOICES AND INDICATING A TELEPHONE NUMBER
WHERE YOU CAN BE REACHED IF NECESSARY:
      (a)   Written Estimate
         ________________________________
         (Customer Signature)
      (b)   Oral Estimate
         ________________________________
         (Customer Signature)
      (c)   No Estimate
         ________________________________
         (Customer Signature)
      ________________________________
      Customer Name
      ________________________________
      Customer Telephone Number
      ________________________________
      Date
      (2)   Fail in all other instances, upon the first contact with the
consumer, to inform the consumer of the right to receive a written or oral
estimate of the anticipated cost of the repair or service;
      (3)   Fail, where the consumer requests an oral estimate, to give the
oral estimate to the consumer before commencing the repair or service;
      (4)   Fail, where the consumer requests a written estimate, to prepare a
written estimate, inform the consumer that the estimate is available and upon
the consumer’s request, give the estimate to the consumer before commencing the
repair or service.
      For purposes of this division, a supplier has not authorized delivery of
a motor vehicle during non- business hours of the repair or service facility
where there has not been communication of that fact to the general public by
the supplier or his or her representative.
      (5)   The forms required by divisions (a)(1) and (b)(1) of this section
may be separate or may be incorporated into another form used by the supplier
so long as the required disclosures are easily legible and clearly and
conspicuously appear on the form. Nothing in this division shall preclude a
supplier from incorporating additional disclosures into the same form;
      (6)   The sign or form required by paragraph (a)(2) of this section shall
be printed in such a size and manner so that the notice is easily legible.
Additional disclosures required by this section may be incorporated into the
sign or form so long as the language required by paragraph (a)(2) of this
section prominently appears as the first listed disclosure. Where a supplier
gives written estimates to consumers prior to the commencement of any repair or
service regardless of the anticipated cost of repairs or services, the language
in the form required by paragraph (a)(1) and the sign or form required by
paragraph (a)(2) of this section may be modified to disclose that fact.
   (c)   In any consumer transaction involving the performance of any repair or
service upon a motor vehicle, no supplier shall:
      (1)   Fail to disclose prior to acceptance of any motor vehicle for
inspection, repair, or service, that, in the event the consumer authorizes
commencement but does not authorize completion of a repair or service, charges
will be imposed for disassembly, reassembly, and partially completed work. Any
charge so imposed shall be directly related to the actual amount of labor or
parts included in the inspection, repair, or service;
      (2)   Charge for any repair or service which has not been authorized by
the consumer;
      (3)   Fail to disclose upon the first contact with the consumer that any
charge not directly related to the actual performance of the repair or service
will be imposed by the supplier whether or not repairs or services are
performed;
      (4)   If the motor vehicle will be towed, fail to disclose upon first
contact with a consumer the basis upon which a charge will be imposed for such
towing;
      (5)   Charge a consumer an amount which exceeds the quoted estimate by
more than ten percent (10%) without the consumer’s approval prior to the
completion of the repair;
      (6)   Materially understate or misstate the estimated cost of the repair;
      (7)   Fail to provide the consumer with an itemized list of repairs
performed or services rendered, including a list of parts and materials, a
statement of whether they are used, re-manufactured or rebuilt, if not new, the
cost thereof to the consumer, the amount charged for labor, and the identity of
the individual performing the repair or service;
      (8)   Fail to tender to the consumer any replaced parts, unless the parts
are to be rebuilt or sold by the supplier or returned to the manufacturer in
connection with warranted repair or services, and such intended reuse or return
is made known to the consumer prior to commencing any repair or service;
      (9)   Fail, at the time of the signing or initialing of any document by a
consumer, to provide the consumer with a copy of the document;
      (10)   Fail to disclose to the consumer prior to the commencement of any
repair or service that any part of the repair or service will be performed by a
person other than the supplier or his or her employees; the nature of the
repair which any such person will perform and the identity of that person; and
the existence of any warranties or the lack thereof on work performed by any
such person;
      (11)   Fail to give the consumer written notification that delivery to
the supplier of the parts required for the repair will be delayed for a period
of ten (10) days or more;
      (12)   In the case of lengthy repairs, fail to obtain written consent
from the consumer to possess said consumer’s motor vehicle for a period in
excess of thirty (30) calendar days.
      (13)   Fail, where an estimate has been requested by a consumer, to
obtain oral or written authorization from the consumer for the anticipated cost
of any additional, unforeseen, but necessary repairs or services when the cost
of those repairs or services amounts to ten per cent (10%) or more (excluding
tax) of the original estimate;
      (14)   Fail, where the anticipated cost of a repair or service is less
than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and an estimate has not been given to the
consumer, to obtain oral or written authorization from the consumer for the
anticipated cost of any additional, unforeseen, but necessary repairs or
services when the total cost of the repairs or services, if performed, will
exceed twenty-five dollars ($25.00);
      (15)   Fail to provide to the consumer upon his or her request a written,
itemized receipt for any motor vehicle or part thereof that is left with, or
turned over to, the supplier for repair or service. Such receipt shall include:
         A.   The identity of the supplier which will perform the repair or
service;
         B.   The name and signature of the supplier or a representative who
actually accepts the motor vehicle or any part thereof;
         C.   A description including make and model number or such other
features as will reasonably identify the motor vehicle or any part thereof to
be repaired or serviced;
         D.   The date on which the motor vehicle or any part thereof was left
with or turned over to the supplier.
   (d)   In any consumer transaction involving the performance of any repair
upon a motor vehicle, no supplier shall:
      (1)   Condition the performance of any repair or service upon a
consumer’s waiver of any rights provided for in this chapter or require the
consumer to give any additional security beyond the mechanic’s lien authorized
by common law;
      (2)   Represent that repairs or services are necessary when such is not
the fact;
      (3)   Represent that repairs have been made or services have been
performed when such is not the fact;
      (4)   Represent that a motor vehicle or any part thereof which is being
inspected or diagnosed for a repair or service is in a dangerous condition or
that the consumer’s continued use of it may be harmful, when such is not the
fact.
   (e)   In lieu of complying with the requirements of paragraphs (a)(1) and
(b)(1) to (b)(4) of this section, a supplier may provide a consumer, prior to
the commencement of any repair or service, with a written quotation of the
price at which the repair or service will be performed, which shall indicate
that the quotation shall be binding upon the supplier for a period of five (5)
days, provided that the subject of the consumer transaction is made available
to the supplier for the repair or service within that period.
(Ord. No. 90-96. Passed 3-18-96, eff. 3-26-96)
§ 657.05 Registration of Motor Vehicle Repair Persons; Fee; Renewal
   (a)   No motor vehicle repair person shall perform repairs without
registering with the Director pursuant to this section.
   (b)   Every motor vehicle repair person desiring to perform repairs within
the City shall apply to the Director for a certificate of registration on forms
prescribed by the Director. The forms shall include:
      (1)   The name, address, phone number, birth date, and social security
number of the motor vehicle repair person;
      (2)   The principal occupation and place of business of the motor vehicle
repair person for the five (5) years immediately before the date of the
application;
      (3)   The name of the repair facility where the motor vehicle repair
person is employed; and
      (4)   Any other related information as the Director requires.
   (c)   The annual registration fee for a motor vehicle repair person shall be
twenty dollars ($20.00). On receipt of a completed application and the annual
fee, the Director shall issue a certificate of registration which, regardless
of the date of issuance, shall cover the period of July 1 to June 30.
   (d)   The certificate of registration issued under this section shall be
permanently and conspicuously displayed at the location where the motor vehicle
repair person performs repairs.
(Ord. No. 2393-02. Passed 2-3-03, eff. 2-3-03)
§ 657.99 Penalty
   (a)   Whoever violates any provisions of this chapter shall be subject to
the penalties provided in Section
643.99.
   (b)   In addition to the penalties above, any person aggrieved by any
violation of this chapter may pursue remedies authorized by Section
643.11 of this Code.
(Ord. No. 1345-01. Passed 12-10-01, eff. 12-19-01 without the signature of the
Mayor)
CHAPTER 659 – PREDATORY LENDING
659.01   Definitions
659.02   Predatory Lending Practices Prohibited
659.03   Notice to Customers of Home Improvement Loans
659.04   Certification of Compliance to be Recorded
659.05   Enforcement
659.06   Severability
659.99   Penalties
§ 659.01 Definitions
   (a)   “Affiliate” means any entity that controls, is controlled by, or is
under common control with another entity, as the term “control” is defined
under the Bank Holding Company Act, 12 U.S.C. 1841 - 1849, including any
successors in interest or alter egos.
   (b)   “Annual percentage rate” means the annual percentage rate for the loan
calculated according to the provisions of the federal Truth in Lending Act (15
U.S.C. 1601 et seq.), and the regulations promulgated thereunder by the Federal
Reserve Board (as said Act and regulations are amended from time to time).
   (c)   “Business Entity” means any individual, domestic corporation, foreign
corporation, association, syndicate, joint stock company, partnership, joint
venture, or unincorporated association, including any parent company,
subsidiary, exclusive distributor or company affiliated therewith, engaged in a
business or commercial enterprise.
   (d)   “City” means the City of Cleveland, its departments, boards and
commissions.
   (e)   “Points and Fees” means:
      (1)   All items required to be disclosed under sections 226.4(a) and
226.4(b) of Title 12 of the Code of Federal Regulations, as amended from time
to time, except the interest rate or time-price differential;
      (2)   Subject to the exclusions provided in this section, all charges for
items listed under section 226.4(c)(7) of Title 12 of the Code of Federal
Regulations, as amended from time to time, but only if the lender receives
direct or indirect compensation in connection with the charge or the charge is
paid to an affiliate of the lender; otherwise the charges are not included
within the meaning of the phrase “points and fees”; and
      (3)   All compensation paid directly or indirectly to a mortgage broker,
including a broker that originates a loan in its own name in a tablefunded
transaction, not otherwise included in divisions (1) or (2) of this section.
   “Points and fees” shall not include any charges or fees excluded by
paragraphs (c) through (e) of Regulation Z of the Truth in Lending Act, section
226.4 of Title 12 of the Code of Federal Regulations; however, notwithstanding
the foregoing, any fees for preparing loan-related documents, such as deeds,
mortgages, and reconveyance or settlement documents shall be included in the
definition of “points and fees”.
   (f)   “Predatory loan” means a loan that is secured by owner-occupied
residential real property located within the City of Cleveland on which there
is situated a dwelling for not more than four (4) families, a condominium unit,
or a cooperative unit, if:
      (1)   At any time over the life of the loan for a fixed interest rate
loan, or at the time a loan is consummated for a variable interest rate loan,
the annual percentage rate of the loan equals or exceeds by more than four and
one half (4-1/2) percentage points but less than or equal to eight (8)
percentage points in the case of a mortgage that is a first lien when it is
made, or equals or exceeds by more than six and one half (6-1/2) percentage
points but less than or equal to ten (10) percentage points in the case of a
mortgage that is junior when it is made, the yield on Treasury securities
having comparable periods of maturity to the loan maturity as of the fifteenth
day of the month immediately preceding the month in which the application for
the extension of credit is received by the creditor; and
      (2)   That was made under circumstances that involve any of the following
acts or practices or that contains any of the following loan terms:
         A.   “Loan Flipping”. “Flipping” a loan means the refinancing of an
existing loan secured by owner-occupied residential real estate in the City of
Cleveland on which there is situated a dwelling for not more than four (4)
families, a condominium unit, or a cooperative unit when:
            1.   More than fifty percent (50%) of the prior debt refinanced
bears a lower interest rate than the new loan unless the lender has received
notice from a counselor employed by a housing counseling agency approved by the
Department of Housing and Urban Development, that the borrower has received
counseling describing the loan transaction and its impact on the borrower;
            2.   The borrower’s payment of prepaid finance charges and closing
costs reduces the interest rate but it will take more than five (5) years for
the borrower to recoup the transactions costs; or
            3.   A mortgage is refinanced that originated, or was subsidized or
guaranteed by or through a state, tribal or local government, or nonprofit
organization, which bears either a below-market interest rate, or has
nonstandard payment terms beneficial to the borrower, such as payments that
vary with income, are limited to a percentage of income, or where no payments
are required under specified conditions, and where, as a result of the
refinancing, the borrower will lose one (1) or more of the benefits of the
mortgage, unless the borrower has received counseling from a certified housing
counseling agency regarding such refinancing and the borrower and current
holder of the loan consent in writing to the refinancing.
         B.   “Balloon Payments”. A loan that contains a scheduled payment that
is more than twice as large as the average of earlier scheduled payments or
which contains a provision that gives the lender, in its sole discretion, the
right to accelerate the indebtedness in the absence of the default of the
borrower. The term “balloon payment” shall not apply to (i) any loan with a
maturity of one (1) year or less, if the purpose of the loan is a “bridge” loan
connected with the acquisition or construction of a dwelling intended to become
the consumer’s principal dwelling, or (ii) a home equity line of credit secured
by the borrower’s primary dwelling.
         C.   “Negative Amortization”. Terms under which the outstanding
principal balance will increase at any time over the course of the loan because
the regular periodic payments do not cover the full amount of interest due.
         D.   “Points and Fees”. The financing of points and fees in excess of
four (4) percentage points of the total loan amount if the loan amount is
sixteen thousand dollars ($16,000.00) or greater, or eight hundred dollars
($800.00) if the loan amount is less than sixteen thousand dollars
($16,000.00).
         E.   “Increased Interest Rate”. A loan that provides for an interest
rate applicable after default that is higher than the interest rate that
applies before default.
         F.   “Advance Payments”. A loan which includes terms under which more
than two (2) periodic payments required under the loan are consolidated and
paid in advance from the loan proceeds provided to the borrower.
         G.   “Mandatory Arbitration”. A loan which contains a mandatory
arbitration clause that limits in any way the right of the borrower to seek
relief through a court of law or equity.
         H.   “Prepayment Penalties”. A loan under which a borrower must pay a
prepayment penalty for paying all or part of the principal before the date on
which the principal is due. Any method of computing a refund of unearned
scheduled interest is a prepayment penalty if it is less favorable to the
consumer than the actuarial method, as “actuarial method” is defined in
division (A) of RC 1349.25. The term “prepayment penalties” shall not include
prepayment penalties imposed in accordance with the Home Ownership and Equity
Protection Act of 1994, 15 U.S.C. 1639(c)(2), as amended, and the regulations
adopted thereunder by the federal reserve board, as amended.
         I.   “Financing of Credit Insurance”. The financing of single premium
credit life, credit disability, credit unemployment, or any other life or
health insurance, directly or indirectly, into one (1) or more loans.
         J.   “Lending Without Home Loan Counseling”. Except in conformity with
the provisions of division (b)(1)B. of Section
659.02, failing to receive notice from a counselor employed by a housing
counseling agency approved by the Department of Housing and Urban Development
that the borrower has received counseling describing of the loan transaction
and its impact on the borrower based upon the information provided by borrower
and lender to the counselor at the time counseling is provided to the borrower.
         K.   “Lending Without Due Regard to Repayment”. Except in conformity
with the provisions of division (b)(1)B. of Section
659.02, making, issuing or originating a loan without reasonable belief at the
time the loan is consummated that the borrower or borrowers (when considered
collectively in the case of multiple borrowers) will be able to make the
scheduled payments to repay the obligation based upon a consideration of their
current and expected income, current obligations, employment status, and other
financial resources (other than the borrower’s equity in the dwelling which
secures repayment of the loan). A borrower shall be presumed to be able to make
the scheduled payments to repay the obligation if, at the time the loan is
consummated, or at the time of the first rate adjustment in the case of a lower
introductory interest rate (i) the borrower’s scheduled monthly payments on the
loan (including principal, interest, taxes, insurance and assessments),
combined with the scheduled payments for all other debt, do not exceed fifty
percent (50%) of the borrower’s documented and verified monthly gross income,
and (ii) provided that the borrower has sufficient “residual income” as defined
in the guidelines established in 38 C.F.R. 36.4337(e) and VA form 26-6393 to
pay essential monthly expenses after paying the scheduled payments and any
additional debt.
         L.   The payment by a lender to a contractor on a home improvement
contract from the proceeds of a loan, other than:
            1.   By an instrument payable to the borrower or borrowers;
            2.   By an instrument payable jointly to the borrower and the
contractor, provided however that no more than thirty percent (30%) of the
total proceeds of the loan shall be disbursed to the contractor at the time of
closing; or
            3.   At the election of the borrower, by a third party escrow agent
in accordance with terms established in a written agreement signed by the
borrower, the lender and the contractor before the date of payment. However,
“predatory loan” shall not include a loan that is made primarily for a business
purpose unrelated to the residential real property securing the loan.
   For purposes of division (f)(1) of this section, if the terms of the home
loan include an initial or introductory period, and the annual percentage rate
is less than that which will apply after the end of such initial or
introductory period, then the annual percentage rate that shall be taken into
account for purposes of this section shall be the first annual percentage rate
adjustment that is calculated and disclosed in conformance with the provisions
of division (b) of Section
659.01 for the period after the initial or introductory period.
   (g)   “Home Improvement Contractor” means any person who engages in the
business of making home improvements, and who undertakes or offers to undertake
or agrees to perform any home improvement, whether or not such person is
registered, or subject to the licensing and registration requirements of
Chapter
3107 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Cleveland, and whether or not
such person is a general contractor.
(Ord. No. 45-03. Passed 1-13-03, eff. 1-15-03)
§ 659.02 Predatory Lending Practices Prohibited
   (a)   Prohibited Conduct. Subject to the limitations of division (b) of this
section:
      (1)   Issuing Predatory Loans. No person or business entity shall make,
issue, or arrange a predatory loan, or assist others in doing so. A person who,
when acting in good faith, fails to comply with this division will not be
deemed to have violated this division if the person establishes that the
compliance failure was not intentional and resulted from a bona fide error
notwithstanding the maintenance of procedures reasonably adapted to avoid such
errors, and within sixty (60) days after the discovery of the compliance
failure and prior to the institution of any action under this chapter or the
receipt of written notice of compliance failure, the borrower is notified of
the compliance failure, appropriate restitution is made, and whatever
adjustments are necessary are made to the loan to either, at the choice of the
borrower, (i) make the predatory loan satisfy the requirements of this chapter,
or (ii) change the terms of the loan in a manner beneficial to the borrower so
that the loan will no longer be considered a predatory loan subject to the
provisions of this chapter. Examples of a bona fide error include clerical,
calculation, computer malfunction and programming, and printing errors. An
error of legal judgment with respect to a person’s obligations under this
chapter is not a bona fide error.
      (2)   Lending Without Home Loan Counseling. No person or business entity
shall make, issue or arrange, or assist others in making, issuing or arranging,
any loan that is secured by owner-occupied residential real property located
within the City of Cleveland on which there is situated a dwelling for not more
than four (4) families, a condominium unit, or a cooperative unit in which
either:
         A.   The annual percentage rate at consummation will exceed by more
than eight (8) percentage points for first lien loans, or by more than ten (10)
percentage points for subordinate-lien loans, the yield on Treasury securities
having comparable periods of maturity to the loan maturity as of the fifteenth
day of the month immediately preceding the month in which the application for
the extension of credit is received by the creditor; or
         B.   The total points and fees payable by the consumer at or before
loan closing will exceed the greater of eight percent (8%) of the total loan
amount, or four hundred dollars ($400.00); the four hundred dollar ($400.00)
figure shall be adjusted annually on January 1 by the annual percentage rate
change in the consumer price index that was reported on the preceding June 1,
unless that person or business entity first receives notice from a counselor
employed by a housing counseling agency approved by the Department of Housing
and Urban Development that the borrower has received counseling describing the
loan transaction and its impact on the borrower based upon the information
provided by borrower and lender to the counselor at the time counseling is
provided to the borrower.
      (3)   Payments to Home Improvement Contractors. A home improvement
contractor may not receive directly and solely from the lender, the proceeds of
a loan that is secured by owner-occupied residential real property located
within the City of Cleveland on which there is situated a dwelling for not more
than four (4) families, a condominium unit, or a cooperative unit in which, at
any time over the life of the loan for a fixed interest rate loan, or at the
time a loan is consummated for a variable interest rate loan, the annual
percentage rate of the loan equals or exceeds by more than four and one half
(4-1/2) percentage points in the case of a mortgage that is a first lien when
it is made, or equals or exceeds by more than six and one half (6-1/2)
percentage points in the case of a mortgage that is junior when it is made, the
yield on Treasury securities having comparable periods of maturity to the loan
maturity as of the fifteenth day of the month immediately preceding the month
in which the application for the extension of credit is received by the
creditor.
      (4)   Incorporating Governmental Financial Assistance Funds. All persons
shall be barred from promoting, utilizing, packaging, or in any other way
incorporating funds from any of the programs administered by the City in
combination with any predatory loan. Any contract, lease, grant or other
agreement entered into by the City with any person or business entity shall
contain a provision requiring that the person or business entity, in the
administration of governmental housing assistance funds, abide by the
provisions of this division as though its administration of such funds was
directly subject to the provisions of this division.
   (b)   Activities of Certain Financial Institutions Exempted.
      (1)   Division (a) of this section is not applicable in the following
circumstances:
         A.   With respect to a lender duly licensed as may be required under
State law, solely because of the presence of a loan provision described in
divisions (f)(2)B., C. or H. of Section
659.01, provided that such provision(s) are made in conformity with the
requirements of federal law pursuant to the Alternative Mortgage Transaction
Parity Act, 12 U.S.C. 3803 and provided that any such loan is not otherwise
predatory as defined in division (f) of Section
659.01; or
         B.   In the case of a loan made pursuant to the Ohio’s Mortgage Loan
Act, RC 1321.51 et seq., solely because the loan contains any provision
authorized by such act, provided that any such loan is not otherwise predatory
as defined in division (f) of Section
659.01.
      (2)   Divisions (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this section are not applicable with
respect to a State chartered bank, bank and trust company, savings bank,
private bank, national bank, or a State or federally chartered savings and loan
association, a federally chartered savings bank, a State or federally chartered
credit union.
      (3)   This section shall apply to affiliates of the entities enumerated
in division (b)(2) of this section, except insofar as such affiliates are
themselves one (1) of those financial institutions.
(Ord. No. 45-03. Passed 1-13-03, eff. 1-15-03)
§ 659.03 Notice to Customers of Home Improvement Loans
   (a)   No person or business entity that knowingly funds a home improvement
loan under the circumstances described in this section shall fail to furnish
the notice described in this section. At least three (3) business days prior to
closing, every lender who knowingly funds a home improvement loan shall furnish
a notice along with any home improvement loan for any work to be performed on
owner-occupied residential real estate located within the City of Cleveland on
which there is situated a dwelling for not more than four (4) families, a
condominium unit, or a cooperative unit and which loan is secured by that real
estate, shall furnish a notice to the borrower. That notice shall be furnished
as a separate document, printed in sixteen (16) point font, with the signature
line at the top of the page, and shall be in substantially the same form as the
following, as may be amended from time to time by the Department of Consumer
Affairs:
   IMPORTANT NOTICE TO CUSTOMERS OF
   HOME IMPROVEMENT CONTRACTORS
I received this notice on this date:
   ________________________________
      (date)
   ________________________________
       signature of home owner(s)
   If you need a loan to pay for home improvements:
   BE CAREFUL. A lender will probably want to take a mortgage on your house.
   You should not borrow more than you can afford or more than you need. The
loan you are being offered may be a predatory loan. You may be eligible for a
different loan which charges significantly less interest or fees. Be very
cautious about consolidating your debt with a home mortgage. Beware that if you
default on this loan you could lose your house! In certain cases, it is now the
law in Cleveland that before you sign a home loan you must receive housing
counseling assistance.
   For the name, address and phone number of a housing counseling or legal
services agency in your neighborhood, turn this notice over to see the list of
agencies printed on the reverse side.
   (b)   For purposes of division (a) of this section, a “home improvement
loan” shall not include a loan commonly known as a “home equity line of
credit”.
(Ord. No. 45-03. Passed 1-13-03, eff. 1-15-03)
   Note: Affected institutions and City departments shall have 60 days from the
effective date of this ordinance to comply with Sections
659.03 and
659.04.
§ 659.04 Certification of Compliance to be Recorded
   No lender or, if applicable, mortgage broker, shall fail to submit the
certification of compliance to the Cuyahoga County Recorder’s Office as
described in this section. At the time of recording a mortgage on owner-
occupied residential real property located in the City of Cleveland on which
there is situated a dwelling for not more than four (4) families, a condominium
unit, or a cooperative unit, and which mortgage secures a loan where the annual
percentage rate of the loan equals or exceeds by more than four and one half
(4- 1/2) percentage points in the case of a mortgage that is a first lien when
it is made, or equals or exceeds by more than six and one half (6-1/2)
percentage points in the case of a mortgage that is junior when it is made, the
yield on Treasury securities having comparable periods of maturity to the loan
maturity as of the fifteenth day of the month immediately preceding the month
in which the application of the extension of credit is received by the
creditor, the lender and, if applicable the mortgage broker, shall submit a
certification of compliance to the Cuyahoga County Recorder’s Office for
recording along with the mortgage instrument and deed. It is not necessary to
record a certificate of compliance for a loan that is made primarily for a
business purpose unrelated to the residential real property securing the loan.
The certification of compliance shall be substantially in the following form
and shall comply with any formatting requirements promulgated from time to time
by the Cuyahoga County Recorder’s Office.
   CERTIFICATION
   The undersigned lender and mortgage broker certify, that to the best of our
knowledge, information and belief, the attached mortgage, described below,
entered into between _________________________
(name of lender) and __________________
(name of borrower) on _________________
(date of execution) for the property located at
___________________________ (street address of property) contains the following
characteristics and terms:
   Type of mortgage:
      Purchase Money   Non-purchase Money
            (circle one)
      First Mortgage   Junior Mortgage
            (circle one)
   a.   The annual percentage rate of the loan at closing is
_____________________.
   b.   The applicable Treasury Rate (i.e., the yield on Treasury securities
having comparable periods of maturity to the loan maturity as of the fifteenth
day of the month immediately preceding the month in which the application for
the extension of credit is received by the creditor) is ______________.
   c.   The total loan amount is ________.
   d.   The total amount of points and fees (as defined in division (e) of
Section
659.01) is ________________________.
   e.   The percentage of points and fees (calculated according to the equation
d/ (c-d) x 100) financed is _____________________.
   f.   The borrower has or has not (circle one) received housing counseling. A
notice of housing counseling is or is not (circle one) attached to this
certification.
   g.   The mortgage does or does not (circle one) violate any provisions of
Chapter
659 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Cleveland, 1976.
   Date: ________________________
   _____________________________
   Mortgage Lender
   _____________________________
   Name and Title of Officer
   _____________________________
   Address
   _____________________________
   Telephone Number
      OR
   _____________________________
   Mortgage Broker
   _____________________________
   Name and Title of Officer
   _____________________________
   Address
   _____________________________
   Telephone Number
   _____________________________
   State of Ohio Registration No.
   I, (lender), have filled out each blank space of this document and have
given it to the customer and it is true and accurate.
   Signed: ________________________
   Date: __________________________
   I, (mortgage broker), have filled out each blank space of this document and
have given it to the customer and it is true and accurate.
   Signed: ________________________
   Date: __________________________
   I, (borrower), have received and reviewed with the contractor a copy of this
document.
   Signed: ________________________
   Date: __________________________
(Ord. No. 45-03. Passed 1-13-03, eff. 1-15-03)
   Note: Affected institutions and City departments shall have 60 days from the
effective date of this ordinance to comply with Sections
659.03 and
659.04.
§ 659.05 Enforcement
   The Manager of Fair Housing and Consumer Affairs is charged with the
enforcement of this chapter. The Manager shall promulgate such rules,
regulations and procedures as he or she may deem necessary to aid in the
administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. For the
purpose of enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, the Manager shall
maintain a listing of those business entitles that have been determined to make
predatory loans under this chapter and shall regularly distribute this listing
to all City departments. This listing shall also be made available to the
public free of charge by request of the Office of Fair Housing and Consumer
Affairs. The Manager shall also maintain a list of HUD-certified housing
counseling agencies and shall make such list available upon request. The
Manager of Fair Housing and Consumer Affairs may make findings with respect to
predatory loans and lenders who make such loans based on recommendations made
by a Consumer Advisory Council.
(Ord. No. 1329-10. Passed 12-6-10, eff. 12-6-10)
§ 659.06 Severability
   If any clause, sentence, paragraph or part of this chapter, or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance, shall for any reason be
adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment
shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder of this chapter nor the
application of such clause, sentence, paragraph or part to other persons or
circumstances but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence,
paragraph or part thereof and to the persons or circumstances directly involved
in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered. It is
hereby declared to be the legislative intent that this chapter would have been
adopted had such provisions not been included or such persons or circumstances
been expressly excluded from their coverage.
(Ord. No. 737-02. Passed 4-22-02, eff. 4-25-02)
§ 659.99 Penalties
   (a)   Whoever violates Section
659.02 is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day in which a
borrower is assessed with interest on the principal loan amount of a predatory
loan shall constitute a separate offense.
   (b)   Whoever violates Section
659.03 or Section
659.04 is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (c)   (1)   No person or business entity shall be awarded a contract with
the City if the person or business entity or any of its affiliates makes
predatory loans or violates RC 1349.27. Every contract with the City shall
contain a provision requiring that the person or business entity with which the
City is contracting must certify that neither the person or business entity nor
any of its affiliates has made predatory loans or has violated RC 1349.27.
Nothing in this section shall affect the validity of any contract entered into
in connection with any debt obligations issued by or on behalf of the City,
regardless of whether the contract was awarded in compliance with this section.
Any other contract awarded in violation of this section shall be voidable at
the option of the City.
      (2)   The Finance Director may suspend the ineligibility of a person or
business entity in order to allow execution of a contract with the person or
entity upon written application by the head of the City department affected by
the proposed contract, setting forth facts sufficient in the judgment of the
Finance Director to establish:
         A.   That the public health, safety or welfare of the City requires
the goods or services of the person or business entity; and
         B.   That the City is unable to acquire the goods or services at
comparable price and quality, and in sufficient quantity from another source or
other sources.
(Ord. No. 737-02. Passed 4-22-02, eff. 4-25-02)
TITLE V: DISCRIMINATION
   Chapter
661   Unfair Labor Practices
   Chapter
663   Fair Employment Practices
   Chapter
665   Fair Housing
   Chapter
667   Unlawful Discriminatory Conduct
   Chapter
669   Unlawful Discriminatory Salary Practices
CHAPTER 661 – UNFAIR LABOR PRACTICES
661.01   Definitions
661.02   Employers to Recognize Labor Organization as Representative of
Employees
661.03   Court Action to Restrain Unfair Practices
661.04   Mandatory Provisions in Labor Contracts
661.05   Exemption from Provisions
Cross-reference:
   Employment of strike breakers, CO
605.15
   Prohibited use of mounted police in a labor dispute, CO
605.16
   Unfair employment practices prohibited, CO
663.02
§ 661.01 Definitions
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   “Person” means one (1) or more individuals, labor organizations,
partnerships, associations, corporations, legal representatives, trustees,
trustees in bankruptcy or receivers. In determining whether any person is
acting as an agent of another person so as to make such other person
responsible for his or her acts, the question of whether the specific acts
performed were actually authorized or subsequently ratified shall not be
controlling.
   (b)   “Employer” means any person acting as an agent of an employer,
directly or indirectly, but shall not include the United States, or any wholly
owned government corporation, or any Federal Reserve Bank, or any employer
whose activity or business affects commerce within the scope and meaning of the
National Labor Relations Act of the United States, as amended, 29 U.S.C. 151 et
seq. and over which the National Labor Relations Board has not declined to
assert jurisdiction in accord with Section
14 of the National Labor Relations Act, or the State or any political
subdivision thereof, or any person subject to the Railway Labor Act, 45 U.S.C.
151 et seq., or any labor organization, other than when acting as an employer,
or anyone acting in the capacity of officer or agent of such labor
organization, or any employer with less than twenty-five (25) employees.
   (c)   “Employee” means any employee and any individual whose work has ceased
as a consequence of, or in connection with, any current labor dispute or
because of any unfair practice as defined herein, but shall not include any
individual employed by his or her parent or spouse, whether through corporate
control or otherwise, or any individual having the status of an independent
contractor, or any individual employed as a supervisor, or by any other person
who is not an employer as herein defined.
   (d)   “Representatives” means any individual or labor organization.
   (e)   “Labor organization” means any organization of any kind, or any agency
or employee representation committee or plan, in which employees participate
and which exists for the purpose, in whole or in part, of dealing with
employers concerning grievances, labor disputes, wages, rates of pay, hours of
employment or conditions of work.
   (f)   “Unfair practice” means the following:
      (1)   Any act or conduct by an employer, or labor organization, which may
interfere with, restrain or coerce employees in the exercise of their rights to
self-organization, to form, join or assist labor organizations, to bargain
collectively through representatives of their own choosing, or to engage in
other concerted activities for the purpose of collective bargaining or other
mutual aid or protection, or to refrain from any or all of such activities
except to the extent that such rights may be affected by an agreement requiring
membership in, or payment of an amount equal to dues and initiation fees to a
labor organization as a condition of employment;
      (2)   Any act or conduct by an employer which may dominate or interfere
with the formation or administration of any labor organization or contribute
financial or other support to it, except that an employer shall not be
prohibited from permitting employees to confer with him or her during working
hours without loss of time or pay;
      (3)   Any act or conduct by an employer or a labor organization which may
cause discrimination in regard to hire or tenure of employment or any term or
condition of employment to encourage or discourage membership in any labor
organization, except that nothing herein shall preclude an employer from making
an agreement with a labor organization, not established, maintained or assisted
by any action defined in subsection (f)(2) hereof as an unfair practice, to
require as a condition of employment membership therein, or payment of an
amount equal to dues and initiation fees to such labor organization if such
labor organization is the representative of the employees of the employer,
provided that no employer shall justify any discrimination against an employee
for nonmembership in a labor organization if he or she has reasonable grounds
for believing that such membership was not available to the employee on the
same terms and conditions generally applicable to other members, or if he or
she has reasonable grounds for believing that membership was denied or
terminated for reasons other than the failure of the employee to tender the
periodic dues and the initiation fees uniformly required as a condition of
acquiring or retaining membership;
      (4)   Any act or conduct by an employer or labor organization to cause or
tend to cause any discrimination against any employee because of testimony or
any other activity in connection with any proceeding brought pursuant to this
chapter;
      (5)   Any act or conduct by an employer or labor organization to refuse
to bargain collectively as hereinafter defined, which includes, among other
things, the performance of the mutual obligation of the employer and the
representative of the employees to meet at reasonable times and confer in good
faith with respect to wages, hours and other terms and conditions of
employment, or the negotiation of an agreement, or any question arising
thereunder, and the execution of a written contract incorporating any agreement
reached if requested by either party, but such obligation does not compel
either party to agree to a proposal or require the making of a concession.
   (g)   “Appropriate unit” means any group of, or combination of, employees
with mutuality of interests in wages, hours and working conditions where the
employees may be assured of the fullest freedom in exercising the rights
guaranteed under this chapter, and including the only employee of an employer
when such single employee unites or makes common cause with employees of other
employers covered by this chapter.
   (h)   “Labor dispute” means any controversy including terms, tenure or
conditions of employment, or concerning the association or representation of
persons in negotiating, fixing, maintaining, changing or seeking to arrange
terms or conditions of employment, regardless of whether the disputants stand
in the proximate relation of employer and employee.
   (i)   “Supervisor” means any individual having authority, in the interest of
the employer, to hire, transfer, suspend, lay off, recall, promote, discharge,
assign, reward or discipline other employees, or responsibility to direct them,
or to adjust their grievance, or effectively to recommend such action, if in
connection with the aforegoing, the exercise of such authority is not of a
merely routine or clerical nature, but requires the use of independent
judgment.
(Ord. No. 119-68. Passed 6-9-69, eff. 6-9-69)
§ 661.02 Employers to Recognize Labor Organization as Representative of
Employees
   (a)   Whenever a labor organization notifies an employer or employers it
represents a majority of the employees in an appropriate unit, and demands
recognition as the exclusive representative of such employees for the purpose
of collective bargaining, and when such labor organization does in fact
represent such a majority, the employer shall recognize the labor organization
as the exclusive representative of such employees and commence collective
bargaining forthwith. Any failure or refusal of the employer to recognize any
majority representative of the employees involved shall entitle the labor
organization to seek such enforcement as may be provided in law, including, but
not limited to, an action for an injunction in the Municipal Court.
   (b)   Whenever a labor organization has notified an employer that it
represented a majority of the employees in an appropriate unit, and in fact did
represent a majority of such employees, and has demanded recognition as the
exclusive representative of such employees, and the commencement of collective
bargaining, and whenever such employer has failed or refused to recognize and
bargain with such labor organization after such timely demand, and when such
labor organization continues to represent sufficient of the employees to have
constituted a majority at the time of the initial demand, and whenever such
failure or refusal of an employer to recognize and bargain has continued to
cause a labor dispute detrimental to the safety, peace or welfare of the people
of the City, such employer shall, upon a continued demand of such labor
organization for recognition and bargaining, forthwith recognize such labor
organization as the exclusive representative of its employees and commence
bargaining. Any failure or refusal by an employer to comply with this provision
shall be enforceable by an action for an injunction as set forth in subsection
(a) hereof.
(Ord. No. 119-68. Passed 6-9-69, eff. 6-9-69)
§ 661.03 Court Action to Restrain Unfair Practices
   No employer or labor organization shall commit an unfair practice as defined
in this chapter. Any aggrieved labor organization, employer, employee or other
person may bring an action in the Municipal Court to restrain and enjoin the
violation or continued violation of this section.
(Ord. No. 119-68. Passed 6-9-69, eff. 6-9-69)
§ 661.04 Mandatory Provisions in Labor Contracts
   Any contract of employment, written or oral, express or implied, between any
employer subject to this chapter and any employee, shall contain a provision
from June 9, 1969, prohibiting and forbidding the commission of any unfair
practice as defined in this chapter. Suits for any breach of such terms and
conditions of any contract of employment, written or oral, express or implied,
may be brought in the Municipal Court for an injunction or damages, or both,
within the limits of the statutory jurisdiction of the Court.
(Ord. No. 119-68. Passed 6-9-69, eff. 6-9-69)
§ 661.05 Exemption from Provisions
   None of the provisions of this chapter shall apply to any employer of
twenty-five (25) persons or less.
(Ord. No. 119-68. Passed 6-9-69, eff. 6-9-69)
CHAPTER 663 – FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES
663.01   Definitions
663.02   Prohibitions
663.03   Discrimination in City Employment Practices
663.04   Exemptions from Provisions
663.05   Administration
663.06   Compliance, Public Hearing and Enforcement
663.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Unfair labor practice defined, CO
661.01
Statutory reference:
   Unlawful discriminatory practices, RC 4112.02
§ 663.01 Definitions
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   “Discriminate,” “discriminates” or “discrimination” means
discrimination solely on the grounds or because of race, religion, color, sex,
sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, national origin, age,
disability, ethnic group or Vietnam-era or disabled veteran status.
   (b)   “Employee” means all persons except those engaged in domestic service,
personal service or an employee of an organized religious congregation or an
employee of an organization or institution limited to members of a single
religious faith.
   (c)   “Employer” means a person, one (1) or more individuals, a partnership,
association or corporation hiring employees unless exemption is provided in
Section
663.04.
   (d)   “Labor organization” means any organization which exists and is
constituted for the purpose, in whole or in part, of collective bargaining or
of dealing with employees concerning grievances, terms of conditions of
employment, or of mutual aid or protection in connection with employment.
   (e)   “Employment agency” means any person, company, partnership,
association, or corporation, which undertakes with or without compensation, to
procure opportunities to work, or to procure, recruit, refer or place
employees.
   (f)   “Sexual orientation” means a person’s actual or perceived
homosexuality, bisexuality or heterosexuality, by orientation or practice.
   (g)   “Gender Identity or Expression” means the gender-related identity,
external presentation of gender identity through appearance, or mannerism or
other gender-related characteristics of an individual, regardless of the
individual’s designated sex at birth.
(Ord. No. 1260-08. Passed 11-30-09, eff. 12-3-09)
§ 663.02 Prohibitions
   No employers, employees, labor unions, employment agencies or others subject
to this chapter shall:
   (a)   Discriminate against any person with regard to hire, discharge,
tenure, upgrading, terms or conditions of employment or union membership solely
on grounds of race, religion, color, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity
or expression, national origin, age, disability, ethnic group or Vietnam-era or
disabled veteran status;
   (b)   Publish or cause to be published any notice or advertisement relating
to employment or membership which contains any specification or limitation as
to race, religion, color, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity or
expression, national origin, age, disability, ethnic group or Vietnam-era or
disabled veteran status;
   (c)   Require of any applicant as a condition of employment or membership
any information concerning the applicant’s race, religion, color, sex, sexual
orientation, gender identity or expression, national origin, age, disability,
ethnic group or Vietnam-era or disabled veteran status;
   (d)   Aid, abet, encourage or incite the commission of any discrimination in
employment practice prohibited by this chapter.
(Ord. No. 1260-08. Passed 11-30-09, eff. 12-3-09)
§ 663.03 Discrimination in City Employment Practices
   The City shall prohibit all of the discriminatory practices set forth in
Section
663.02 in all of its departments, divisions, boards and commissions, or the
commission of discriminatory practices by any City officials, their agents or
employees acting for or on behalf of the City.
(Ord. No. 1183-69. Passed 12-15-69, eff. 12-15-69)
§ 663.04 Exemptions from Provisions
   Exemptions from the requirements of this chapter shall be:
   (a)   Any employer of less than four (4) persons; nor shall members of the
immediate family of an employer be included in determining the number of
employees;
   (b)   Any religious organization or institute whose membership or service is
limited to persons of a single religious faith;
   (c)   Any institution organized for educational purposes that is operated,
supervised, or controlled by such a religious association, corporation, or
society;
   (d)   Any private organization having a purely social or fraternal purpose;
   (e)   Any type of employment where religion, religious creed or nationality
would usually and normally be considered an essential qualification of
employment;
   (f)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require the modification
of existing facilities or the construction of new or additional facilities.
(Ord. No. 1446-13. Passed 7-13-16, eff. 7-17-16)
§ 663.05 Administration
   The administration of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the
Community Relations Board, which Board shall cooperate with the Office of Equal
Opportunity in those instances where the two (2) entities have concurrent
duties.
   In addition to any powers heretofore conferred on this Board, the Board
shall have power to:
   (a)   Make technical studies and prepare and disseminate educational
materials relating to discrimination and ways and means of reducing and
eliminating it in areas other than employment;
   (b)   Make specific and detailed recommendations to the interested parties
as to the method of eliminating discrimination in areas other than employment;
   (c)   By March 1 of each year, or more often if so requested, render to
Council and the Mayor a report of its activities;
   (d)   Adopt such reasonable rules and procedures as are necessary to effect
the broad purposes of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 1065-B-82. Passed 3-7-83, eff. 4-16-83)
§ 663.06 Compliance, Public Hearing and Enforcement
   (a)   In the consideration of a complaint, the Community Relations Board
shall determine the facts, and if there appears to be probable cause for the
complaint, the Board shall use its offices to attempt an adjustment by
education, persuasion, conciliation and conference. A reasonable time shall be
allowed for this purpose.
   (b)   If, in the opinion of a majority of the members of the Board, the
efforts to settle any complaint initiated by its own investigations or brought
to the attention of the Board by an outside agency or individual, by education,
persuasion, conciliation and conference have not adjusted the specific
complaint, the Board may certify the complaint to the Mayor, who shall make
further effort to adjust the complaint. If the Mayor is unable to adjust the
complaint to the satisfaction of the Board, within thirty (30) days of the
receipt thereof, the Board shall cause a public hearing to be held. A notice of
the particulars of the complaint shall be sent to the respondent by registered
mail not less than ten (10) days prior to the day set for the hearing. The
hearing shall be held before the Board.
   (c)   The respondent shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint
and appear at such hearing to testify in his or her own behalf, or be
represented by counsel or otherwise, and to examine and cross- examine
witnesses.
   If upon all the testimony taken, the Board by a majority vote of the members
thereof determines that the respondent committed the discriminatory practice
set forth in the complaint, the Board shall issue an order directing the
respondent to cease such discriminatory employment practice so found to be
engaged in. The Board shall have the power to require proof of compliance.
   (d)   In the event the respondent fails or refuses to comply with the order
of the Board, the fact of refusal, together with the verified complaint and the
record of the proceedings of the public hearing shall be certified to the
Director of Law for prosecution. No prosecution under this chapter shall be
brought except after certification to the Director.
(Ord. No. 1333-64. Passed 5-17-65, eff. 5-20-65)
§ 663.99 Penalty
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(Ord. No. 1446-13. Passed 7-13-16, eff. 7-17-16)
CHAPTER 665 – FAIR HOUSING
665.01   Purpose
665.02   Definitions
665.03   Unlawful Discriminatory Housing Practices
665.04   Exemptions
665.05   Fair Housing Board; Powers; Duties; Responsibilities
665.051   Fair Housing Administrator – Repealed
665.06   Complaints
665.07   Investigation of Complaints
665.08   Conciliation Process
665.09   Hearings
665.10   Hearing Decisions
665.11   Other Legal Action – Repealed
665.12   Injunctive Relief
665.13   Remedial Actions
665.14   Judicial Relief
665.15   Intimidation or Interference in Housing
665.16   Reserved
665.17   Reserved
665.18   Pattern or Practice of Discrimination
665.19   Prohibitions Against Real Estate Steering
665.20   Additional Remedies
665.21   Scope/Severability
665.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Civil Right, RC Ch. 4112
§ 665.01 Purpose
   It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this chapter to provide, within
constitutional limitations, fair housing throughout the City of Cleveland
(hereinafter, the City), to assure that all persons have full and equal
opportunity to consider all available housing for themselves and their families
within the City without discrimination based on race, religion, color, sex,
sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, national origin, age,
disability, ethnic group, Vietnam-era or disabled veteran status, familial
status, marital status or ancestry, and to promote a stable, racially
integrated community.
(Ord. No. 1260-08. Passed 11-30-09, eff. 12-3-09)
§ 665.02 Definitions
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   “Aggrieved person” includes any person who:
      (1)   Claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice;
or
      (2)   Believes that such person will be injured by a discriminatory
housing practice that is about to occur.
   (b)   “Covered multi-family dwellings” means buildings consisting of four
(4) or more units, if such buildings have one (1) or more elevators, and ground
floor units in other buildings consisting of four (4) or more units.
   (c)   “Disability”
      (1)   Means, with respect to a person:
         A.   A physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one (1)
or more major life activities, including the functions of caring for one’s self
such as: performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking,
breathing, learning, and/or working;
         B.   A record of a physical or mental impairment;
         C.   Being regarded as having a physical or mental impairment; or
         D.   Any person associated with that person, and any person residing
or intending to reside with that person.
      (2)   Does not include current, illegal use of, or addiction to, a
controlled substance, as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802.
   (d)   “Manager of Fair Housing and Consumer Affairs” means the Manager as
established and defined in Section
137.03.
   (e)   “Fair Housing Board” means the Board as established and defined in
Section
665.05.
   (f)   “Familial status” refers to the status of:
      (1)   One (1) or more individuals (who have not attained the age of
eighteen (18) years) being domiciled with:
         A.   A parent or another person having legal custody of the individual
or individuals; or
         B.   The designee of the parent or other person having such custody,
with the written permission of the parent or other persons.
      (2)   Any person who is pregnant or is in the process of securing legal
custody of any individual who has not attained the age of eighteen (18) years.
   (g)   “Gender identity or expression” means the gender-related identity,
external presentation of gender identity through appearance, or mannerism or
other gender-related characteristics of an individual, regardless of the
individual’s designated sex at birth.
   (h)   “Housing for older persons” means:
      (1)   Housing provided under any State or Federal program that the
Secretary of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development
(hereafter “HUD”) determines is specifically designed and operated to assist
elderly persons (as defined in the State or Federal program);
      (2)   Housing intended for, and solely occupied by, persons sixty-two
(62) years of age or older;
      (3)   Housing intended and operated for occupancy by at least one (1)
person fifty-five (55) years or older per unit. The determination as to whether
housing qualifies as housing for older persons under this division shall be
consistent with regulations promulgated by the Secretary of HUD, which require
that at least the following factors are present:
         A.   The existence of significant facilities and services specifically
designed to meet the physical or social needs of older persons or if the
provision of the facilities and services is not practicable, that the housing
is necessary to provide important housing opportunities for older persons; and
         B.   That at least eighty percent (80%) of the units are occupied by
at least one (1) person fifty-five (55) years of age or older per unit; and
         C.   The publication of, and adherence to, policies and procedures
which demonstrate an intent by the owner or manager to provide housing for
persons fifty-five (55) years of age or older.
      (4)   Housing shall not fail to meet the requirements for housing for
older persons by reason of:
         A.   There being persons residing in the housing as of the date of
enactment of the Fair Housing Act of 1988 who do not meet the age requirements
of division (h)(2) or (3) of this section; provided that the new occupants of
the housing meet the age requirements of division (h)(2) or (3); or
         B.   There being unoccupied units, provided that such units are
reserved for occupancy by persons who meet the age requirements of division (h)
(2) or (3).
   (i)   “Lending institution” means any bank, savings and loan association,
insurance company, or other organization or person regularly engaged in the
business of lending money, guaranteeing loans for profit, or otherwise
providing financial assistance or insurance in connection with the purchase,
sale or rental of dwellings.
   (j)   “Person” means one (1) or more individuals, partnerships,
associations, organizations, corporations, joint stock companies, mutual
companies, legal representatives, trusts, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy,
receivers, and other organized groups of persons. It also includes, but is not
limited to, any owner, lessor, assignor, builder, manager, broker, salesman,
appraiser, agent, employee, and lending institution.
   (k)   “Property”, as used in this chapter, means any building, structure,
facility or portion thereof, which is used, occupied or is intended, arranged
or designed to be used or occupied;
      (1)   As the residence, dwelling unit, or sleeping place of one (1) or
more individuals, groups, or families whether or not living independently of
each other, and includes any housing accommodations held or offered for sale or
rent by a real estate broker, salesman, or agent, or by any other person with
authorization of the owner, by the owner, or by the person’s legal
representative;
      (2)   For the purpose of operating a business, an office, a manufactory
or public accommodation; or
      (3)   Any vacant land offered for sale, lease or held for the purpose of
constructing or locating thereon any such building, structure, facility,
business concern or public accommodation.
   (l)   “Protected group” or “protected class” refers to persons who are or
may be discriminated against on the basis of race, religion, color, sex, sexual
orientation, gender identity or expression, national origin, age, disability,
ethnic group, Vietnam-era or disabled veteran status, familial status, marital
status or ancestry.
   (m)   “Purchase” means to obtain property through sale.
   (n)   “Real estate broker” means a real estate agent or salesperson, or a
limited real estate broker or salesperson as defined in RC 4735.01.
   (o)   “Rent” or “rental” means to lease, sublease, assign or otherwise grant
or obtain the right to occupy property not owned by the occupant in return for
consideration, or a contract or option to do any of the foregoing.
   (p)   “Sale or sell” means to convey, exchange, transfer or assign legal or
equitable title to, or beneficial interest in, property in return for
consideration, or a contract or option to do any of the foregoing.
   (q)   “Sexual orientation” means a person’s actual or perceived
homosexuality, bisexuality or heterosexuality, by orientation or practice.
   (r)   “Solicitation” or “solicit” means the mailing or delivery of any
printed matter or any oral communication either in person or by telephone to
the owner or occupant of property by any real estate broker, agent, sales
representative or other person for any of the following purposes:
      (1)   Advertising the accomplishments and/or abilities of the real estate
broker, agent, sales representative or other person to sell or rent property;
      (2)   Requesting or suggesting that the owner or occupant list his or her
property for sale or rent; or
      (3)   Offering to purchase or rent the owner’s property.
(Ord. No. 1233-15. Passed 11-9-15, eff. 11-11-15)
§ 665.03 Unlawful Discriminatory Housing Practices
   It shall be an unlawful discriminatory housing practice for any person to:
   (a)   Refuse to sell, transfer, assign, rent, lease, sublease, finance, or
negotiate after the making of a bona fide offer, or otherwise deny or make
unavailable, because of membership in a protected class, a property to any
person;
   (b)   Represent to any person, because of membership in a protected class,
that a property is not available for sale, rental, inspection, purchase,
transfer, assignment, lease or sublease when, in fact, it is available;
   (c)   Discriminate against any person in making available such a
transaction, or in the terms or conditions of such a transaction, if the
person’s business includes engaging in residential real estate- related
transactions, because of race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender
identity or expression, national origin, age, disability, ethnic group,
Vietnam- era or disabled veteran status, familial status, marital status or
ancestry. As used in this section, the term “residential real estate-related
transaction” means any of the following:
      (1)   The making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial
assistance:
         A.   For purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or
maintaining a dwelling; or
         B.   Secured by residential real estate.
      (2)   The selling, brokering or appraising of real property; and
      (3)   For the purposes of this section, a person is engaging in
residential real estate-related transactions if:
         A.   He or she has, within the preceding twelve (12) months,
participated as principal in three (3) or more transactions involving the sale
or rental of any dwelling or any interest in any dwelling; or
         B.   He or she has, within the preceding twelve (12) months,
participated as agent, other than in the sale of his or her own personal
residence, in providing sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services
in two (2) or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or
any interest in any dwelling; or
         C.   He or she is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for
occupancy by, or occupied by, five (5) or more families; or
         D.   He or she has, within the preceding twelve (12) months,
participated as principal in three (3) or more transactions involving the
making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial assistance or
appraising of real property.
   (d)   Discriminate against any person in the terms or conditions of selling,
renting, transferring, assigning, brokering, leasing or subleasing any
property, or in furnishing facilities, services or privileges in connection
with the ownership, occupancy or use of any property because of membership in a
protected class or because of the racial composition or presence of any other
protected groups in the area in which the dwelling is located;
   (e)   Discriminate against any person in the provision of property and
casualty, including but not limited to, fire, extended coverage, renter’s or
homeowner’s insurance (“insurance”) or insurance related services because of
membership in a protected class of a current or prospective purchaser, renter,
or occupant, or of other residents in the area or community, by any one (1) or
more of the following practices:
      (1)   Making insurance or insurance related services unavailable or
making them available on different terms or conditions;
      (2)   Refusing to sell or renew or by canceling insurance or an insurance
policy;
      (3)   Varying the terms or conditions under which an insurance policy or
insurance related services is available;
      (4)   Establishing different qualifications, requirements or standards
for making insurance or insurance related services available;
      (5)   Offering different services, facilities or privileges in the
provision of insurance or insurance related services;
      (6)   Discouraging potential applicants from applying for insurance,
including not but limited to utilizing different sales and marketing practices;
      (7)   Evaluating, settling, or paying insurance claims;
   (f)   Refuse to consider the combined income of both husband and wife for
the purpose of extending mortgage credit to a married couple or either member
because of their membership in a protected class;
   (g)   Print, publish or circulate, or cause to be printed, published or
circulated, any statement or advertisement, or make or cause to be made any
written or oral statement, relating to the sale, transfer, assignment, rental,
lease, sublease or acquisition of any property or the loan of money, whether or
not secured by mortgage or otherwise, for the acquisition, construction,
rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of a property, which indicates any
preference, limitation, specification or discrimination based upon protected
group membership, or an intention to make any such preference, limitation,
specification or discrimination;
   (h)   Include in any sale, transfer, rental, lease or sublease of a property
any restrictive covenant based on protected group membership, or honor or
exercise, or attempt to honor or exercise any restrictive covenant;
   (i)   For the purposes of profit, whether or not realized, induce or solicit
or attempt to induce or solicit a property listing or transaction including but
not limited to a sale, rental or other transaction by representing that a
change has occurred or may occur with respect to the protected class or classes
of the area in which the property is located, or induce or solicit or attempt
to induce or solicit such listing, sale, or transaction by representing that
the actual or anticipated presence of persons of any protected class in the
area will or may have results such as:
      (1)   The lowering of property values;
      (2)   A change in the composition of the area in which the property is
located based upon a protected class or classes;
      (3)   An increase in criminal or anti-social behavior in the area; or
      (4)   A decline in the quality of the schools serving the area.
   (j)   Coerce, injure, intimidate, threaten or interfere with any person in
the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of that person’s having exercised
or enjoyed or having aided or encouraged any other person in the exercise or
enjoyment of any right granted or protected by this section;
   (k)   Discriminate against any person because of protected group status in
appraising the value of any property in connection with the sale, brokering or
rental or because of the composition of the area based upon protected class or
classes;
   (l)   Deny any person access to, or membership or participation in, any
multiple-listing service, real estate brokers’ association or other service
association or facility relating to the business of selling or renting housing
accommodations or commercial property, or to discriminate against any person in
the terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation, on account
of membership in a protected class;
   (m)   Refuse to permit, at the expense of a disabled person, reasonable
modifications to existing premises occupied or to be occupied by such person,
if the modifications may be necessary to afford such person full enjoyment of
the premises, except that, in the case of a rental, a landlord may – where it
is reasonable to do so – condition his or her consent to a modification on a
renter’s agreement, which can include the establishment of an escrow account,
to restore the interior of the premises to the condition that existed prior to
the modification, reasonable wear and tear excepted:
   (n)   Refuse to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices
or services, when the accommodations may be necessary to afford a disabled
person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling including associated
public and common use areas;
   (o)   Construct covered multi-family dwellings that do not provide for
accessibility and usability for physically disabled persons in compliance with
42 U.S.C. 3604(f)(3)(C);
   (p)   Discriminate in any manner against any other person because that
person has opposed any unlawful practice defined in this section, or because
that person has made a charge, testified, assisted or participated in any
manner in any investigation, proceeding or hearing under RC 4112.01 to 4112.07;
or
   (q)   Aid, abet, incite, compel or coerce the doing of any act declared by
this section to be an unlawful discriminatory practice, or obstruct or prevent
any person from complying with RC 4112.01 to 4112.11, 42 U.S.C. 3601 et seq.,
or any order issued under those sections, or attempt directly or indirectly to
commit any act declared by this section to be an unlawful discriminatory
practice.
(Ord. No. 1260-08. Passed 11-30-09, eff. 12-3-09)
§ 665.04 Exemptions
   The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to:
   (a)   Prohibit a religious or denominational institution, organization,
society or association of any non-profit charitable or educational organization
that is operated, supervised or controlled by or in connection with a religious
organization, from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it
owns or operates for other than commercial purposes to persons of the same
religion or from giving preference to those persons, unless membership in the
religion is restricted on account of race, color or national origin, nor shall
anything in this chapter prohibit a private club not in fact open to the
public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes, provides
lodging which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from
limiting the rental or occupancy of the lodgings to its members or from giving
preference to its members;
   (b)   Require any person selling or renting property to modify the property
in any way at his or her expense, provided that the person does not refuse to
permit reasonable modifications by a disabled person, which are necessary for
that person to fully enjoy the premises in which he or she resides or will
reside, when the modifications are made at the expense of the disabled person,
which permission may be reasonably based on the disabled person’s promise,
under division (m) of Section
665.03, to restore the interior of the dwelling to the condition in which it
existed before permission was granted for the modification, nor shall this
chapter be construed to relieve any disabled person of any obligation generally
imposed on all persons, regardless of disability, in a written lease, rental
agreement or contract of purchase or sale, or to forbid distinctions based on
the inability to fulfill the terms and conditions, including financial
obligations, of the lease, agreement, or contract, so long as the distinctions
are not based on the disability, or on the landlord’s refusal to make
reasonable modifications in the lease, agreement or contract conditions for the
purpose of denying a disabled person equal opportunity to the use and enjoyment
of the premises. Making the modifications permitted under this division does
not relieve any person from the applicability of division (o) of Section
665.03 or from the design and construction requirements in 42 U.S.C. 3604(f)(3)
(C) for accessibility for physically disabled persons.
(RC 4112.12(K), (N))
   (c)   Prohibit the restriction of a sale or rental of a property on the
basis of disability when the property is authorized, approved, financed or
subsidized, in whole or in part, for the benefit of disabled persons by a unit
of the local, state or federal government, so long as the restrictions do not
discriminate against an otherwise qualified disabled person;
   (d)   Require that a property be made available to an individual whose
tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of other
individuals or whose tenancy would result in substantial physical damage to the
property of others;
   (e)   Prohibit the application of any reasonable local, state or federal
restrictions regarding the maximum number of occupants permitted to occupy a
property;
   (f)   With regard to familial status, apply to properties that have been
determined to be housing for older persons;
   (g)   Hold a person personally liable for monetary damages for
discrimination on the basis of familial status if such person reasonably
relied, in good faith, on the application of the exemption under 42 U.S.C. 3607
(b)(1) relating to housing for older persons; or
   (h)   Prohibit a person engaged in the business of furnishing appraisals of
real property to take into consideration factors other than membership in a
protected class.
(Ord. No. 295-08. Passed 4-7-08, eff. 4-14-08)
§ 665.05 Fair Housing Board; Powers; Duties; Responsibilities
   (a)   There is hereby established a Fair Housing Board which shall consist
of five (5) members: one (1) appointed by the Mayor; one (1) appointed by the
Council; and three (3) citizen members nominated by the Mayor and confirmed by
Council. The member appointed by the Mayor and the member appointed by Council
each shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years. Of the citizen members
first appointed, one (1) shall be appointed for a term of one (1) year, one (1)
for a term of two (2) years, and one (1) for a term of three (3) years;
thereafter appointments shall be for three (3) years.
   (b)   After January 1, 2011, and upon expiration of the terms of the members
appointed under division (a), appointments to the Fair Housing Board shall be
as follows: two (2) appointed by the Mayor; two (2) appointed by the Council;
and one (1) citizen member nominated by the Mayor and confirmed by Council. The
members shall each be appointed for a term of three (3) years. To accomplish
this change in the appointment process, the first expired term of a citizen
member appointed under division (a) shall be filled by the Mayor; the second
expired term of a citizen member appointed under division (a) shall be filled
by Council. Thereafter, all appointments shall be made in accordance with this
division.
   (c)   The Fair Housing Board shall have the responsibility to administer the
provisions of this chapter and to adjudicate complaints alleging violations of
any section. The Board shall have and may exercise the following powers to
implement the purposes of this chapter:
      (1)   To hold adjudicative hearings, make findings of fact, issue orders,
enforce such orders and seek judicial and/or administrative relief with respect
to any such complaints in accordance with the provisions of this chapter;
      (2)   To subpoena witnesses, compel their attendance, administer oaths,
take sworn testimony and, in connection therewith, to require the production
for examination of any documents relating to any matter under investigation or
in question before the Board, and enforce such powers by proper petition to any
court of competent jurisdiction;
      (3)   To adopt such rules and regulations as the Board may deem necessary
or desirable for the conduct of its business and to carry out the purposes of
this chapter;
      (4)   To do such other acts as are necessary and proper to perform those
duties with which the Board is charged under this chapter, including the
provision of referral services for the community;
      (5)   To collect, analyze and study the results of investigations made
under this chapter and report to the Mayor and City Council on or before
January 31 of each calendar year on the working of this chapter for the purpose
of advising on and recommending amendments to this chapter;
      (6)   To conduct a continuing program of education and community
organization throughout the City;
      (7)   To initiate an investigation without the filing of an official
complaint, provided a majority of the Board elects to proceed based upon
reasonable cause to believe that violations of this chapter are occurring or
have occurred. The Board shall have the same powers following this initiated
investigation as it has with an investigation based on the filing of a
complaint;
      (8)   To enter into cooperative agreements with other governmental
agencies to effectuate the purposes of this chapter;
      (9)   To refer persons allegedly aggrieved by unlawful discriminatory
housing practices to the Ohio Civil Rights Commission or other governmental or
private agencies, as appropriate;
      (10)   If the Board has reasonable cause to believe that any person or
persons are engaged in unlawful discriminatory housing practices as described
in Section
665.03, the Board may refer the matter to the Director of Law for commencement
of a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction on behalf of the City.
The Director of Law may seek any relief considered necessary to ensure the full
enjoyment of the rights granted by this chapter.
(Ord. No. 1329-10. Passed 12-6-10, eff. 12-6-10)
§ 665.051 Fair Housing Administrator – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1329-10. Passed 12-6-10, eff. 12-6-10)
§ 665.06 Complaints
   (a)   Any aggrieved person may allege that a violation of Section
665.03 has occurred or is about to occur by filing with the Fair Housing Board,
within one hundred and eighty (180) days of the alleged violation, a sworn,
written complaint setting forth his or her grievance. The complaint shall state
the name and address of the aggrieved party (the “complainant”), the name and
address of the person(s) alleged to have committed a violation of Section
665.03 (the “respondent”), a description and address of the property involved
in the discriminatory incident and the particular facts and other information
as may be required by the Board. A complaint may be amended at any time before
the hearing is conducted under Section
665.09, and thereafter only with permission of the Fair Housing Board. On the
filing of a complaint, the Fair Housing Board shall acknowledge the receipt of
the complaint and serve notice to the complainant, which notice shall also
contain information as to the time limits, notice of procedural rights and
obligations and choice of forum provided in this chapter.
   (b)   Within ten (10) days after a complaint has been received by the Fair
Housing Board, it shall serve or cause to be served, in person or by certified
mail, a copy of the complaint on the respondent alleged to have committed a
violation of Section
665.03. Along with the service of the complaint, the Fair Housing Board shall
advise the respondent, in writing, of his or her procedural rights and
obligations under this chapter. The respondent may file a written verified
answer to the complaint with the Fair Housing Board within ten (10) days after
receipt of notice of the complaint, and thereafter only with permission of the
Fair Housing Board.
   (c)   Within ten (10) days after identification of an additional respondent
under this section, the Fair Housing Board shall serve a notice identifying the
alleged discriminatory housing practice and advising the additional respondent
of the procedural rights and obligations of respondents under this section, and
a copy of the original complaint.
(Ord. No. 295-08. Passed 4-7-08, eff. 4-14-08)
§ 665.07 Investigation of Complaints
   (a)   Investigations shall be commenced by the Manager of Fair Housing and
Consumer Affairs or his or her designee or designees within thirty (30) days
after a complaint has been received. Conciliation, under Section
665.08, shall be attempted beginning with the filing of the complaint and
ending with the filing of a charge or a dismissal of the complaint. If
conciliation has failed and the investigation has been completed, the Manager
of Fair Housing shall determine that:
      (1)   There are reasonable grounds to believe that a violation of Section
665.03 has occurred, in which case the Manager of Fair Housing and Consumer
Affairs shall issue a charge stating the facts forming the basis for the
finding of reasonable grounds to believe discrimination occurred or is about to
occur under Section
665.03. The Manager of Fair Housing and Consumer Affairs shall then forward the
complaint to the Fair Housing and Consumer Affairs Board for a hearing, under
Section
665.09; or
      (2)   There are no reasonable grounds to believe that a violation of
Section
665.03 has occurred or was about to occur, in which case the Manager of Fair
Housing and Consumer Affairs shall prepare and issue a written notice of
dismissal, within five (5) days of the finding of no reasonable grounds, by
serving a copy of the notice of dismissal by certified mail on the parties. The
notice of dismissal shall advise the complainant of his or her right of appeal
under this section. Within fourteen (14) days of receipt of notice of
dismissal, the complainant may request, in writing, reconsideration by the Fair
Housing Board of the dismissal. By a majority vote, the Fair Housing Board may
affirm or reverse the dismissal. If the Fair Housing Board reverses, it shall
refer the complaint to the Manager of Fair Housing and Consumer Affairs for
conciliation and other actions consistent with this chapter.
   (b)   The Manager of Fair Housing and Consumer Affairs shall complete the
investigation within one hundred (100) days after receipt of the complaint,
unless impracticable, in which case the Fair Housing Board shall inform, in
writing, the complainant and the respondent of the reasons why the
investigation cannot be completed within the time prescribed.
   (c)   The Manager of Fair Housing and Consumer Affairs and his or her
designee and staff may be assisted in the investigation by a fair housing
agency or other appropriate organization or person under contract with the
City.
(Ord. No. 1329-10. Passed 12-6-10, eff. 12-6-10)
§ 665.08 Conciliation Process
   (a)   During the period beginning with the filing of such complaint and
ending with the filing of a charge or a dismissal by the Fair Housing Board,
the Fair Housing Board shall, to the extent feasible, engage in conciliation
with respect to such complaint. As appropriate, the Manager of Fair Housing and
Consumer Affairs or his or her designee shall:
      (1)   Notify the complainant and respondent of the time, place and date
of the conciliation conference at least ten (10) days prior thereto, and both
parties shall appear at the conciliation conference in person or by attorney;
and
      (2)   Attempt to resolve the complaint by methods of conference,
conciliation and persuasion with all interested parties and such
representatives as the parties may choose to assist them. Conciliation
conferences shall be informal and nothing said or done during such conferences
shall be made public unless the parties agree thereto in writing. The terms of
conciliation agreed to by the parties shall be reduced to writing and
incorporated into a consent agreement to be signed by the parties, subject to
approval by the Fair Housing Board. The terms of the conciliation agreement
shall be made public, unless the complainant and the respondent agree otherwise
and the Fair Housing Board determines that disclosure is not required to
further the purposes of this chapter.
   (b)   A conciliation agreement may provide for binding arbitration of the
dispute arising from the complaint. Any such arbitration that results from a
conciliation agreement may award appropriate relief, including monetary relief.
(Ord. No. 1329-10. Passed 12-6-10, eff. 12-6-10)
§ 665.09 Hearings
   (a)   After the complaint is received by the Fair Housing Board pursuant to
division (a)(1) of Section
665.07, the Fair Housing Board shall, upon due and reasonable notice to all
parties, hold a hearing on the complaint. Parties to the hearing shall be the
complainant and respondent and such other persons as the Fair Housing Board may
deem appropriate. The hearing shall be open to the public. At the time it
determines to hold such hearing, the Fair Housing Board shall serve upon the
respondent a summons requiring the attendance of named persons and the
production of relevant documents and records.
   (b)   At any time prior to the conclusion of the hearing, the parties may
request the Fair Housing Board to issue subpoenas for individuals or documents
in the Fair Housing Board’s name. Failure to comply with a summons or subpoena
shall constitute a violation of this chapter. The parties may appear before
such Board in person or by duly authorized representative and may be
represented by legal counsel. The parties shall have the right to present
witnesses and to cross-examine witnesses, and all testimony and evidence shall
be given under oath or by affirmation.
   (c)   If a charge is issued pursuant to Section
665.07(a)(1), either the complainant or the respondent, in lieu of
participating in the administrative hearing process, as outlined in this
Section
665.09, may elect to have the case heard in a civil action. Such civil action
shall be maintained on behalf of the aggrieved person at the expense of the
Fair Housing Board. Such election must be made within twenty (20) days after
the receipt of the charge.
(Ord. No. 1081-01. Passed 6-19-01, eff. 7-27-01)
§ 665.10 Hearing Decisions
   (a)   Within thirty (30) days of the close of the hearing, the Fair Housing
Board shall deliver its decision, which shall be rendered in the form of a
written order and which shall include findings of fact and a statement as to
whether the respondent has violated or was about to violate Section
665.03 and any remedial actions as the Fair Housing Board may order under
Section
665.13. The order shall be served upon the parties by certified mail within
fifteen (15) days of the date of the decision. The order shall be available for
public inspection, and a copy shall be provided to any person on request and
payment of reproduction costs.
   (b)   If the Fair Housing Board is unable to make a recommendation within
the time frame indicated in section (a), the Fair Housing Board shall notify
the Manager of Fair Housing and Consumer Affairs, the complainant and the
respondent in writing of the reasons for not doing so.
(Ord. No. 1329-10. Passed 12-6-10, eff. 12-6-10)
§ 665.11 Other Legal Action – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1081-01. Passed 6-19-01, eff. 6-27-01)
§ 665.12 Injunctive Relief
   At any time after the filing of a complaint referred to in Section
665.07, the Fair Housing Board may request the City’s Director of Law to
petition the appropriate court for temporary or preliminary relief pending
final determination of the proceedings under this chapter, or as otherwise
necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter, including an order or
decree restraining the respondent from doing or causing any act which would
render ineffectual any order or action by the Fair Housing Board.
(Ord. No. 162-A-2000. Passed 12-4-00, eff. 12-14-00 without the signature of
the Mayor)
§ 665.13 Remedial Actions
   (a)   If the Fair Housing Board finds that the respondent has not violated
or was not about to violate Section
665.03, its order under Section
665.10 shall dismiss the complaint.
   (b)   If the Fair Housing Board finds that the respondent has violated or
was not about to violate Section
665.03, its order under Section
665.10 shall provide for the taking of remedial action, as it deems
appropriate, which may include but not be limited to:
      (1)   Directing the respondent to cease and desist from violations of
Section
665.03 and to take affirmative steps as necessary to effectuate the purposes of
this chapter;
      (2)   Initiating, at the Fair Housing Board’s expense, an appropriate
court action for the enforcement of Section
665.03, and for other or further relief as the court may deem appropriate
including, but not limited to, injunctive relief, compensatory damages,
punitive damages to the complainant and/or attorneys’ fees and costs incurred
by the complainant and/or the Fair Housing Board and/or the City; court action
shall be required in the event the respondent does not voluntarily comply with
remedial actions ordered by the Fair Housing Board;
      (3)   Initiating proceedings based on violation of federal or state law
and/or regulations;
      (4)   Initiating proceedings with any contracting agency, in the case of
any violation of Section
665.03 by respondent in the course of performing under a contract or
subcontract with the State or any political subdivision or agency, or with the
United States of America or any agency or instrumentality, for the purpose of
terminating the contract or any portion of the contract, or obtaining other
relief;
      (5)   Initiating proceedings with the State of Ohio, where applicable, to
revoke, suspend or refuse to renew the license of any person found to have
violated any provision of Section
665.03;
      (6)   Directing the respondent to reimburse the complainant and/or the
City, as applicable, for his or her actual and reasonable expenses incurred and
to be incurred as a result of each violation found including, but not limited
to, expenses for moving and temporary storage of household furnishings,
additional expenses in connection with the purchase or rental of a dwelling for
alternative accommodations, and reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs;
      (7)   Directing the respondent to reimburse the City for its actual
reasonable direct expenses incurred and to be incurred as a result of each
violation found including reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs;
      (8)   Assessing compensatory damages, as appropriate, or arrange to have
adjudicated in court, at the Fair Housing Board’s expense, the award of
compensatory damages against the respondent;
      (9)   Assessing civil penalties, as appropriate, or arranging to have
adjudicated in court at the Fair Housing Board’s expense, the award of punitive
damages against the respondent. For purposes of this chapter, civil penalties
are defined as penalties assessed against the respondent to vindicate the
public interest in an amount:
         A.   Not exceeding fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for a first
violation; and
         B.   Not exceeding one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for any
subsequent violation.
      (10)   Such other further relief as the Fair Housing Board may deem
appropriate for enforcement of Section
665.03.
   (c)   The Fair Housing Board shall make a final administrative disposition
of a complaint within one (1) year after the complaint has been filed, unless
it is impracticable to do so, in which case the complainant and respondent
shall be notified, in writing, of the reasons why disposition of the complaint
cannot be made within the time prescribed.
   (d)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the City, at its
own expense, from initiating appropriate court action on behalf of the
complainant in order to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   (e)   The complainant and the respondent shall have the right to appeal an
adverse final determination by the Board to the Cuyahoga County Common Pleas
Court under RC Chapter 2506, or in another forum or court of competent
jurisdiction as provided by law.
(Ord. No. 295-08. Passed 4-7-08, eff. 4-14-08)
§ 665.14 Judicial Relief
   The City, the complainant, or any person aggrieved by a violation of any
provision of this chapter may at any time within one (1) year from the date of
the alleged violation and in lieu of proceeding with the administrative process
set forth in this chapter, apply to any court of competent jurisdiction for
appropriate relief including, but not limited to:
   (a)   Injunctive relief or an order otherwise compelling compliance with
this chapter;
   (b)   Compensatory damages and/or punitive damages;
   (c)   Reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs to complainant and/or the City as
applicable; and/or
   (d)   Such other or further relief as is appropriate for the enforcement of
this ordinance and elimination of violations thereof.
   The City shall notify the complainant of all statutes of limitations for the
filing of complaints in state and/or federal court.
(Ord. No. 162-A-2000. Passed 12-4-00, eff. 12-14-00 without the signature of
the Mayor)
§ 665.15 Intimidation or Interference in Housing
   No person, whether or not acting under color of law, shall by force or
threat of force willfully injure, intimidate or interfere with, or attempt to
injure, intimidate or interfere with any of the following:
   (a)   Any person because of race, religion, color, sex, sexual orientation,
gender identity or expression, national origin, age, disability, or ethnic
group, Vietnam-era or disabled veteran status, familial status, marital status
or ancestry and because that person is or has been selling, purchasing,
renting, financing, occupying, contracting, or negotiating for the sale,
purchase, rental, financing, or occupation of any property; or applying for or
participating in any service, organization, or facility relating to the
business of selling or renting housing accommodations;
   (b)   Any person because that person is, or has been, or is considering:
      (1)   Participating, without discrimination on account of race, religion,
color, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, national origin,
age, disability, ethnic group, Vietnam-era or disabled veteran status, familial
status, marital status or ancestry, in any of the activities, services,
organizations or facilities described in division (a) of this section;
      (2)   Affording another person or class of persons opportunity or
protection so to participate;
   (c)   Any person because that person is, or is considering lawfully aiding
or encouraging other persons to participate, without discrimination on account
of race, religion, color, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity or
expression, national origin, age, disability, ethnic group, Vietnam-era or
disabled veteran status, familial status, marital status or ancestry, in any of
the activities, services, organizations or facilities described in division (a)
of this section, or participating lawfully in speech or peaceful assembly
opposing any denial of the opportunity to so participate.
(Ord. No. 1233-15. Passed 11-9-15, eff. 11-11-15)
§ 665.16 Reserved
§ 665.17 Reserved
§ 665.18 Pattern or Practice of Discrimination
   Whenever the Fair Housing Board has reasonable cause to believe that any
person or persons are engaged in a pattern or practice of resistance to a
person’s or persons’ full enjoyment of the rights granted by Section
665.03 or
665.19, of this chapter, or that any group of persons has been denied any of
the rights granted by such section and the denial raises an issue of public
policy, the Fair Housing Board may refer the matter to the Director of Law for
commencement of a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction on behalf
of the City. The Director of Law may seek any relief considered necessary to
ensure the full enjoyment of the rights granted by this chapter.
(Ord. No. 162-A-2000. Passed 12-4-00, eff. 12-14-00 without the signature of
the Mayor)
§ 665.19 Prohibitions Against Real Estate Steering
   No person who receives or expects to receive pecuniary gain from the sale or
rental of housing accommodations shall:
   (a)   Influence or attempt to influence any other person who purports or
represents himself or herself to be a prospective purchaser, occupant or tenant
of housing accommodations to refrain from purchasing or renting housing
accommodations by referring to race, religion, color, sex, sexual orientation,
national origin, age, disability, ethnic group, Vietnam-era or disabled veteran
status, familial status, marital status or ancestry, of occupants or
prospective occupants of other housing accommodations in the neighborhood;
   (b)   Influence or attempt to influence, by any words, acts, or failure to
act, any person who purports or represents himself or herself to be a
prospective seller, purchaser, occupant, landlord or tenant of housing
accommodations, in connection with the sale or rental of housing
accommodations, in connection with the sale or rental of housing
accommodations, so as to promote or tend to promote the continuance or
maintenance of segregated housing or so as to retard, obstruct or discourage
integrated housing on or in any street, block or neighborhood;
   (c)   Discriminate against any person who purports or represents himself or
herself to be a prospective seller, purchaser, occupant, landlord or tenant of
housing accommodations by any influence, suggestion, act or failure to act, or
accord any differential treatment among such persons, in connection with the
sale or rental of housing accommodations or in the furnishing of information,
services, or facilities relative thereto because of the race, religion, color,
sex, sexual orientation, national origin, age, disability, ethnic group,
Vietnam-era’ or disabled veteran status, familial status, marital status or
ancestry of any person.
(Ord. No. 162-A-2000. Passed 12-4-00, eff. 12-14-00 without the signature of
the Mayor)
§ 665.20 Additional Remedies
   This chapter shall not prevent the City or any person from exercising any
right or seeking any remedy to which that person might otherwise be entitled,
or from filing any complaint with any other agency or court of law or equity.
(Ord. No. 162-A-2000. Passed 12-4-00, eff. 12-14-00 without the signature of
the Mayor)
§ 665.21 Scope/Severability
   (a)   Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all property, as
defined herein, located within the territorial limits of the City of Cleveland,
Ohio.
   (b)   Severability. If any provision of this chapter is held to be
unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction,
the remaining provisions of the chapter shall not be invalidated.
(Ord. No. 162-A-2000. Passed 12-4-00, eff. 12-14-00 without the signature of
the Mayor)
§ 665.99 Penalty
   (a)   Whoever violates division (b) of Section
665.09 of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (b)   Whoever violates Section
665.15 of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (c)   The Fair Housing Board may not initiate any criminal proceeding
arising under this chapter. However, nothing in this Section
665.99 shall prevent such Board from referring a possible criminal violation to
the appropriate authorities.
(Ord. No. 1081-01. Passed 6-19-01, eff. 7-27-01)
CHAPTER 667 – UNLAWFUL DISCRIMINATORY CONDUCT
667.01   Unlawful Discriminatory Public Accommodations Practices
667.011   Definitions
667.012   Complaints; Procedure; Hearings
667.013   Remedies and Relief
667.02   Pictures Inciting Race Violence
667.03   Printed Matter Inciting Racial or Religious Hatred
667.04   Societies to Promote Racial Hatred, Etc.
667.05   Unlawful Discrimination in Employment
667.06   Efforts to Change Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity, or Expression
667.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Civil rights interference, CO
615.13
   Coercion, CO
621.09
   Discrimination at amusement parks, CO
687.05
   Discrimination at karting parks, CO
691.16
Statutory reference:
   Unlawful discriminatory practices, RC 4112.02
§ 667.01 Unlawful Discriminatory Public Accommodations Practices
   It shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice in a place of public
accommodation for any person who is the owner, operator, lessee, manager,
administrator, servant, agent or employee of any place of public accommodation:
   (a)   To refuse, deny, segregate, discriminate or make a distinction,
directly or indirectly, in offering its goods, services, facilities or
accommodations to any person because of race, religion, color, sex, sexual
orientation, gender identity or expression, national origin, age, disability,
ethnic group, or Vietnam-era or disabled veteran status of such person;
   (b)   To refuse, deny, segregate, separate, discriminate, or make a
distinction, directly or indirectly in any way, against any person in the full
and equal use and enjoyment of the services, facilities, privileges, advantages
or enforcement powers of the City, or any unit or office thereof, because of
race, religion, color, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression,
national origin, age, disability, ethnic group, or Vietnam-era or disabled
veteran status of such person;
   (c)   For any person, whether or not specifically prohibited from
discriminating under any provisions of this section, to aid, abet, incite,
compel, or coerce the doing of any act declared to be an unlawful
discriminatory practice by this section, or to attempt to do so;
   (d)   To coerce, intimidate, threaten, retaliate against, or otherwise
interfere with any person, or attempt to do so, because he or she has promoted
the provisions of this section, or because he or she has filed a complaint,
testified, or assisted in any proceeding, investigation or hearing authorized
by Sections
667.011 through
667.013 or by appropriate state or federal law;
   (e)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit a religious or denominational
institution, organization, society or association or any nonprofit charitable
or educational organization that is operated, supervised or controlled by or in
connection with a religious organization, from limiting its offerings of goods,
services, facilities and accommodations to persons of the same religion, or
from giving preference to such persons, provided that such offerings mentioned
above are not, in fact, offered for commercial purposes;
   (f)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the establishment of programs
or other public accommodations designed and operated for a particular age
group. However, such public accommodations shall not discriminate on the basis
of race, religion, color, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity or
expression, national origin, age, disability, ethnic group, or Vietnam-era or
disabled veteran status;
   (g)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require the modification
of existing facilities or the construction of new or additional facilities.
(Ord. No. 1446-13. Passed 7-13-16, eff. 7-17-16)
§ 667.011 Definitions
   (a)   As used herein, “public accommodation” or “place of public
accommodation” means any inn, restaurant, eating house, barbershop, public
conveyance by air, land, or water, theater, store or other place for the sale
of merchandise or provision of services, amusement or accommodation of which
the accommodations, advantages, facilities, or privileges are offered or
available to the public.
   (b)   All other terms used in Sections
667.01 through 667.013 shall have the meanings and definitions given in Chapter
665, except as may be specifically provided herein or as required by the
context.
(Ord. No. 162-A-2000. Passed 12-4-00, eff. 12-14-00 without the signature of
the Mayor)
§ 667.012 Complaints; Procedure; Hearings
   Any aggrieved person may allege that a violation of Section
667.01 has occurred by filing a complaint with the Fair Housing Board in the
time, manner and form prescribed under Section
665.06 for complaints of unlawful practices under Section
665.03. The Fair Housing Board shall have the same powers, duties and
responsibilities with respect to a complaint alleging a violation of Section
667.01 as it has under Sections
665.05 through
665.10 with respect to a complaint alleging a violation of Section
665.03, except as may be inapplicable or required by the context or by law.
(Ord. No. 162-A-2000. Passed 12-4-00, eff. 12-14-00 without the signature of
the Mayor)
§ 667.013 Remedies and Relief
   The City, the Fair Housing Board, any person aggrieved by a violation of
Section
667.01 and any respondent thereto shall have the same rights, powers, duties
and responsibilities with respect to remedies and relief for violation of
Section
667.01 as they have under Section
665.11 through Section
665.13 with respect to a violation of Section
665.03, except as may be inapplicable or required by the context or by law.
(Ord. No. 162-A-2000. Passed 12-4-00, eff. 12-14-00 without the signature of
the Mayor)
§ 667.02 Pictures Inciting Race Violence
   No person, firm, corporation or association of individuals shall knowingly
advertise, publish, present or exhibit in any public place in the City, any
lithograph, drawing, sign, picture (motion or still), play, drama or sketch
that represents any hanging, lynching or drawing of a human being that in any
way incites race riot or race hatred.
(Ord. No. 1333-64. Passed 5-17-65, eff. 5-20-65)
§ 667.03 Printed Matter Inciting Racial or Religious Hatred
   No person, firm, corporation or association of individuals shall knowingly
print, publish, distribute or cause to be printed, published or distributed by
any means, or in any manner whatsoever, any handbill, dodger, circular,
booklet, pamphlet, leaflet, card, sticker, periodical literature or paper, that
exposes any individual or any racial or religious group to hatred, contempt,
ridicule or obloquy within the meaning of this section.
(Ord. No. 1333-64. Passed 5-17-65, eff. 5-20-65)
§ 667.04 Societies to Promote Racial Hatred, Etc.
   No person shall organize any society which tends to promote racial hatred or
religious bigotry.
(Ord. No. 63410-A. Passed 9-22-24)
§ 667.05 Unlawful Discrimination in Employment
   (a)   No person shall refuse to employ or to bar or to discharge from
employment any person because of race, religion, color, sex, sexual
orientation, gender identity or expression, national origin, age, disability,
ethnic group or Vietnam-era or disabled veteran status of such person.
   (b)   No person shall refuse to promote or grant any condition or privilege
of employment because of race, religion, color, sex, sexual orientation, gender
identity or expression, national origin, age, disability, ethnic group or
Vietnam-era or disabled veteran status of such person.
   (c)   As used in this section, “person” means an individual, corporation,
business trust, estate, trust, partnership, labor organization and association.
   (d)   As used in this section, “labor organization” means any organization
which exists and is constructed for the purpose, in whole or in part, of
collective bargaining or of dealing with employers concerning grievances, terms
and conditions of employment, or of other mutual aid or protection in
connection with employment.
   (e)   In accordance with the Religious Freedom Restoration Act, 42 U.S.C.
2000bb et seq., and other state and federal laws, nothing in this ordinance
shall be construed to infringe the free exercise of religious rights under the
First Amendment to the United States Constitution, nor shall the ordinance be
construed to affect bona fide occupational qualifications based upon religion
for employment.
(Ord. No. 1260-08. Passed 11-30-09, eff. 12-3-09)
§ 667.06 Efforts to Change Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity, or Expression
   (a)   Definitions.
      (1)   “Mental health professional” means an individual who is licensed,
certified or registered under the laws of the State of Ohio to provide, to an
individual or a group, mental health services, including but not limited to,
the assessment or improvement of mental, emotional, psychiatric, psychological,
or psychosocial adjustment or functioning, regardless of whether there is a
diagnosable, pre-existing disorder or disease. Mental health professionals
include, but are not limited to, physicians specializing in the practice of
psychiatry, psychologists, marriage and family therapists, licensed social
workers, professional clinical counselors, behavioral clinicians or therapists,
nurses, or any other persons offering such mental health services.
      (2)   “Minor” means a person less than eighteen (18) years of age.
      (3)   “Sexual orientation, gender identity, or expression change efforts”
means any practices that seek to change an individual’s sexual orientation or
gender identity, including efforts to change behaviors or gender expressions,
or to eliminate or reduce sexual or romantic attraction or feelings toward
individuals of the same sex. “Sexual orientation, gender identity, or
expression change efforts” does not include psychotherapies or therapeutic
activities that provide acceptance, support, and understanding for an
individual or the facilitation of an individual’s coping, social support, and
identity exploration and development, including sexual orientation-neutral
interventions to prevent or address unlawful conduct or unsafe sexual
practices, as long as such practices do not seek to change sexual orientation
or gender identity.
   (b)   Efforts to Change Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity, or Expression
Prohibited. No mental health professional shall knowingly engage, within the
geographic boundaries of the City of Cleveland, in sexual orientation, gender
identity, or expression change efforts with a minor, without regard to whether
the mental health professional is compensated or receives any form of
remuneration for his or her services.
   (c)   Licensing Board Notification. In addition to the penalty imposed in
Section
667.99, upon conviction of a violation of Section
667.06, the relevant licensing board, commission, or entity tasked with review
of professional conduct shall be notified of the violation by the Director of
Public Health.
   (d)   Enforcement. In addition to Cleveland Police Officers, this section
may be enforced by the Director of Public Health, the Director of Public
Safety, the Commissioner of Health, the Commission of Health Equity and Social
Justice, and any other officer or employee designated by them.
(Ord. No. 696-2022. Passed 10-10-22, eff. 10-14-22)
§ 667.99 Penalty
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(Ord. No. 1446-13. Passed 7-13-16, eff. 7-17-16)
CHAPTER 669 – UNLAWFUL DISCRIMINATORY SALARY PRACTICES
669.01   Definitions
669.02   Unlawful Discriminatory Salary History Practices
669.03   Administration
669.04   Complaints
669.05   Appeal and Collection
669.06   Severability
669.07   Effective Date
669.99   Civil Penalties
   Note: Pursuant to Section 3 of Ord. No. 104-2025, this chapter is effective
on October 27, 2025.
§ 669.01 Definitions
   For the purposes of this chapter:
   (a)   “Applicant” means any person applying for Employment, as defined in
this section, to be performed within the geographic boundaries of the City of
Cleveland, and whose application, in whole or in part, will be solicited,
received, processed, or considered in the City of Cleveland, regardless of
whether the person is interviewed.
   (b)   “City” means the City of Cleveland and all City divisions,
departments, and offices.
   (c)   “Days” means calendar days.
   (d)   “Employer” means an individual, firm, limited liability company,
partnership, association, labor organization, corporation, or any other entity,
whether or not organized for profit, and including any agent of the same, that
employs fifteen (15) or more persons within the City of Cleveland. “Employer”
includes job placement and referral agencies and other employment agencies when
such agencies operate on behalf of an entity that otherwise meets the
definition of “Employer.” “Employer” does not include any unit of local, state,
or federal government, except it does include the City.
   (e)   “Employment” means any occupation, vocation, job, or work, including
but not limited to, temporary and seasonal work, part-time work, contracted
work, contingent work, work on commission, and work through the services of a
temporary or other employment agency, for which the Applicant is to receive a
Salary. Employment does not include work as an independent contractor.
   (f)   “Fair Employment Wage Board” or “FEWB” means the board established
under Chapter
189 of these Codified Ordinances.
   (g)   “Inquire” means to communicate any direct or indirect statement,
question, prompting or other communication, orally or in writing, personally or
through an agent, to gather information from or about an Applicant, or to
conduct a search of publicly available records or reports for the purpose of
gathering information from or about an Applicant. “Inquire” does not include
informing the Applicant in writing or otherwise about the position’s proposed
or anticipated Salary.
   (h)   “Respondent” means the Employer and/or person alleged to have
committed a violation of Section
669.02.
   (i)   “Salary” means a person’s financial compensation in exchange for
labor, including but not limited to wages, commissions, hourly earnings, and
other monetary earnings, and also includes benefits.
   (j)   “Salary History” means an Applicant’s current or prior Salary. “Salary
History” does not include any objective measure of an Applicant’s productivity
such as revenue, sales, or other production reports.
(Ord. No. 104-2025. Passed 4-28-25, eff. 10-27-25)
§ 669.02 Unlawful Discriminatory Salary History Practices
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, it shall be unlawful
discriminatory practice for an Employer to do any of the following:
      (1)   Inquire about the Salary History of an Applicant;
      (2)   Screen an Applicant based on their current or prior Salary History,
including requiring that an Applicant’s prior Salary History satisfy minimum or
maximum criteria;
      (3)   Rely solely on the Salary History of an Applicant, except as
provided in division (d) of this section, in deciding whether to offer
Employment to an Applicant, or in determining the Salary for such Applicant
during the hiring process, including the negotiation of an employment contract;
and
      (4)   Refuse to hire or otherwise disfavor, injure, or retaliate against
an Applicant for not disclosing their Salary History.
   (b)   Notwithstanding division (a) of this section, an Employer may, without
inquiring about Salary History, engage in discussions with the Applicant about
their expectations with respect to Salary, including but not limited to,
unvested equity or deferred compensation that an Applicant would forfeit by
resigning from their current Employer.
   (c)   Employers shall provide the Salary range or scale for potential
Employment in the notification, advertisement, or other formal posting that
offers the opportunity to apply for Employment.
   (d)   The requirement(s) and prohibitions contained in this section shall
not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   Any actions taken by an Employer pursuant to any federal, state, or
local law that specifically authorizes the reliance on Salary History to
determine an employee’s compensation;
      (2)   Applicants for internal transfer or promotion with their current
Employer;
      (3)   A voluntary and unprompted disclosure of Salary History information
by an Applicant;
      (4)   Any attempt by an Employer to verify an Applicant’s disclosure of
non salary related information or conduct a background check, provided that if
such verification or background check discloses the Applicant’s Salary History,
such disclosure shall not be solely relied upon for purposes of determining the
Salary of such Applicant during the hiring process, including the negotiation
of an employment contract;
      (5)   Applicants who are re-hired by the Employer, provided that the
Employer already has past Salary History for the Applicant from the previous
employment of Applicant;
      (6)   Employee positions for which the Salary is determined pursuant to
procedures established by collective bargaining; and
      (7)   Federal, state, and local governmental Employers, other than the
City.
(Ord. No. 104-2025. Passed 4-28-25, eff. 10-27-25)
§ 669.03 Administration
   (a)   The administration of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the
Fair Employment Wage Board (FEWB).
   (b)   In addition to any powers conferred on the FEWB under these Codified
Ordinances, the FEWB shall have power to:
      (1)   Make technical studies and prepare and disseminate educational
materials related to this chapter;
      (2)   Make specific and detailed recommendations related to this chapter
to interested parties;
      (3)   Receive and consider complaints alleging violations of this
chapter;
      (4)   Assess penalties under Section
669.99; and
      (5)   Adopt such reasonable rules and procedures as are necessary to
effect the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 104-2025. Passed 4-28-25, eff. 10-27-25)
§ 669.04 Complaints
   (a)   Any person may allege that a violation of Section
669.02 has occurred by filing a written complaint with the FEWB within one
hundred and eighty (180) days of the alleged violation.
      (1)   The complaint shall include a description of the violation.
      (2)   The complaint shall include the name, address, and other relevant
identifying information of the Respondent.
      (3)   The complaint shall include any documentation of the alleged
violation, including but not limited to job application material or links to a
website that Inquires about the Salary History of an Applicant, to the extent
that such documentation is available.
      (4)   The complaint may but is not required to include the aggrieved
party’s signature and identifying information, such as name, address, phone
number, and email address.
   (b)   The FEWB shall consider the complaint at its next meeting but no later
than ninety (90) days from receipt of the complaint.
      (1)   If the complaint contains neither documentation of the alleged
violation nor the aggrieved party’s signature and identifying information, then
within ten (10) days of the meeting, the FEWB shall issue to the Respondent:
         A.   copy of the complaint; and
         B.   written notice stating the prohibitions and requirement(s) under
this chapter; and further stating that, while the complaint named the
Respondent, because of the lack of information available, no further action
would be taken without a new or amended complaint.
      (2)   If the complaint contains documentation of the alleged violation or
the aggrieved party’s signature and identifying information, then based on the
complaint, the FEWB shall ascertain whether a violation of Section
669.02 has occurred.
         A.   If the FEWB finds by a preponderance of the evidence that no
violation occurred, then it shall notify the aggrieved party by written or
electronic notice, if the aggrieved party has provided sufficient identifying
information to be notified.
         B.   If the FEWB finds by a preponderance of the evidence that a
violation has occurred, then it shall:
            1.   Within ten (10) days of the FEWB’s finding, issue to the
Respondent:
               a.   copy of the complaint, and
               b.   written notice stating each of the following: the
prohibitions and requirement(s) under this chapter; the basis for FEWB’s
finding of a violation; and any proposed resolution process described in
subdivision (b)(2)B.2. below; and
            2.   Attempt to resolve the complaint by methods of education,
conference, conciliation, and persuasion with all interested parties.
      (3)   The FEWB shall determine if the complaint is resolved, except that
the complaint shall be considered resolved if, within ninety (90) days of
receiving a copy of the complaint from the FEWB under Section
669.04(b)(2)B.1.a., the Respondent:
         A.   corrects its deficient processes, policies, and/or application
materials; and
         B.   provides to the FEWB a credible plan to commit no further
violations of Section
669.02.
(Ord. No. 104-2025. Passed 4-28-25, eff. 10-27-25)
§ 669.05 Appeal and Collection
   (a)    A civil penalty imposed under Section
669.99 may be appealed by the Respondent to the Director of Finance or their
designee within thirty (30) days after receipt of the civil penalty. The
Director or their designee shall have jurisdiction to affirm or reverse the
civil penalty by issuing a written decision. The final decision of the Director
or their designee may be further appealed to the Board of Zoning Appeals within
thirty (30) days after the written decision is issued.
   (b)   If a civil penalty has been imposed under Section
669.99, and any portion of it remains unpaid thirty (30) days following the
Respondent’s receipt of the civil penalty or, if an appeal had been requested,
thirty (30) days following receipt of final appellate decision, the City may
initiate a civil action or any other means provided for in these Codified
Ordinances or the Revised Code to collect the penalty and recover costs.
(Ord. No. 104-2025. Passed 4-28-25, eff. 10-27-25)
§ 669.06 Severability
   If any provision or section of this chapter or the enforcement of any such
provision or section is held to be invalid or unenforceable by a court of
competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect or
render invalid or unenforceable any other provision or section of this chapter.
To this end, each of the provisions and sections of this chapter are severable.
(Ord. No. 104-2025. Passed 4-28-25, eff. 10-27-25)
§ 669.07 Effective Date
   This chapter shall take effect and be in force after it becomes law.
(Ord. No. 104-2025. Passed 4-28-25, eff. 10-27-25)
§ 669.99 Civil Penalties
   If the FEWB has found that a violation has occurred but the complaint has
not been resolved and ninety (90) days have passed since the Respondent has
received a copy of the complaint from the FEWB under Section
669.04(b)(2)B.1.a., then the FEWB may assess a civil penalty. The civil
penalties are as follows and shall be adjusted on an annual basis by the first
(1st) day of February in proportion to any increases in the previous year in
the consumer price index for all Urban Consumers (CPI-U), as published by the
Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor:
   (a)   If the Respondent has not been found to have committed any prior
violations of this chapter during the five (5) years immediately preceding the
date on which the complaint was submitted, the civil penalty shall not exceed
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
   (b)   If the Respondent has been found to have committed one prior violation
of this chapter during the five (5) years immediately preceding the date on
which the complaint was submitted, then the civil penalty shall not exceed two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
   (c)   If the Respondent has been found to have committed two or more
violations of this chapter during the five (5) years immediately preceding the
date on which the complaint was submitted, then the civil penalty shall not
exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00).
(Ord. No. 104-2025. Passed 4-28-25, eff. 10-27-25)
   Note: Pursuant to Section 3 of Ord. No. 104-2025, this chapter is effective
on October 27, 2025.
TITLE VII: BUSINESS REGULATION
   Chapter
670   Commissioning of Armed Security Guards
   Chapter
670A   Unnecessary Police Alarms
   Chapter
670B   Outdoor Pay Telephones
   Chapter
671   Auctions
   Chapter
672   Christmas Tree Sales
   Chapter
673   Going-Out-Of-Business Sales
   Chapter
674   Handgun Possession and Sale
   Chapter
674A   Late Night Retail Establishments
   Chapter
675   Street Vendors
   Chapter
675A   Street Performers
   Chapter
676   Junk and Secondhand Dealers
   Chapter
676A   Motor Vehicle Repair Garages
   Chapter
676B   Garage and Residential Personal Property Sales
   Chapter
677   Meter Readers
   Chapter
677A   Tow Trucks
   Chapter
678   Motor Vehicles and Parts
   Chapter
679   Movers
   Chapter
679A   Donation Boxes
   Chapter
680   Newspaper Dispensing Devices
   Chapter
680A   Cigarette Advertising on Publicly Visible Locations
   Chapter
680B   Alcoholic Beverage Advertising on Publicly Visible Locations
   Chapter
681   Pawnbrokers
   Chapter
681A   Precious Metals Dealers
   Chapter
682   Itinerant Vendors and Wholesale Produce Dealers
   Chapter
682A   Rental Agencies
   Chapter
683   Sound Devices
   Chapter
683A   Massage Establishments
   Chapter
684   Street Action Pictures
   Chapter
685   Trailer Rental Agencies
   Chapter
686   Hospitals
   Chapter
686A   Hotels
   Chapter
686C   Used Motor Vehicle Storage Places
   Chapter
687A   Surety Bail Bond Agents
   Chapter
687B   Third-Party Food Delivery Services
CHAPTER 670 – COMMISSIONING OF ARMED SECURITY GUARDS
670.01   Definition
670.02   Application Forms; Availability; Contents
670.03   Requirements for Obtaining a Commission
670.04   Duration of Commission
670.041   Fee for Record Check – Repealed
670.05   Appeal
670.06   Ohio Peace Officer Training
670.07   Weapons Qualification
670.08   Background Check
670.09   Photographs of Applicant
670.10   Application Fee; Firing Range Fee
670.11   Commission Identification Card
670.12   Approval of Uniforms
670.13   Imitation of Official Uniforms
670.14   Limitation of Authority
670.15   Firearms
670.16   Reporting of Criminal Offenses
670.17   Grounds for Suspension and Revocation of Commission
670.18   Suspension and Revocation Procedure
670.19   Rules and Regulations
670.20   Authority to Permit Commissioned Armed Security Guards to Carry
Firearms Outside the Municipal Boundaries of the City
670.21   Grounds for Suspension and Revocation of License – Repealed
670.22   Suspension and Revocation Procedure – Repealed
670.23   Application of Chapter – Repealed
670.24   Civil Damages – Repealed
670.25   Concealed Weapons – Repealed
670.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Auxiliary police, RC 737.051
   Certification of security guards by peace officer training council, RC
109.78(B)
   Private policemen, RC 737.05
§ 670.01 Definition
   As used in this chapter, “armed security guard” means a person engaged for
hire or employed as a watchman, guard, private policeman, or other person whose
primary duty is to protect persons or property or both, with the exception of
such persons who do not carry a weapon of any kind, but does not include any
police officer, special police officer, or any other person who by virtue of
federal, state, or local law, excluding this chapter, is a “law enforcement
officer” as defined in RC 2901.01.
(Ord. No. 171-04. Passed 2-2-04, eff. 2-4-04)
   Note: Former Section
670.01 was repealed by Ord. No. 1235-03, passed 12-15-03, eff. 12-22-03.
§ 670.02 Application Forms; Availability; Contents
   The Director of Public Safety shall make application forms available to any
person who requests to be commissioned as an armed security guard.
   The application form shall require the applicant to provide his or her full
name, current residence, previous residences within the five (5) year period
preceding the date of the application, age, place of birth, citizenship,
current employment, and previous employment within the five (5) year period
preceding the date of the application.
   In addition, the application shall include all of the questions contained in
divisions (g) and (h) of Section
670.03, and may include other questions that the Director determines to be
administratively helpful in determining whether the applicant is qualified to
be commissioned under this chapter.
   The application form shall also require the submission of at least two (2)
references to the good character and integrity of the applicant, which may not
be a family member or the applicant’s current employer.
   The applicant shall swear or affirm before a notary public that the
information contained in the application is true.
   If the applicant provides incomplete or untruthful information in connection
with the application for a commission, it shall be grounds for denial of the
commission.
(Ord. No. 171-04. Passed 2-2-04, eff. 2-4-04)
   Note: Former Section
670.02 was repealed by Ord. No. 1235-03, passed 12-15-03, eff. 12-22-03.
§ 670.03 Requirements for Obtaining a Commission
   A person may be commissioned as an armed security guard if he or she:
   (a)   Is an “armed security guard” as defined in Section
670.01; and
   (b)   Is twenty-one (21) years of age or older; and
   (c)   Is a United States citizen; and
   (d)   Is able to read, write, and speak the English language; and
   (e)   Has good eyesight; and
   (f)   Has height, weight, and muscle tone within normal range; and
   (g)   Answers all of the following questions in the negative:
   “(1)   Are you under indictment or have you been convicted of a felony of
violence?”
   “(2)   Are you under indictment or have you been convicted of a crime
involving force or threat of force?”
   “(3)   Are you currently engaging in the illegal use of drugs?”
   “(4)   Are you engaged in the abuse of alcohol?”; and
   (h)   Answers all of the following questions in the negative or demonstrates
to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Safety that an affirmative answer
will not adversely affect the applicant’s ability to perform the job of a
commissioned armed security guard:
   “(1)   Have you ever been convicted of a crime under federal, state, or
local law, other than a minor traffic violation? If you answer ‘
   “(2)   Are you under a current court order that may affect your ability to
perform the job of an armed security guard? If you answer ‘yes’, explain.”
   “(3)   Do you have any condition that would render you unfit to carry a
firearm? If you answer ‘yes’, explain.”; and
   (i)   Submits a letter from the applicant’s employer indicating that the
applicant is employed as an armed security guard; and
   (j)   Submits proof of age in the form of a birth certificate or valid
driver’s license; and
   (k)   Submits proof that any handgun that the applicant may use in the
course of his or her duties has been registered; and
   (l)   Submits all of the items required by Sections
670.06,
670.07, and
670.09;
   (m)   Is fingerprinted for purposes of a criminal background check as
required by Section
670.08;
   (n)   Pays all applicable fees as required by this chapter;
   (o)   Is not under any of the legal disabilities set forth in RC 2923.13
preventing such person from acquiring, having, carrying, or using any firearm
or dangerous ordnance.
   The Director of Public Safety is authorized to commission armed security
guards who have complied with all applicable provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 171-04. Passed 2-2-04, eff. 2-4-04)
   Note: Former Section
670.03 was repealed by Ord. No. 1235-03, passed 12-15-03, eff. 12-22-03.
§ 670.04 Duration of Commission
   Each commission or renewal of a commission issued under this chapter shall
be in effect for a period of one (1) year, unless sooner suspended or revoked
in accordance with Sections
670.17 and
670.18.
(Ord. No. 171-04. Passed 2-2-04, eff. 2-4-04)
   Note: Former Section
670.04 was repealed by Ord. No. 1235-03, passed 12-15-03, eff. 12-22-03.
§ 670.041 Fee for Record Check – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1235-03. Passed 12-15-03, eff. 12-22-03)
§ 670.05 Appeal
   Any person denied a commission under this chapter may appeal the decision to
the Board of Zoning Appeals within thirty (30) days of the decision by filing a
written notice of appeal with the Director and paying any fee charged by the
Board to conduct the appeal.
(Ord. No. 171-04. Passed 2-2-04, eff. 2-4-04)
   Note: Former Section
670.05 was repealed by Ord. No. 1235-03, passed 12-15-03, eff. 12-22-03.
§ 670.06 Ohio Peace Officer Training
   Every applicant for a commission shall submit with the application evidence
of satisfactory completion of a minimum of one hundred twenty (120) hours of
basic law enforcement training certified by the Ohio peace officer training
commission.
(Ord. No. 171-04. Passed 2-2-04, eff. 2-4-04)
   Note: Former Section
670.06 was repealed by Ord. No. 1235-03, passed 12-15-03, eff. 12-22-03.
§ 670.07 Weapons Qualification
   Every new applicant for a commission shall submit with the application
evidence that the applicant has completed, within two (2) years prior to the
date of the application, a firearms training program certified by the Ohio
peace officer training commission or has been requalified within two (2) years
prior to the date of the application, through a course certified by the Ohio
peace officer training commission or at the City’s firing range.
   Every applicant for renewal of a commission under this chapter shall submit
evidence that the applicant has completed firearms requalification within
ninety (90) days prior to the date of the expiration of the commission being
renewed, through a course certified by the Ohio peace officer training
commission or at the City’s firing range.
(Ord. No. 171-04. Passed 2-2-04, eff. 2-4-04)
   Note: Former Section
670.07 was repealed by Ord. No. 1235-03, passed 12-15-03, eff. 12-22-03.
§ 670.08 Background Check
   The applicant shall be fingerprinted for purposes of conducting a criminal
background check. The applicant shall pay a non-refundable fee of fifteen
dollars ($15.00) for the costs of the background check.
(Ord. No. 171-04. Passed 2-2-04, eff. 2-4-04)
   Note: Former Section
670.08 was repealed by Ord. No. 1235-03, passed 12-15-03, eff. 12-22-03.
§ 670.09 Photographs of Applicant
   Upon notification by the office of the Director of Public Safety that the
applicant will be issued a new or renewed commission under this chapter, the
applicant shall submit two (2) current unretouched photographs of himself or
herself, the size and character of which shall be designated by the Director.
One (1) of the photographs shall be affixed to the identification card issued
under Section
670.11.
(Ord. No. 171-04. Passed 2-2-04, eff. 2-4-04)
   Note: Former Section
670.09 was repealed by Ord. No. 1235-03, passed 12-15-03, eff. 12-22-03.
§ 670.10 Application Fee; Firing Range Fee
   A non-refundable fee of eighty-five dollars ($85.00) shall be charged to an
applicant for the issuance of a new commission or for the renewal of a
commission.
   A non-refundable fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) shall be charged for each
use of the City’s firing range for the purpose of passing a weapons
qualification test.
(Ord. No. 171-04. Passed 2-2-04, eff. 2-4-04)
   Note: Former Section
670.10 was repealed by Ord. No. 1235-03, passed 12-15-03, eff. 12-22-03.
§ 670.11 Commission Identification Card
   (a)   Any person issued a commission under this chapter shall be issued a
photo identification card that shall contain at a minimum the person’s name,
the name of the person’s employer(s), the date of expiration of the commission,
and an identification number unique to that individual.
   (b)   Each armed security guard issued a photo identification card under
this section shall carry the card on his or her person at all times while
engaged in armed security guard duties.
   (c)   No person while engaged in armed security guard duties shall fail to
present the photo identification card issued under this section to a police
officer upon demand.
(Ord. No. 171-04. Passed 2-2-04, eff. 2-4-04)
   Note: Former Section
670.11 was repealed by Ord. No. 1235-03, passed 12-15-03, eff. 12-22-03.
§ 670.12 Approval of Uniforms
   No armed security guard commissioned under this chapter shall use or wear a
name tag, distinctive uniform, cap, badge, or button until their form, design,
and color have been submitted to and approved by the Director of Public Safety.
(Ord. No. 171-04. Passed 2-2-04, eff. 2-4-04)
   Note: Former Section
670.12 was repealed by Ord. No. 1235-03, passed 12-15-03, eff. 12-22-03.
§ 670.13 Imitation of Official Uniforms
   No person who is not a member of the Division of Police or the Division of
Fire shall wear a uniform, cap, badge, or button similar to, or in imitation
of, the official uniform, cap, badge, or button in use at any time by a member
of either such Division.
(Ord. No. 171-04. Passed 2-2-04, eff. 2-4-04)
   Note: Former Section
670.13 was repealed by Ord. No. 1235-03, passed 12-15-03, eff. 12-22-03.
§ 670.14 Limitation of Authority
   The Director of Public Safety may designate the property, including
properties or facilities that are owned and/or operated by the City but are
outside the municipal boundaries of the City, or the geographical area of the
City within which an armed security guard commissioned by the City may exercise
his or her authority.
   Commissioned armed security guards shall not obtain search warrants or
warrants for arrest or perform any other specific function which the Director
of Safety may, by rules and regulations, reserve exclusively to the Division of
Police or which are exclusively reserved by the ordinances of the City and the
City Charter to the Division of Police.
   Commissioned armed security guards shall exercise their authority consistent
with all applicable federal, state, and local laws.
(Ord. No. 987-2025. Passed 8-13-25, eff. 8-18-25)
   Note: Former Section
670.14 was repealed by Ord. No. 1235-03, passed 12-15-03, eff. 12-22-03.
§ 670.15 Firearms
   In no event shall a commissioned armed security guard use or carry any type
of firearm other than a thirty-eight (.38) caliber revolver or a nine (.9) mm
semi-automatic pistol, provided that the guard shall not carry or use a nine
(.9) mm semi-automatic pistol unless the guard has first completed at least
thirty-two (32) hours of training in handgun use approved by the Ohio peace
officer training commission and presents to the Director of Public Safety a
certificate of satisfactory completion of the course of study.
   If a commissioned armed security guard discharges his or her firearm in the
City other than at a training range, then the guard shall report that fact to
the Division of Police immediately after the incident and to the Director of
Public Safety, in writing, the same or next business day.
   Nothing in this chapter shall relieve a person from the provisions and
prohibitions contained in RC 2923.12 relating to carrying a concealed weapon,
or any other federal, state or local law with respect to the possession or
discharge of firearms.
(Ord. No. 1744-08. Passed 4-13-09, eff. 4-20-09)
§ 670.16 Reporting of Criminal Offenses
   If a commissioned armed security guard is arrested or charged with any
felony offense, or any offense of violence as defined in RC 2901.01, then the
guard shall report that fact to the Director of Public Safety, in writing,
within two (2) business days of the arrest or charge. If convicted of any such
charge, then the commissioned guard shall also report that fact to the Director
of Public Safety, in writing, within two (2) business days of the conviction.
(Ord. No. 171-04. Passed 2-2-04, eff. 2-4-04)
   Note: Former Section
670.16 was repealed by Ord. No. 1235-03, passed 12-15-03, eff. 12-22-03.
§ 670.17 Grounds for Suspension and Revocation of Commission
   Any commission issued under this chapter is subject to suspension or
revocation if the holder of the commission:
   (a)   Has violated any of the provisions of this chapter; or
   (b)   Has violated any rule or regulation issued by the Director of Public
Safety under Section
670.19; or
   (c)   Was unqualified at the time of the issuance of the commission; or
   (d)   Has become unqualified and would be denied a commission if he or she
was then submitting an application; or
   (e)   Has provided incomplete or untruthful information in connection with
the application for a commission; or
   (f)   Has given a false statement to a law enforcement officer; or
   (g)   Has committed any criminal offense that would have been grounds for
denial of the commission originally, and the same is found to be true by a
preponderance of the evidence at a hearing conducted in accordance with Section
670.18, whether or not the person is ultimately convicted of the offense.
(Ord. No. 171-04. Passed 2-2-04, eff. 2-4-04)
   Note: Former Section
670.17 was repealed by Ord. No. 1235-03, passed 12-15-03, eff. 12-22-03.
§ 670.18 Suspension and Revocation Procedure
   The Director of Public Safety, upon the complaint of any person, or upon the
Director’s own information or belief, shall investigate any allegation that a
commissioned armed security guard has committed an act that constitutes grounds
for suspension or revocation of a commission issued under this chapter.
   If the Director finds that there is probable cause to believe there is
grounds to suspend or revoke a commission, the Director shall give the holder
of the commission notice and an opportunity to present evidence on his or her
behalf, with or without assistance of an attorney. The strict rules of evidence
applicable in courts of law shall not apply.
   If the Director finds that the allegations are true by a preponderance of
the evidence, then the Director shall suspend or revoke the commission in
question.
   A person whose commission is suspended or revoked may appeal the decision to
the Board of Zoning Appeals within thirty (30) days of the date of the decision
by filing a written notice of appeal with the Director and paying any fee
charged by the Board to conduct the appeal.
(Ord. No. 171-04. Passed 2-2-04, eff. 2-4-04)
   Note: Former Section
670.18 was repealed by Ord. No. 1235-03, passed 12-15-03, eff. 12-22-03.
§ 670.19 Rules and Regulations
   The Director of Public Safety is authorized to issue rules and regulations
to carry out the purposes of this chapter. Any such rule or regulation shall
take effect thirty (30) days after its publication in the City Record.
(Ord. No. 171-04. Passed 2-2-04, eff. 2-4-04)
   Note: Former Section
670.19 was repealed by Ord. No. 1235-03, passed 12-15-03, eff. 12-22-03.
§ 670.20 Authority to Permit Commissioned Armed Security Guards to Carry
Firearms Outside the Municipal Boundaries of the City
   The Director of Public Safety, or their designee, is authorized to permit
commissioned armed security guards to carry firearms while on duty at
properties or facilities that are owned and/or operated by the City located
outside the municipal boundaries of the City.
   The Director of Public Safety, or their designee, may enter into written
agreements expressly authorizing armed security guards to carry firearms while
on duty within the political subdivision where the property or facility that is
owned and/or operated is located.
(Ord. No. 987-2025. Passed 8-13-25, eff. 8-18-25)
   Note: Former Section
670.20 was repealed by Ord. No. 1235-03, passed 12-15-03, eff. 12-22-03.
§ 670.21 Grounds for Suspension and Revocation of License – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1235-03. Passed 12-15-03, eff. 12-22-03)
§ 670.22 Suspension and Revocation Procedure – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1235-03. Passed 12-15-03, eff. 12-22-03)
§ 670.23 Application of Chapter – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1235-03. Passed 12-15-03, eff. 12-22-03)
§ 670.24 Civil Damages – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1235-03. Passed 12-15-03, eff. 12-22-03)
§ 670.25 Concealed Weapons – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1235-03. Passed 12-15-03, eff. 12-22-03)
§ 670.99 Penalty
   (a)   Any person who violates division (c) of Section
670.11 is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on the first offense, and a misdemeanor
of the fourth degree on the second and each subsequent offense.
   (b)   Any person who violates Section
670.13 is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(Ord. No. 171-04. Passed 2-2-04, eff. 2-4-04)
   Note: Former Section
670.99 was repealed by Ord. No. 1235-03, passed 12-15-03, eff. 12-22-03.
CHAPTER 670A – UNNECESSARY POLICE ALARMS
670A.01   Definitions
670A.02   Unnecessary Alarms; Charges
670A.03   Registration of Alarm System Users; Fee
670A.04   Noise Limit
670A.05   Hearings
670A.06   Appeals
670A.07   Annual Report
670A.99   Penalty
   Note: Pursuant to Section 2 of Ord. No. 1585-90, Sections
670A.01 through
670A.07 and Section
670A.99 shall take effect on January 1, 1991.
§ 670A.01 Definitions
   As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
following meanings:
   (a)   “Alarm system” means any device, which is designed or used for the
detection of burglary or attempted burglary, or for alerting others of the
commission of a robbery or attempted robbery within a building, structure or
facility, or both, and which emits a sound or transmits a signal or message
when activated for the purpose of deterring the intruder, or notifying another
person of any of the above, and includes systems that transmit the signal or
message directly to the Division of Police. “Alarm system” does not include any
such device used exclusively to protect a residential premises. “Alarm system”
does not include alarms on motor vehicles.
   (b)   “Alarm system user” means the person who owns, has control of, or the
right to possession of the premises on which an alarm system is operated.
   (c)   “Division of Police” means the Division of Police in the Department of
Public Safety of the City of Cleveland.
   (d)   “Chief of Police” means the Chief of the Division of Police of the
City of Cleveland.
   (e)   “Person” means an individual, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or business of any kind.
   (f)   “Unnecessary alarm” means the activation of an alarm system whereby
the Division of Police is summoned to a location when there is no incident
occurring nor is there any evidence of any incident having occurred or having
been attempted, as reported by the alarm. “Unnecessary alarm” shall also mean
any violation of Section
670A.04. “Unnecessary alarm” shall not include alarms obviously attributable to
extreme weather conditions, or power outages, the burden of proof of such
exceptions to this section being on the alarm system user.
(Ord. No. 906-18. Passed 8-15-18, eff. 8-17-18; Am. Ord. No. 1163-18. Passed
10-29-18, eff. 10-31-18)
§ 670A.02 Unnecessary Alarms; Charges
   If more than two (2) unnecessary alarms occur at a particular location in a
given calendar year then the Chief of Police shall invoice the alarm system
user in the sum of one hundred thirty dollars ($130.00) for reimbursement of a
portion of the costs of responding to the third and any subsequent unnecessary
alarm.
   The charges shall be due and payable upon receipt of an invoice, except that
the charges shall be suspended pending the outcome of any hearing conducted
under Section
670A.05, or any appeal conducted under Section
670A.06.
(Ord. No. 2393-02. Passed 2-3-03, eff. 2-3-03)
§ 670A.03 Registration of Alarm System Users; Fee
   (a)   Each alarm system user shall register with the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses using forms designated by the Commissioner for this
purpose, and shall provide the name of the user, the location of the premises
on which the alarm system is in operation, and other information as the
Commissioner shall require.
   (b)   Each alarm system user on whose premises an alarm system is in
operation on the effective date of this section shall initially register within
ninety (90) days of the effective date of the section. Each alarm system user
on whose premises an alarm system is placed in operation after the effective
date of this section shall initially register not later than the date on which
the system is placed in operation.
   (c)   After the initial registration required by division (b) of this
section, such registrations shall be issued as of January 1, and shall expire
on December 31, next succeeding. Each registered alarm system user shall re-
register each year before January 1. The period from July 1, 2018 through
December 31, 2018 shall apply to the 2019 calendar year registration.
   (d)   Each alarm system user shall pay a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00)
for each registration or re- registration required by this section.
   (e)   No alarm system user shall fail to register as required by this
section.
(Ord. No. 906-18. Passed 8-15-18, eff. 8-17-18; Am. Ord. No. 1163-18. Passed
10-29-18, eff. 10-31-18)
§ 670A.04 Noise Limit
   All bells, sirens, or other noise sources that sound in the event of an
alarm are, if located in residential areas, to cut off automatically within
fifteen (15) minutes after the alarm has been activated or, if located in
commercial areas, to cut off automatically within thirty (30) minutes after the
alarm has been activated. Each violation of this section shall constitute an
unnecessary alarm with regard to other provisions in this chapter. Audible
alarms shall not resemble the sound of any emergency signal or civil defense
alarm or siren.
(Ord. No. 1585-90. Passed 1-7-91, eff. 2-16-91; Reprinted 1-23-91 CR)
§ 670A.05 Hearings
   Any person who has been invoiced pursuant to Section
670A.02 may request, in writing, within thirty (30) days of the date of
invoice, a hearing by the Chief of Police or his or her designee for the
purpose of presenting evidence that an unnecessary alarm did not occur, or that
the person invoiced is not the alarm system user. Upon the establishment by the
Division of Police of a prima facie case supporting the invoice, the burden of
proof shall shift to the person who requested the hearing. The rules of
evidence applicable to courts of law shall not be strictly applied.
   If the Chief of Police or his or her designee determines, by a preponderance
of the evidence, that an unnecessary alarm did not occur, or that the person
invoiced pursuant to Section
670A.02 is not the alarm system user, then the charges shall be voided,
otherwise the charges shall be due and payable.
(Ord. No. 1585-90. Passed 1-7-91, eff. 2-16-91; Reprinted 1-23-91 CR)
§ 670A.06 Appeals
   Any person subject to an adverse finding by the Chief of Police or his or
her designee pursuant to Section
670A.05 may appeal the finding to the Board of Building Standards and Building
Appeals. The notice of appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the
Board of Building Standards and Building Appeals within ten (10) days of the
finding of the Chief of Police or his or her designee. The Board shall approve,
modify or annul the finding from which the appeal is taken.
(Ord. No. 1585-90. Passed 1-7-91, eff. 2-16-91; Reprinted 1-23-91 CR)
§ 670A.07 Annual Report
   The Director of Public Safety shall file a report with the Clerk of Council
by the 15th of February each year, containing the number of unnecessary police
alarms that occurred and the amount of monies that were reimbursed to the City
pursuant to Section
670A.02 in the previous calendar year.
(Ord. No. 1585-90. Passed 1-7-91, eff. 2-16-91; Reprinted 1-23-91 CR)
§ 670A.99 Penalty
   Whoever violates division (e) of Section
670A.03 is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 1585-90. Passed 1-7-91, eff. 2-16-91; Reprinted 1-23-91 CR)
CHAPTER 670B – OUTDOOR PAY TELEPHONES
670B.01   Definitions
670B.02   Requirements for License and Contracts; Permits; Location
Requirements
670B.03   Contracts with Outdoor Pay Telephone Owners; Public Right-of-Way
670B.04   Biennial Outdoor Pay Telephone License Required
670B.05   Biennial Outdoor Pay Telephone Permits Required
670B.06   Inspection; Enforcement; Removal Orders; License and Permit
Suspension and Revocation; Appeal
670B.07   Public Nuisance; Removal of Outdoor Pay Telephones
670B.08   PUCO Regulations
670B.99   Penalty
§ 670B.01 Definitions
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   “Director” means the Director of Finance or the Director’s designee.
   (b)   “Commissioner” means the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses or
the Commissioner’s designee.
   (c)   “Outdoor Pay Telephone” means any self- service, coin-operated, credit
card-operated or other similar telephone that is available outdoors for use by
the general public.
   “Outdoor Pay Telephone” shall include outdoor pay telephone booths and
stands, outdoor pay telephone drive-up and walk-up units, and outdoor pay
telephones which are affixed to the exterior walls of a building or structure.
   (d)   “Owner” means a person in whom is vested ownership, dominion, control
or title of an outdoor pay telephone.
   (e)   “Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company, organization or legal entity of any kind.
   (f)   “Public Property” means all City-owned property, and does not include
the right-of-way of the City or property owned by a person other than the City.
   (g)   “Public right-of-way” means any way which has been deeded to the
public or dedicated to the public use for pedestrian or vehicular travel, and
does not include public property or property owned by a person other than the
City.
   (h)   “Private property” means any property other than the public right-of-
way or public property.
   (i)   “PUCO” means the Public Utility Commission of Ohio.
   (j)   “Special telephone service features” include the blocking of incoming
calls to a telephone, installation of telephones that do not permit “touch
tone” dialing, restricting coin access to a telephone during late evening and
night hours, and such other service features as are acceptable to the Director.
(Ord. No. 1989-01. Passed 10-22-01, eff. 11-1-01 without the signature of the
Mayor)
§ 670B.02 Requirements for License and Contracts; Permits; Location
Requirements
   (a)   No person shall engage in the business of providing and installing
outdoor pay telephones on private property, and no person shall install, place
or maintain an outdoor pay telephone on private property, unless the owner has
a biennial outdoor pay telephone license. This prohibition applies to any
outdoor pay telephone installed prior to or after the effective date of this
chapter.
   (b)   No person shall engage in the business of providing and installing
outdoor pay telephones in the public right-of-way, and no person shall install,
place or maintain an outdoor pay telephone within the public right-of-way
unless the owner of the telephone has entered into a biennial contract with the
Director that grants to such owner the privilege of installing and maintaining
outdoor pay telephones in the public right- of-way. This prohibition applies to
any outdoor pay telephone installed prior to or after the effective date of
this chapter. This prohibition also applies to any outdoor pay telephone that
is attached to or mounted on a building or other structure when such telephone
extends above or into the right-of-way, and any outdoor pay telephone located
in the right-of-way that is attached to a building or structure by a wire or
cable.
   (c)   No person shall engage in the business of providing and installing
outdoor pay telephones on private property or in the right-of-way, and no
person shall install, place or maintain an outdoor pay telephone on private
property or in the right-of-way unless the owner has a biennial permit for each
telephone installed, placed or maintained, issued in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter.
   (d)   It shall be unlawful for any person to install, own or maintain, or to
allow the installation or maintenance of, an outdoor pay telephone on private
property or the public right-of-way under any of the following circumstances:
      (1)   On any vacant private property or any public right-of-way adjacent
thereto;
      (2)   On any private property or any public right-of-way adjacent
thereto, where any or all buildings are vacant;
      (3)   On any private property or any public right-of-way adjacent
thereto, that has a premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic liquor (other
than beer or wine);
      (4)   In a residential use district as defined in the Zoning Code of the
City, or within fifty (50) feet of a residential dwelling unit in a residential
use district;
      (5)   At a location where use from a vehicle is possible which would
cause the vehicle to stand in a driveway or aisle in a parking lot or in the
right-of-way;
      (6)   Within five (5) feet of any area used for vehicular ingress or
egress or an aisle way in a parking area for vehicular travel;
      (7)   Within five (5) feet of the entrance or exit to any structure, a
crosswalk, a bus shelter, a fire exit or escape, a mail box, parking meter,
police or fire call box, traffic control box, fire hydrant or sidewalk
elevator, or that blocks or restricts free passage of pedestrians or vehicles;
      (8)   On any public right-of way adjacent to private property where an
outdoor pay telephone has been previously removed; or
      (9)   On any property or at any location that has been determined by the
Director of Public Safety to create a nuisance based upon prior actual use.
   (e)   No dial tone provider shall provide dial tone to any outdoor pay
telephone on private property or in the right-of-way without first verifying
that the pay telephone has been permitted by the City pursuant to this chapter.
   (f)   All outdoor pay telephones on private property or in the right-of-way
must: automatically block all incoming calls and provide outgoing only service;
prevent the use of pagers or beepers; use electric wiring, not telephone wire,
for electric connections; be well lighted if available for use during hours
between sunset and sunrise, which may include ambient lighting; and be kept
free from graffiti and stickers not placed by the owner, and kept clean.
   (g)   Any outdoor pay telephone placed or installed on private property or
in the right-of-way shall be either a so-called “smart phone” equipped with a
built in computer or a “smart line” phone, and shall have the capability to
make the telephone inoperative for designated periods of time, to provide lists
of each outgoing call as to the number called, its duration, and the date and
time of the call, shall have built in volume control and shall have a key pad
that prevents the use of pagers or beepers.
   (h)   No outdoor pay telephone shall be placed or installed at any location
on private property or in the right-of-way that is within five hundred (500)
feet of any other outdoor pay telephone, whether on private property or in the
right-of-way.
   (i)   The five hundred (500) feet restrictions in this section shall not
apply to any retail gas service station. The five hundred (500) feet
restrictions shall also not apply to: the Central Business District as defined
in Section
325.12 of the Codified Ordinances; the Flats Oxbow Revitalization District; the
University Circle institutional area defined as the area included within and
bounded by both sides of East 105 Street, East Boulevard, Ford Road, and Euclid
Avenue; Regional Transit Authority rapid stations and the adjacent right-of-
way; hospitals, universities, and Cuyahoga Community College and the adjacent
right- of-way; and strip shopping centers and the adjacent right-of-way. All
other requirements of this chapter apply to outdoor pay telephones in the areas
named in this division.
   (j)   An owner may apply in writing to the Commissioner for an exemption
from the five hundred (500) feet restriction to place multiple outdoor pay
telephones at one (1) location, due to a demonstrated appropriate use or need
for additional outdoor pay telephones as a result of a high level of pedestrian
and automobile traffic, and a concentration of heavy usage of pay telephones at
that location. Any such application shall be referred to the Director of
Planning for review and approval, and if so approved, shall be submitted to
Council for action. If Council passes an ordinance approving the exemption,
such ordinance shall be forwarded to the Commissioner who shall attach the
approved exemption to the license of the owner or as an amendment to the
owner’s contract, and the owner then may apply for permits for additional
phones, as approved.
   (k)   For the purposes of this section, the submission of a completed
application for a permit for a telephone on private property or in the right-
of-way, shall be considered a placement of a pay telephone.
(Ord. No. 15-05. Passed 1-10-05, eff. 1-12-05)
§ 670B.03 Contracts with Outdoor Pay Telephone Owners; Public Right-of-Way
   (a)   Any owner may enter into a biennial contract with the Director that
grants to the owner the privilege of installing and maintaining outdoor pay
telephones in the public right-of-way for a period of two (2) years, subject to
the terms and conditions set forth in the contract and this chapter.
   (b)   Any contract entered into pursuant to division (a) of this section
must include as terms and conditions at a minimum all of the requirements of
this chapter applicable to pay telephones in the right-of-way; however, the
City may impose additional requirements and restrictions on pay telephones in
the right-of-way in the contract with an owner, but no such requirements may
unnecessarily discriminate in favor of or against any owner.
   (c)   Owners with a contract to install telephones in the right-of-way shall
apply for permits under Section
670B.05 for each telephone.
   Applications for permits shall be given preference for purposes of
determining compliance with the distance requirements in the order that they
are received.
   (d)   The Director shall determine whether to approve the proposed location
of all outdoor pay telephone to be installed and maintained in the right-of-
way, and in doing so shall consider the following factors in addition to other
requirements of this chapter:
      (1)   Possible obstruction of pedestrian and vehicular traffic;
      (2)   The size of the telephone and any booth stand, or pole;
      (3)   The ability to provide access by disabled persons;
      (4)   The proliferation of visual clutter; and
      (5)   Such other factors as are delineated in the contract.
   (e)   Any outdoor pay telephone installed and maintained in the right-of-way
must:
      (1)   Allow a “direct dial” of 911 without the need to first use a coin
or a credit card or the need to dial the operator;
      (2)   Have a functioning coin return mechanism;
      (3)   Have affixed in a readily visible place a notice setting forth the
name of the owner, the owner’s telephone number for repair and the telephone
number or serial number of the outdoor pay telephone;
      (4)   Be maintained in a properly functioning, clean, neat and attractive
condition, free of rust and free of danger of electrical shock;
      (5)   Not be used for advertising signs or publicity of any sort; and
      (6)   Be in full compliance with all state and federal laws and
regulations, including this chapter.
   (f)   The owner of each outdoor pay telephone shall indemnify the City and
hold it harmless from any and all claims or liability arising from any act of
the owner, or failure to act, in the installation, maintenance and operation of
the telephone. The owner shall submit to the Commissioner, at its own expense,
general liability insurance to protect the owner and the City from all claims
for damage to property or bodily injury, including death. The insurance shall
be in an amount not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00)
combined single limit, and shall provide that the insurance coverage shall not
be canceled or reduced by the insurance carrier without thirty (30) days’ prior
written notice to the City. A certificate of such insurance shall be provided
to the Director at the time of execution of the contract and shall be
maintained before and during the installation of any telephone in accordance
with the contract and throughout the period that the contract for any telephone
is in effect. The Director may accept documentation that the owner has a self-
insurance retention plan in lieu of insurance, provided that the Director
determines that the coverage is equivalent or better than the insurance
coverage required by this division.
(Ord. No. 583-04. Passed 4-5-04, eff. 4-8-04)
§ 670B.04 Biennial Outdoor Pay Telephone License Required
   (a)   Prior to engaging in the business of installing, placing and
maintaining outdoor pay telephones on private property in the City, and
biennially thereafter, a person shall submit an application for a license, or
the renewal of a license, to the Commissioner upon forms to be prescribed by
the Commissioner. The application shall include the following information:
      (1)   The name, address, telephone number and federal tax identification
or social security number of the person;
      (2)   The name, address and telephone number of the individual or other
persons to whom the City shall serve in person or by mail any order required by
Section
670B.05;
      (3)   An affidavit that the business will be and remain in compliance
with all relevant City, State and federal laws and regulations and this
chapter;
      (4)   A disclosure of any violations, or license or permit suspensions or
revocations, involving the business or licensee, with regard to pay telephone
laws and regulations in other jurisdictions in which the business or licensee
conducts a pay telephone business;
      (5)   Any other information as the Commissioner deems necessary to ensure
compliance with this chapter.
   (b)   One (1) license application may be submitted regardless of the number
of outdoor pay telephones the owner has or that will be installed. The
application for and the issuance of a license do not authorize the person to
install, place or maintain any outdoor pay telephone without a permit required
by this chapter.
   (c)   A biennial license fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) shall be
submitted with the application. This license fee is for the purpose of
defraying the expenses incident to the administration of the provisions this
chapter.
   (d)   The owner shall promptly notify the Commissioner in writing of any
change in the information required by division (a) of this section. Any
misrepresentation or false information contained in a license application, and
any failure to disclose information required by this chapter, shall be
considered a violation of this chapter and the license, and may be the basis of
a violation notice or a suspension or revocation of a license, permit or
contract.
   (e)   A copy of each application for a license shall be provided by the
Commissioner to the Director of Public Safety and the Clerk of Council. These
officials shall notify the Director in writing of any objections to the license
within ten (10) business days after receiving the application.
   (f)   Upon receipt of a completed application that is in compliance with
this chapter and all required information and fees, the Commissioner shall
issue to the owner an outdoor pay telephone license, except that a license may
be denied if the applicant has a significant history of non-compliance with
this chapter, or if the applicant’s license was revoked or an appeal of such a
revocation was denied within the previous year.
(Ord. No. 1989-01. Passed 10-22-01, eff. 11-1-01 without the signature of the
Mayor)
§ 670B.05 Biennial Outdoor Pay Telephone Permits Required
   (a)   Prior to the installation or placement of an outdoor pay telephone on
private property or in the right-of-way, and biennially thereafter, the owner
of the telephone shall submit an application for a permit to the Commissioner
upon forms to be prescribed by the Commissioner. The applicant may request that
documents and information provided to the Commissioner be considered
confidential and not public records by labeling such documents or information
as “Confidential and Proprietary,” and the Commissioner shall disclose such
documents or information only to those parties to whom disclosure is necessary
to carry out the provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise required by law.
The application shall include the following information:
      (1)   The name, address, telephone number and federal tax identification
or social security number of the owner;
      (2)   The number of the owner’s outdoor pay telephone license or
contract, as applicable;
      (3)   The serial number or telephone number and dimensions of the outdoor
pay telephone and any enclosure;
      (4)   A description of the services provided for the users of the outdoor
pay telephone, including any special telephone features or restrictions;
      (5)   If the telephone was or will be placed, installed and maintained by
a licensee, the name, address and telephone number of the property owner and
any lessees of the property where the outdoor pay telephone is or will be
located;
      (6)   A drawing of the location of the telephone for which the permit is
requested and the location of any telephone within five hundred (500) feet of
that telephone;
      (7)   A description of the source and brightness of lighting of the
telephone by built-in or ambient lighting;
      (8)   Any other information as the Commissioner deems necessary to ensure
compliance with this chapter.
   (b)   A biennial permit fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per telephone
installed or to be installed shall be submitted with the application. This
permit fee is for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to the
administration of the provisions of this chapter.
   (c)   The owner shall promptly notify the Commissioner in writing of any
change in the information required by division (a) of this section. The owner
must submit a written notice of the removal of any telephone to the
Commissioner prior to the removal. No refund of fees previously paid shall be
made for telephones removed by the owner, the City or otherwise. If the owner
plans to change the location of a telephone that is already permitted, or
install a new phone at the same location, the owner must submit a new
application for a permit and the fee to defray the expenses incident to the
administration of the provisions of this chapter. No additional fee or permit
application is required to replace a broken or defective telephone, or to
permanently relocate a telephone ten (10) feet or less once per permit period
or to relocate a telephone temporarily on the same property for a period of
less than ninety (90) days. An owner must notify the Commissioner of any
relocation allowed by this division within thirty (30) days of the relocation.
   (d)   A copy of each application for a permit and any notice of a removal
shall be provided by the Commissioner to the Director of Public Safety, the
Director of Public Service, and the Council member in whose ward the telephone
is proposed to be installed. The Commissioner shall refer each application for
a permit to the Commissioner of Building and Housing for review and approval.
The Commissioner of Building and Housing shall determine whether or not the
provisions of the Building or Zoning Codes would be violated by the
installation of the telephone, and particularly, set back requirements, use
restrictions, restrictions as to attachments to structures, and if located in a
parking lot, the Zoning requirement that a specified number of parking spaces
be available for use by the business. These officials shall notify the Director
in writing of any, objections to the permit within thirty (30) days after
receiving the application.
   (e)   If an application for a permit is for the placement of a pay telephone
in a design review district, then the Commissioner shall also refer it to the
City Planning Commission or Landmarks Commission, whichever is applicable, and
that commission shall notify the director in writing of any objections to the
permit within thirty (30) days after receiving the application. In deciding
whether or not to object to the issuance of the permit, the City Planning
Commission or Landmarks Commission, acting in accordance with its rules and
regulations, shall consider whether the placement of the phone is consistent
with the design review standards for the district; whether it is consistent
with other streetscape elements in the vicinity and any overall streetscape
plan for the district; whether there have been streetscape improvements in the
area such as special lighting, landscaping, pavers, and the like; whether there
is any visual clutter concerns if a pay telephone is installed; and whether
there are any architectural or historical considerations. As used in this
division,”design review district” means any area in which building permits
require review and approval of either the City Planning Commission or the
Landmarks Commission.
   (f)   A permit application shall be disapproved if a telephone has been
determined to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter within five hundred (500)
feet of the proposed telephone location within the previous two (2) years, and
may be disapproved if the applicant has violated this chapter within the
previous one (1) year.
   (g)   Upon receipt of a completed application that demonstrates that the
telephone will be in compliance with this chapter and all required information
and fees, the Commissioner shall issue to the owner an outdoor pay telephone
permit and shall provide the owner with a label to be affixed to each telephone
identifying the registration number and location of the telephone. The
Commissioner shall ordinarily approve or disapprove a permit within forty-five
(45) days of the receipt of a completed application and fee, unless the
exercise of due diligence by the Commissioner requires that a longer period of
time be taken. A telephone for which a permit is issued shall be installed
within thirty (30) days of the issuance of the permit or the permit is void and
no longer effective. No refund of permit fees shall be given if the permit
becomes void.
(Ord. No. 583-04. Passed 4-5-04, eff. 4-8-04)
§ 670B.06 Inspection; Enforcement; Removal Orders; License and Permit
Suspension and Revocation; Appeal
   (a)   It shall be the responsibility of the Commissioner to perform an
annual inspection of all pay telephones that are installed on private property
and in the right-of-way in the City, to ensure that they are in compliance with
this chapter. The Commissioner will provide a report to the Director listing
all pay telephones not in compliance with this chapter, the owners of such
telephones, and the owners of the properties where such telephones are located.
   (b)   Any owner of a pay telephone who is not in compliance with this
chapter shall be notified in writing by the Commissioner of the violation, a
copy of which shall be sent to the property owner where such violations exist.
The owner of the pay telephone must correct the violations within five (5)
business days of the mailing of such notice. If the owner fails to correct the
violations within the time required, the Commissioner may order the telephone
removed, and the license or permit of the owner suspended, until all violations
are corrected, or revoked.
   (c)   An order of removal, or license or permit suspension or revocation,
shall be sent in writing to the pay telephone owner, and a copy shall be sent
to the property owner where such violations exist. The City may remove the
phone within five (5) business days of the mailing of such notice, at the
owner’s expense. The owner shall reimburse the City for the cost of removing
and storing the telephone before the owner may reclaim the telephone. Such
costs shall also include the cost of removing any installation ancillary to the
outdoor pay telephone and the cost of restoring the public right-of- way to its
original condition.
   (d)   An owner may appeal a violation notice, a removal order, or an order
of suspension or revocation to the Board of Zoning Appeals within fourteen (14)
days of the date of receipt of the notice or order. The Board shall promptly
notify the Clerk of Council of any appeal and of the hearing date. The Board
shall hear the appeal within fourteen (14) days after the appeal is filed, and
the Board shall issue a decision within fourteen (14) days after the conclusion
of the hearing. No notice of the hearing is required to be provided to
adjoining property owners.
   (e)   If the license, contract or permit of an owner is suspended or
revoked, the owner must remove all telephones installed pursuant to that
license, contract or permit, and the owner may not install any more telephones
until the suspension is lifted or a new license or permit is issued or contract
is executed. An appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals of a removal order, or of
a suspension or revocation, shall stay such removal order.
   (f)   If an owner’s license, contract or permit is revoked, the owner must
apply for a new license, contract or permit and pay all fees required for a
license or permit prior to the installation of any telephone. After the
revocation of a permit, the owner may not reapply for a permit for the same
location for one (1) year after the date the revocation is effective and after
the conclusion of any appeal therefrom.
   (g)   If an owner does not comply with an order to correct a violation of
the requirements to maintain a telephone clean or free of graffiti, stickers or
advertising within five (5) business days from the mailing of such an order,
the Commissioner may take action necessary to clean or remove graffiti,
stickers or advertising from the telephone at the owner’s expense. The owner
shall reimburse the City for such expenses.
(Ord. No. 1989-01. Passed 10-22-01, eff. 11-1-01 without the signature of the
Mayor)
§ 670B.07 Public Nuisance; Removal of Outdoor Pay Telephones
   (a)   Upon request in writing by the member of Council in whose ward an
outdoor pay telephone is located in the right-of-way or on private property, or
upon receipt of verbal or written citizen complaints concerning such an outdoor
pay telephone, the Director of Public Safety shall conduct an investigation
into whether the installation and maintenance of the outdoor pay telephone
constitutes a public nuisance. Upon determination by the Director of Public
Safety that a particular outdoor pay telephone constitutes a public nuisance,
the Director shall order that special telephone service features as are
acceptable to the Director shall be provided by the outdoor pay telephone or,
if the Director determines it is necessary, that the telephone be removed.
Nothing in this section shall preclude the Director from ordering the removal
of a telephone without first requiring the implementation of special features.
A particular outdoor pay telephone shall constitute a public nuisance when the
Director of Public Safety determines that one (1) or more of the following
conditions exist:
      (1)   The outdoor pay telephone has been used in the commission of
illegal drug transactions or other criminal activity, or substantially
contributes by its presence to the commission of illegal drug transactions or
other criminal activity as evidenced by significant numbers of such crimes
occurring in the vicinity of the telephone;
      (2)   The existence of the outdoor pay telephone has substantially
contributed by its presence to the congregation of persons who have made loud
noises and other disturbances that have disrupted persons residing near the
telephone or disrupted business enterprises located near the telephone;
      (3)   The existence of the outdoor pay telephone has substantially
contributed by its presence to the congregation of persons consuming alcoholic
beverages, except where such consumption is expressly authorized by state
license, or consuming illegal or controlled substances;
      (4)   The existence of the outdoor pay telephone has substantially
contributed by its presence to the congregation of persons who have interfered
with pedestrian or vehicular traffic in the public right-of- way near the
telephone;
      (5)   Usage of the outdoor pay telephone between the hours of 1:00 a.m.
and 5:00 a.m. is significantly and repeatedly above normal usage for similarly
situated outdoor pay telephones during the same hours so as to indicate that
the telephone is being used in the commission of illegal drug activity or other
criminal activity;
      (6)   The pay telephone has been used to abuse the 911 system.
   (b)   The special features shall be instituted, or the owner shall remove
the telephone, and restore the right- of-way to its original condition, if
applicable, within five (5) business days of an order to institute special
features or remove the telephone. Removal of a nuisance pay telephone shall be
governed by the provisions of Section
670B.06.
   (c)   If the Director determines that the nuisance may be abated by the
reduction in the total number of pay telephones in an area, the removal of pay
telephones shall be ordered based upon the total period of time that a
telephone has been permitted by the City, with the telephones permitted for the
least amount of time being ordered removed first.
   (d)   The Director of Public Safety will inform in writing the member of
Council who made the complaint regarding the pay telephone the result of such
investigation and the Director shall notify the member in writing of any order
issued by the Director.
   (e)   If an outdoor pay telephone has been removed from a location because
it is a nuisance, no other pay telephone may be installed at the same location
or within five hundred (500) feet of that location for a minimum of one (1)
year.
   (f)   The owner of an outdoor pay telephone may appeal from the
determination of a nuisance and the order of special features or removal as set
forth in Section
670B.06.
(Ord. No. 1989-01. Passed 10-22-01, eff. 11-1-01 without the signature of the
Mayor)
§ 670B.08 PUCO Regulations
   Nothing in this chapter shall be read so as to limit the authority of the
PUCO to regulate outdoor pay telephones within the City of Cleveland, nor to
conflict with the authority of the PUCO to approve any special services for pay
telephones.
(Ord. No. 1989-01. Passed 10-22-01, eff. 11-1-01 without the signature of the
Mayor)
§ 670B.99 Penalty
   Any owner as defined in this chapter, or any owner, lessee, or person in
possession or control of private property where an outdoor pay telephone is or
has been located, who violated any part of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and fined one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first offense and
five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a second or subsequent offense. Each day
that a violation occurs or continues constitutes a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 1989-01. Passed 10-22-01, eff. 11-1-01 without the signature of the
Mayor)
CHAPTER 671 – AUCTIONS
671.01   Auction License Required
671.02   License Application; Fee and Issuance
671.03   Bills of Sale
671.04   Sales to Minors; Licensee’s Bond
671.05   Shills Prohibited
671.06   License Revocation
671.07   Legal Process Exempted
671.08   Definitions; Legislative Intent
671.09   Jewelry Auction License Required
671.10   Application for Jewelry Auction License
671.11   Jewelry Auction Licensee’s Bond
671.12   Licensee’s Hearing; License Fee
671.13   Sale Prohibitions; License Issuance Restrictions
671.14   Article Labeling Requirements
671.15   Limitations on Sale Merchandise
671.16   Misrepresentation
671.17   Shills Prohibited at Jewelry Auction
671.18   Auction Attendance by Licensee
671.19   Additional Regulations
671.20   License Revocation or Suspension
671.21   Appeals
671.99   Penalty
   Note: The legislative history of this chapter, except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 63410-A, passed
September 22, 1924.
Cross-reference:
   Falsification, CO
615.02
   Rebuilt or second merchandise, CO
653.04
Statutory reference:
   Conduct of auction sales, RC 1302.41
   Goods improperly marked as sterling, coin silver, RC 1329.26, 1329.27
   License suspension or revocation, RC 4707.15
   Power to regulate, RC 715.24, 715.63
   State licensing of auctioneers, RC Ch. 4707
§ 671.01 Auction License Required
   No person or corporation by himself, herself, or itself, or by any servant
or agent within the corporate limits of the City of Cleveland shall sell or
offer for sale at auction any goods, wares and merchandise, except utensils of
husbandry, household furniture, real estate, produce, horses, sheep, hogs, meat
cattle and books, unless such person or corporation first procures a license to
do so as provided in this chapter.
§ 671.02 License Application; Fee and Issuance
   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses, upon application in writing of
any person or corporation, may upon the receipt of ten dollars ($10.00) for
each auction such applicant desires to conduct to sell or offer for sale goods,
wares or merchandise except as provided in Section
671.01, issue a license to such applicant, authorizing such applicant to make
the sales at auction for the time therein specified, provided the Commissioner
is satisfied that the applicant has complied with the requirements of State
laws regulating the listing of such goods, wares and merchandise for taxation,
and has paid the taxes thereon.
(Ord. No. 2588-80. Passed 6-1-81, eff. 6-23-81)
§ 671.03 Bills of Sale
   There shall be delivered to the purchasers of articles made at the auction
sales, a bill of sale in such form as is prescribed by the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses.
§ 671.04 Sales to Minors; Licensee’s Bond
   No authorized sales shall be made to minors. Every auction licensee shall
make and execute a bond of five hundred dollars ($500.00) with surety, to the
approval of the Director of Finance, that the licensee will comply with all the
laws of the State and the ordinances of the City in regard to sales at auction.
§ 671.05 Shills Prohibited
   The auction licensee shall not allow to be present at any auction sale any
person who shills; namely, a person who in collusion with the auctioneer enters
false bids on the articles offered for sale for the purpose of advancing the
bid price thereon. The licensee under this chapter shall not allow shilling at
auction sales.
§ 671.06 License Revocation
   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses may revoke the license of any
licensee, under the terms of this chapter, who is found guilty of violating any
of the provisions hereof. Any person whose license is revoked shall not be
granted another license before the expiration of one (1) year following the
date of revocation.
§ 671.07 Legal Process Exempted
   This chapter shall not extend to an officer, person or corporation executing
a process or order of court for selling property directed by law or by legal
process or order to be sold by public vendue, auction or outcry.
§ 671.08 Definitions; Legislative Intent
   (a)   As used in this chapter:
      (1)   “Public auction” means a sale or offering for sale to the highest
bidder of any gold, silver, plated ware, precious stones, watches, clocks or
jewelry or like merchandise, in any building, or any of the streets or alleys
or any other public place, where any and all persons who choose are permitted
to attend and offer bids.
      (2)   “Stock on hand” means such gold, silver, plated ware, precious
stones, watches, clocks or jewelry which a merchant usually and ordinarily
carries through the year, and does not include gold, silver, plated ware,
precious stones, watches, clocks, jewelry or like merchandise purchased or
otherwise acquired especially and purposely for sales at public auction.
      (3)   The words used in this chapter shall be subject to the
interpretation provided by Section
101.03 of the Codified Ordinances.
   (b)   It is hereby declared the legislative intent that jewelry auction
sales as herein defined shall be held only to liquidate estates and businesses
and to avoid bankruptcy or the like, and shall not be permitted as established
merchandising practice.
(Ord. No. 1301-A-44. Passed 5-7-45)
§ 671.09 Jewelry Auction License Required
   No person shall sell or offer for sale at public auction any gold, silver,
plated ware, precious stones, watches, clocks, jewelry or like merchandise,
whether the same is his or her property or that of another, unless licensed to
do so as provided in this chapter. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to
apply to any person executing a process or order of a court of competent
jurisdiction, nor to licensed pawnbrokers or loan companies selling or offering
for sale unredeemed pledges or chattels in the manner provided by law.
(Ord. No. 1301-A-44. Passed 5-7-45)
§ 671.10 Application for Jewelry Auction License
   An applicant for the license required by Section
671.09 shall file an application with the Commissioner of Assessments and
Licenses not later than thirty (30) days prior to the auction sale to be
licensed upon forms prescribed by the Commissioner. The application shall
include, in addition to the name and address of the applicant, and the location
and time of the proposed auction sale, a sworn statement of the stock on hand
and the stock to be offered at auction, the quality, quantity, kind or grade of
each item, the wholesale market value thereof and the name of the owner of such
merchandise for at least one (1) year prior to the proposed auction sale, and
such other information as the Commissioner prescribes. The application shall be
accompanied by a certified copy of the auctioneer’s license required by State
laws.
(Ord. No. 1301-A-44. Passed 5-7-45)
§ 671.11 Jewelry Auction Licensee’s Bond
   Every applicant for the license required by Section
671.09 shall execute and file with the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses
a good and sufficient bond of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00),
with two (2) or more sureties thereon who shall be freeholders within the City,
or with the surety thereon a surety company authorized to do a business in the
State. Such bond shall be to the approval of the Director of Law, and shall be
conditioned upon faithful observance of all the conditions of this chapter.
Such bond shall also indemnify any purchaser at a public auction who suffers
any loss by reason of misrepresentations in such sale. Such bond shall continue
in effect until the expiration of the statute of limitations on all claims
secured by such bond. The licensee shall notify the Commissioner of any suit
filed as a result of the operations hereby licensed. Any purchaser claiming to
have been damaged by misrepresentation in an auction sale may maintain an
action at law against the licensee, making such misrepresentations, and may
join as party defendant the surety or sureties on the bond.
(Ord. No. 1301-A-44. Passed 5-7-45)
§ 671.12 Licensee’s Hearing; License Fee
   Upon receipt of the application specified in Section
671.10, the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses shall set a time and place
for public hearing thereon not later than two (2) weeks thereafter, notice of
which shall be published in the City Record. When satisfied as a result of such
public hearing or otherwise that neither any fraud nor deception in the conduct
of the sales or in the advertising thereof, nor any misrepresentation of the
goods to be sold, is intended or will be practiced, the Commissioner upon
receipt of the bond required by Section
671.11 duly approved by the Director of Law as to form and the Director of
Finance as to sufficiency, shall issue to the applicant a license for which
application has been made. The license fee shall be one hundred dollars
($100.00) for the first thirty (30) days or less and the renewal fee shall be
one hundred dollars ($100.00) for an additional thirty (30) days or less.
(Ord. No. 1301-A-44. Passed 5-7-45)
§ 671.13 Sale Prohibitions; License Issuance Restrictions
   No sale by auction shall be licensed or held in the month of December. No
sale by auction shall be licensed or permitted for a period of more than thirty
(30) days, Sundays and legal holidays excepted. The thirty (30) days shall be
consecutive except as to Sundays and legal holidays, and from December 1 to
December 31, inclusive, except that if the licensee does not sell the quantity
of merchandise permitted under Section
671.15, he or she may make application for an extension of the thirty (30) day
period. No sale by auction shall be held or open for business between the hours
of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. of the following morning under any circumstances,
and no license shall permit such sales. No license shall be issued for the sale
of stock on hand of any person who has not been for the period of one (1) year
next preceding such sale, continuously engaged in the City in the business of
selling such merchandise at wholesale or retail. Nor shall a license be issued
for the sale or offering for sale at public auction of stock on hand by any
purchaser thereof from a person that has not been for the period of one (1)
year next preceding any such purchase, continuously engaged in and upon the
same premises wherein the sale is to be held, in the business of selling such
merchandise at wholesale or retail. No license shall under any circumstances be
granted to any person within a period of two (2) years after the termination of
such sale by auction held or conducted by such person. No person who has been
convicted of violating any of the provisions relating to the conduct of jewelry
auctions shall be granted a license or act as auctioneer or be employed in any
manner at or in connection with any sale or auction licensed by this chapter
for a period of five (5) years after such conviction.
(Ord. No. 1301-A-44. Passed 5-7-45)
§ 671.14 Article Labeling Requirements
   No person licensed hereunder shall offer for sale by auction any article to
which there is not attached a card, ticket or label containing a true and
correct statement plainly written or printed in English specifying the kind and
quality of the metal of which such article is made or composed, or the
percentage, karat or purity of such metal. If such articles are plated or
overlaid, then such tag or label shall contain a true statement of the kind of
plate. When precious stones are for sale or sold by auction as such or as part
of an article of jewelry, such written statement shall set forth the true name,
weight and quality of such stone or stones. When semiprecious stones are
offered for sale or sold by auction as such or as part of an article of
jewelry, such written statements shall set forth the true name of the stones.
When imitations of precious or semiprecious stones are offered for sale or sold
by auctions as such or as part of an article of jewelry, the imitations shall
be described or defined as synthetic or imitations of such stones as they
purport to represent. When watches and clocks are sold the true names of the
manufacturers shall be stated in writing and no parts of the movements or
mechanism thereof shall be substituted or contain false and misleading names or
trademarks; neither shall secondhand or old movements be offered for sale in
new cases without a true statement to that effect. Used and rebuilt watches
should be so indicated in accordance with Section
653.04. Such tag or label shall remain securely attached to any such article or
merchandise, shall be delivered to the purchaser as a true and correct
description and representation of the article sold and shall be deemed prima
facie evidence of intent to defraud in case such written statement is not a
true and correct description and representation of the articles sold.
(Ord. No. 90-96. Passed 3-18-96, eff. 3-26-96)
§ 671.15 Limitations on Sale Merchandise
   During any sale by auction no additions whatsoever shall be made to the
stock of merchandise set forth in the inventory attached to the license
application. Nothing shall be offered for sale or sold at any sale by auction
which is in addition to the stock of merchandise described in the inventory, or
which has been added to the applicant’s stock within a period of thirty (30)
days prior to the date the applicant filed application for a license. Under no
circumstances shall the inventory offered for sale at auction exceed by fifty
percent (50%) the average inventory carried by the applicant over the preceding
five (5) year period. If the applicant has been in business less than five (5)
years, the inventory offered for sale at auction shall not exceed by fifty
percent (50%) the average inventory carried for the period of time the
applicant has been in business. Any abnormal purchases during the year prior to
the license application shall be cause for refusal to issue such license.
(Ord. No. 1301-A-44. Passed 5-7-45)
§ 671.16 Misrepresentation
   No licensee, his or her agents or employees shall make any statements which
are false in any particular, or which have a tendency to mislead or to make any
misrepresentations whatsoever with reference to any article sold or offered for
sale during an auction.
(Ord. No. 1301-A-44. Passed 5-7-45)
§ 671.17 Shills Prohibited at Jewelry Auction
   No person shall act at any jewelry sale as bidder, or what is commonly known
as a “capper,” “booster” or “shiller,” or offer or make any false bid, or offer
any false bid to buy or pretend to buy any article sold or offered for sale at
any sale by auction.
(Ord. No. 1301-A-44. Passed 5-7-45)
§ 671.18 Auction Attendance by Licensee
   The person to whom the license has been granted shall remain in continuous
attendance at all times while the sale by auction is being conducted, and shall
be responsible for any violation of the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 1301-A-44. Passed 5-7-45)
§ 671.19 Additional Regulations
   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses shall have the power to make
such further regulations not inconsistent with the purpose and intent of this
chapter as he or she may from time to time deem necessary or desirable.
However, any such regulations before becoming effective shall first be
published at least once in the City Record.
(Ord. No. 1301-A-44. Passed 5-7-45)
§ 671.20 License Revocation or Suspension
   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses upon the recommendation of the
Chief of Police, or upon his or her own initiative, may at any time revoke or
suspend the license granted under authority of this chapter for any violation
of the requirements thereof or of any law relating to the business so licensed
or for failure to comply with the terms of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 1301-A-44. Passed 5-7-45)
§ 671.21 Appeals
   In case of the refusal to issue a license or the revocation or suspension of
a license by the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses, the applicant or
licensee may appeal from such order to the Board of Zoning Appeals established
by Charter Section
76-6. Notice of such appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the
Commissioner within ten (10) days after the making of such order. The Board
within ten (10) days after the filing with the Commissioner of such notice of
appeals shall proceed with the hearing of such appeal, at which hearing all
parties interested shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard. The Board
shall approve, modify or annul such order from which the appeal has been
perfected. The finding of the Board shall be final on all parties thereto.
(Ord. No. 1301-A-44. Passed 5-7-45)
§ 671.99 Penalty
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not
less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) for the first offense, and for each subsequent offense, not less than
one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and
may be imprisoned not more than ninety (90) days or both. Each separate sale or
offering for sale at public auction of any article of gold, silver, plated
ware, precious stones or imitations thereof, watches, clocks, jewelry or like
merchandise in violation of the provisions of this chapter constitutes a
separate offense.
(Ord. No. 1301-A-44. Passed 5-7-45)
CHAPTER 672 – CHRISTMAS TREE SALES
672.01   License Required
672.02   License Issuance; Fee
672.03   Tree Placement on Street Prohibited
672.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Transportation of Christmas trees, RC Ch. 4551
§ 672.01 License Required
   On and after February 1, 1959, no person, firm or corporation, or any agent
thereof, shall engage in the sale of Christmas trees in the City, except
pursuant to a special license for specific premises for a limited period, not
to exceed thirty (30) days, in any one (1) year, unless such sale is incidental
to and upon premises of an established horticultural business in the City, or
unless it is a business for which an annual license has been issued by the
City, and is in full force and effect, and the sale will be conducted upon the
same premises for which such annual license was issued, or unless such person,
firm or corporation, or any agent thereof has been established in its business
location prior to June 1 of that year, and the sale will take place upon the
same premises. However, any business not annually licensed by the City that
desires to engage in the sale of Christmas trees shall first register with the
Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses as to its intention to engage in such
sale, and provided further that no license or registration for the casual sale
of Christmas trees shall be required of any church or charitable institution
which is the recipient of the entire proceeds from such sale.
(Ord. No. 1330-58. Passed 3-9-59, eff. 3-16-59)
§ 672.02 License Issuance; Fee
   Before December 1st of the year in which the sale is to take place, an
applicant for the license required by Section
672.01 shall file an application with the Commissioner of Assessments and
Licenses on forms provided by the Commissioner. The forms shall include the
name and address of the person, firm, or corporation on whose behalf the sale
is to be conducted, the dates during which the sale will take place, the
location where the sale will take place, the approximate value of the trees
proposed to be sold at the sale and other information as the Commissioner
reasonably requires. The Commissioner, when satisfied as to the truth of any
application, shall issue a license for the sale of Christmas trees for a period
not exceeding thirty (30) days. Any person, firm, or corporation to whom a
license is granted shall pay a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) to the
Commissioner.
(Ord. No. 2393-02. Passed 2-3-03, eff. 2-3-03)
§ 672.03 Tree Placement on Street Prohibited
   No person, firm or corporation to whom a license is issued under the
provisions of Section
672.02 shall place, allow or permit to be placed upon any sidewalk, street,
alley or other public ground any Christmas tree, branches thereof or any other
type of Christmas decorations or trimmings. The Commissioner of Assessments and
Licenses shall revoke the license of the licensee upon a conviction of a
violation of the provisions of this section. The Division of Police shall
enforce the provisions of this section.
(Ord. No. 1330-58. Passed 3-9-59, eff. 3-16-59)
§ 672.99 Penalty
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not
less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00), and may be imprisoned not more than thirty (30) days, or both.
(Ord. No. 1330-58. Passed 3-9-59, eff. 3-16-59)
CHAPTER 673 – GOING-OUT-OF-BUSINESS SALES
673.01   License Required
673.02   License Application
673.03   License Fees
673.04   Licensee’s Bond
673.05   Hearing; License Issuance
673.06   License Issuance Limitations; Renewal
673.07   Inventory Limitation
673.08   License Revocation or Suspension
673.09   Appeals
673.99   Penalty
   Note: The legislative history of this chapter, except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 63410-A, passed
September 22, 1924.
Statutory reference:
   Bankruptcy sale, trade practices, RC 1333.35 et seq.
§ 673.01 License Required
   No person, firm or corporation in the business of the retail sale of goods,
wares or merchandise shall sell, offer for sale, announce or advertise for
sale, such goods, wares or merchandise without first obtaining a license as
provided in this chapter, when such sale is described or referred to either
directly or indirectly in form or in substance as a going-out-of-business sale,
removal, loss, termination, loss or expiration of lease, closing out,
liquidation, creditors, damaged goods, forced sale, distressed stock or by any
other term which reasonably leads the public to believe that the owner or
offerer of such goods, wares or merchandise either by choice or necessity will
no longer continue to engage in business, at the same location. Nothing in this
section shall be deemed to apply to any person, firm or corporation who sells,
offers for sale, announces or advertises for sale goods, wares or merchandise
at a reduction in price when such reduction in price is made in the normal
course of business operations; nor to any person executing a process or order
of a court of competent jurisdiction; nor to a creditor’s sale, conducted by a
licensed auctioneer, which does not exceed one (1) day’s duration.
(Ord. No. 994-56. Passed 6-18-56, eff. 6-20-56)
§ 673.02 License Application
   (a)   Each applicant for a license required by Section
673.01 shall make application to the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses
prior to the advertising or offering for sale of any goods, wares or
merchandise. Such application shall be on forms provided by the Commissioner,
which shall include in addition to the name and address of the applicant, the
name and address of the person, firm or corporation on whose behalf such sale
will be conducted if such is other than the applicant, the date when such sale
shall commence, the complete inventory including the quality, kind, character
and wholesale market value of the goods, wares or merchandise to be offered for
sale. Such information shall be prepared in the following manner:
      (1)   A listing of all goods, wares or merchandise which has been in
stock fifteen (15) days or longer prior to the date of such application;
      (2)   A list of all goods, wares or merchandise received in stock within
the fifteen (15) days immediately prior to the date of such application;
      (3)   A list of all goods, wares or merchandise which has been or will be
ordered and placed in stock during the pendency of such sale;
      (4)   Such other information relative to the business as may be deemed
necessary by the Commissioner.
   (b)   If the inventory itemized in the original application is not disposed
of within the required time the Commissioner may, as hereinafter provided,
renew such license. The fee for such renewal shall be determined by the
wholesale value of the inventory itemized in an application for license
renewal, which form shall be provided by the Commissioner.
(Ord. No. 994-56. Passed 6-18-56, eff. 6-20-56)
§ 673.03 License Fees
   Each application for a license or license renewal for any thirty (30) day
period or part thereof shall be accompanied by the following fee:
 
Itemized Inventory   Fee
Not more than $5,000 $10.00
$5,000 to $10,000    $25.00
$10,000 to $25,000   $50.00
More than $25,000    $75.00
 
(Ord. No. 2588-80. Passed 6-1-81, eff. 6-3-81)
§ 673.04 Licensee’s Bond
   Each license applicant shall execute and file with the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses a good and sufficient bond of two thousand five
hundred dollars ($2,500.00), except that such bond shall not be required when
the wholesale market value of the goods, wares or merchandise to be offered for
sale is not in excess of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), with two (2) or
more sureties thereon who shall be freeholders within the City, or with the
surety thereon a surety company authorized to do business in the State. Such
bond shall be to the approval of the Director of Law, and conditioned upon
faithful observance of all the conditions of this chapter, and shall also
indemnify any purchaser who suffers any loss by reason of misrepresentations in
a licensed sale. The bond shall continue in effect for a period of one (1)
year. The licensee shall notify the Commissioner of any suit filed as a result
of the licensed operations. Any purchaser claiming to have been damaged by
misrepresentation in a sale may maintain an action at law against the licensee
making such misrepresentations, and may join as party defendant the surety or
sureties on the bonds as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. No. 994-56. Passed 6-18-56, eff. 6-20-56)
§ 673.05 Hearing; License Issuance
   Upon receipt of any license application the Commissioner of Assessments and
Licenses shall set a time and place for public hearing thereon. When satisfied
as a result of such public hearing or otherwise that neither any fraud nor
deception in the conduct of the sales or in the advertising thereof, nor any
misrepresentation of the goods to be sold is intended or will be practiced and
that such applicant has complied with all requirements of law, the
Commissioner, upon receipt of the bond required by Section
673.04, duly approved by the Director of Law as to form and sufficiency, shall
issue a license to the applicant.
(Ord. No. 994-56. Passed 6-18-56, eff. 6-20-56)
§ 673.06 License Issuance Limitations; Renewal
   No sale referred to in Section
673.01 shall be licensed or permitted for a period of more than thirty (30)
days, Sundays and legal holidays excepted. The thirty (30) days shall be
consecutive except as to Sundays and legal holidays. However, if the licensee
does not sell the quantity of merchandise listed in the application for a
license he or she may make application for extension of such license to the
Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses. If upon investigation the
Commissioner is satisfied as to the truth of the statements contained in the
application for renewal, he or she shall issue a renewal license for a period
not exceeding thirty (30) days. It is further provided that a maximum of two
(2) such renewals may be granted, except that if cause is shown to the
satisfaction of the Commissioner, additional thirty (30) day renewals may be
granted until all the disposable inventory listed in the original application
for a license is sold. No license shall be issued to any person, firm or
corporation to conduct a sale at the same location where such applicant has
terminated a prior sale licensed hereunder within a period of eighteen (18)
months subsequent to the termination of such prior sale; nor shall a license be
issued to a purchaser of stock at a sale licensed hereunder for a period of
eighteen (18) months subsequent to such purchase if the purchaser continues to
conduct business under the same firm name as that used by the seller of such
stock without having adopted a reasonable means of advertising the change in
ownership to the public, or where no bona fide change in ownership has taken
place and the purchase was a sham transaction intended to deceive the public.
Nor shall a license be issued to any person, firm or corporation who has not
been for a period of sixty (60) days next preceding such sale, continuously
engaged in the City in the business of selling goods, wares or merchandise at
retail. No person who has been convicted of violating any of the provisions
pertaining to a licensed sale shall be issued a license to conduct such a sale
or be employed in any manner in the conduct of such a sale for a period of two
(2) years subsequent to such conviction.
(Ord. No. 994-56. Passed 6-18-56, eff. 6-20-56)
§ 673.07 Inventory Limitation
   No additions whatsoever shall be made to the stock of goods, wares or
merchandise set forth in the inventory attached to the application for the
required license, and nothing shall be offered for sale or sold at any such
sale which is in addition to the stock of goods, wares or merchandise described
in the inventory. Under no circumstances shall the inventory offered for sale
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the average inventory carried by the applicant
over the preceding five (5) years. If the applicant has been in business for a
lesser period of time, the inventory offered for sale shall not exceed by fifty
percent (50%) the average inventory carried for the period of time the
applicant has been in business. Any abnormal purchases during the year prior to
the application for a license shall be cause for refusal to issue the license.
(Ord. No. 952-54. Passed 6-28-54, eff. 7-2-54)
§ 673.08 License Revocation or Suspension
   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses, upon recommendation of the
Chief of Police, or upon his or her own initiative, may at any time revoke or
suspend a license for any violation of this chapter or of any law or ordinance
relating to the conduct of such business.
(Ord. No. 952-54. Passed 6-28-54, eff. 7-2-54)
§ 673.09 Appeals
   In case of the refusal to issue a license or the revocation or suspension of
a license by the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses, the applicant or
licensee may appeal from such order to the Board of Zoning Appeals established
by Charter Section
76-6. Notice of such appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the
Commissioner within ten (10) days after the making of such order. The Board,
within ten (10) days after the filing with the Commissioner of such notice of
appeal, shall proceed with the hearing of such appeal, at which hearing
interested persons shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard. Such Board
shall approve, modify or annul such order from which the appeal has been
perfected, and the finding of such Board shall be final on all parties thereto.
(Ord. No. 952-54. Passed 6-28-54, eff. 7-2-54)
§ 673.99 Penalty
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and may be
imprisoned not more than thirty (30) days, or both. Each separate sale or
offering for sale constitutes a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 952-54. Passed 6-28-54, eff. 7-2-54)
CHAPTER 674 – HANDGUN POSSESSION AND SALE
674.01   Definitions – Repealed
674.02   General Prohibitions – Repealed
674.03   Handguns Confiscated – Repealed
674.04   Handgun Owner’s Identification Card; Application; Prohibitions –
Repealed
674.05   Registration of Handguns; Application; Fee – Repealed
674.06   Exemptions – Repealed
674.07   Handgun Dealer’s License; Fee – Repealed
674.08   License Revocation – Repealed
674.09   Handgun Dealer’s Records – Repealed
674.10   Stolen or Lost Handguns; Reports – Repealed
674.11   Construction and Interpretation – Repealed
674.99   Penalty – Repealed
§ 674.01 Definitions – Repealed
(Ord. No. 931-14. Passed 4-20-15, eff. 4-21-15)
§ 674.02 General Prohibitions – Repealed
(Ord. No. 931-14. Passed 4-20-15, eff. 4-21-15)
§ 674.03 Handguns Confiscated – Repealed
(Ord. No. 931-14. Passed 4-20-15, eff. 4-21-15)
§ 674.04 Handgun Owner’s Identification Card; Application; Prohibitions –
Repealed
(Ord. No. 931-14. Passed 4-20-15, eff. 4-21-15)
§ 674.05 Registration of Handguns; Application; Fee – Repealed
(Ord. No. 931-14. Passed 4-20-15, eff. 4-21-15)
§ 674.06 Exemptions – Repealed
(Ord. No. 931-14. Passed 4-20-15, eff. 4-21-15)
§ 674.07 Handgun Dealer’s License; Fee – Repealed
(Ord. No. 931-14. Passed 4-20-15, eff. 4-21-15)
§ 674.08 License Revocation – Repealed
(Ord. No. 931-14. Passed 4-20-15, eff. 4-21-15)
§ 674.09 Handgun Dealer’s Records – Repealed
(Ord. No. 931-14. Passed 4-20-15, eff. 4-21-15)
§ 674.10 Stolen or Lost Handguns; Reports – Repealed
(Ord. No. 931-14. Passed 4-20-15, eff. 4-21-15)
§ 674.11 Construction and Interpretation – Repealed
(Ord. No. 931-14. Passed 4-20-15, eff. 4-21-15)
§ 674.99 Penalty – Repealed
(Ord. No. 931-14. Passed 4-20-15, eff. 4-21-15)
CHAPTER 674A – LATE NIGHT RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS
674A.01   Definitions
674A.02   Security Measures at Late Night Retail Establishments
674A.99   Penalty
§ 674A.01 Definitions
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   “Late night retail establishment” shall mean any commercial enterprise
which is open at any time between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m. and
derives fifty percent (50%) or more of its gross income from the sale of goods,
merchandise, or other articles of value, which are sold in their original
containers, excluding commercial enterprises which conduct their business
exclusively by means of drive-thru windows made with security glass.
   (b)   “Security guard” shall mean a person engaged for hire as a watchman,
guard, private policeman or other person whose primary duty is to protect
persons or property or both and is a class A or C licensee pursuant to RC
Chapter 4749 or a registered employee of same and meets all requirements
imposed by that chapter, and also meets all requirements that may be imposed by
RC Chapter
109 and Chapter
670 of these Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 242-A-92. Passed 3-22-93, eff. 5-1-93)
§ 674A.02 Security Measures at Late Night Retail Establishments
   (a)   The owner or person in charge of a late night retail establishment
shall provide security measures during any period of time that the late night
retail establishment is open for business to the general public between the
hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m.
   (b)   As used in division (a), “security measures” means:
      (1)   Providing a security guard to patrol the premises, including any
parking lot, and otherwise be visible; or
      (2)   Providing all of the following:
         A.   A drop-safe on the premises which must weigh at least five
hundred (500) pounds or be bolted to the floor; and
         B.   A posted sign in the window stating that there is a safe on the
premises that is not accessible to employees on duty. Such sign shall be placed
in a conspicuous place so as not to obstruct the interior of the store from the
street; and
         C.   All cash registers positioned so that they are visible from the
street; and
         D.   A posted sign in the window stating that the cash register
contains fifty dollars ($50.00) or less. Such sign shall be placed in a
conspicuous place so as not to obstruct the interior of the store from the
street; and
         E.   Sufficient lighting to the entire exterior area of the store that
is utilized by employees and patrons. The intensity of the lighting shall be at
a minimum of five (5) footcandles per square foot as measured at ground level;
and
         F.   An alarm system on the premises and available for use by
employees in case of emergency which transmits a signal to an alarm system
company which will alert the Division of Police of the emergency. Such system
must be maintained in proper working order at all times; and
         G.   If fewer than two (2) employees are working at any time between
the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m., a video monitoring and recording system on
the premises of a type approved by the Chief of Police which monitors the
interior area of the store. Such system must be capable of immediately
producing a retrievable image on film or tape that can be a permanent record
and that can be enlarged through projection or other means. Such system must be
maintained in proper working order at all times.
(Ord. No. 242-A-92. Passed 3-22-93, eff. 5-1-93)
§ 674A.99 Penalty
   Whoever violates the provisions of Section
674A.02 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(Ord. No. 242-A-92. Passed 3-22-93, eff. 5-1-93)
CHAPTER 675 – STREET VENDORS
675.01   Definitions; Chapter Scope
675.02   Street Vendor’s License Required; Application; Fee
675.03   Street Vendor’s License: Issuance and Replacement; Fee
675.04   Permits Required
675.041   Street Vendors Advisory Committee
675.05   Permit; Vending on Private Property
675.06   Permit: Zones Within the Central Business District
675.07   Permit; Temporary Sidewalk Occupancy Outside the Central Business
District
675.061   Permit: Mobile Vending Within the Central Business District
675.08   Permit: Mobile Vending Outside the Central Business District
675.09   Regulations Governing Vendors
675.10   Revocation or Suspension of License or Permit; Appeals
675.99   Penalty
   Note: The legislative history of this chapter, except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 63410-A, passed
September 22, 1924.
Cross-reference:
   Peddlers, CO
Ch. 682
Statutory reference:
   License revocation, RC 2961.03
   Power to inspect food products, RC 715.46
   Power to regulate, RC 715.61 et seq.
   Sale of fresh fruits and vegetables, RC 925.21 et seq.
§ 675.01 Definitions; Chapter Scope
   (a)   For purposes of this chapter:
      (1)   "Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses.
      (2)   "Street Vending" or "Vending" means selling, offering or displaying
for sale, or soliciting another to purchase, for present or future delivery,
any goods, wares, merchandise, subscriptions, services, pre-packaged frozen
desserts, commercially prepackaged foods and beverages contained in displays of
less than two hundred (200) cubic feet, or any combination thereof from, in,
upon, along, or through the highways, streets, or sidewalks, door-to-door on
residential property, or in the open air or from a temporary shelter or vending
device upon private property.
      (3)   "Street Vendor" or "Vendor" means any person who engages in street
vending. "Vendor" does not include itinerant vendors or itinerant wholesale
produce dealers licensed under Chapter 682 or food shops or food vehicles
licensed pursuant to
Chapter 241, unless such food shop or food vehicle licensed under
Chapter 241 vends pre-packaged frozen desserts.
      (4)   "Person" means an individual, corporation, partnership or
association; provided, however, that for purposes of Section
675.02, "person" shall mean a natural person only.
      (5)   "Sell" or "selling" includes barter or bartering.
      (6)   "Sidewalk" means that portion of the street between the curb lines
or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property line.
      (7)   "Street" means street, alley, highway, roadway or avenue, including
all curbs along such streets.
      (8)   "Vending device" means vehicle or a container used for the sale,
display or transport of goods, wares, merchandise, or commercially pre-packaged
food or beverages, or equipment used for menial tasks by a vendor.
   (b)   Scope of Chapter. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to
sales made to dealers by commercial travelers or selling agents in the usual
course of business, to bona fide sales of goods, wares, commercially
prepackaged food or beverages, or merchandise by samples for future delivery,
to sales at trade shows or conventions, or to sales by charitable organizations
in conjunction with solicitations for charity.
   (c)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the
distribution of non-commercial handbills, cards, leaflets, or other literature
upon the sidewalks of the City.
(Ord. No. 1382-13. Passed 6-9-14, eff. 6-12-14)
§ 675.02 Street Vendor’s License Required; Application; Fee
   (a)   No person shall engage in vending anywhere in the City without a
vendor's license issued under Section
675.03. The issuance of a vendor's license to a person shall not be deemed to
authorize agents or employees of the person to vend without a license.
   (b)   The application for the license required by division (a) of this
section shall be made to the Commissioner on forms prescribed by the
Commissioner. The application shall include the following information:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   A detailed description of the goods, wares, commercially
prepackaged food or beverages, or merchandise that the applicant intends to
sell; and
      (3)   Such other information as the Commissioner deems necessary to
ensure compliance with this chapter.
   (c)   In addition to the application required by division (a) of this
section, each applicant for a vendor's license shall furnish two (2)
photographs of the applicant taken within thirty (30) days before the date of
application and of a size designated by the Commissioner.
   (d)   The annual license fee shall be sixty dollars ($60.00) which shall
cover the period beginning August 1 and ending July 31 of the following year.
   (e)   This section shall not apply to any special event as defined under and
governed by Section
133.07 of the Codified Ordinances, or to any vendor associated with that
special event.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. No. 377-24. Adopted
8-7-24)
§ 675.03 Street Vendor’s License: Issuance and Replacement; Fee
   (a)   Upon receipt of a completed application and all other materials
required by Section
675.02, the Commissioner shall issue to the applicant a vendor’s license and a
laminated identification card containing the applicant’s photograph. The
identification card shall be worn by and the license shall be kept upon the
person of the vendor at all times during which the vendor is engaged in
vending.
   (b)   The license issued pursuant to division (a) of this section shall
contain the following information:
      (1)   The vendor ‘s name and address;
      (2)   A detailed description of the goods, wares, commercially
prepackaged food or beverages, or merchandise which the vendor is authorized to
sell;
      (3)   The license number and the license expiration date.
   (c)   In the event that a licensed vendor loses the laminated identification
card issued pursuant to division (a) of this section, the Commissioner shall
issue a replacement identification card upon payment by the vendor of a fee of
ten dollars ($10.00).
(Ord. No. 1657-11. Passed 11-28-11, eff. 11-28-11)
§ 675.04 Permits Required
   A permit is required in each of the following circumstances when vending is
occurring upon the highways, streets, or sidewalks, or to business invitees
upon or from private property:
   (a)   No person shall engage in vending upon or from private property
anywhere in the City without a permit issued in accordance with Section
675.05;
   (b)   No person shall engage in vending upon or from a fixed location on a
sidewalk within the Central Business District without a permit issued in
accordance with
Chapter 508 or without a permit issued in accordance with Section
675.06;
   (c)   No person shall engage in vending while moving continuously from place
to place on the highways, streets or sidewalks of the Central Business District
without a permit issued in accordance with Section
675.061;
   (d)   No person shall engage in vending upon or from a fixed location on a
sidewalk outside of the Central Business District without a permit issued in
accordance with Section
675.07;
   (e)   No person shall engage in vending while moving continuously from place
to place on the highways, streets, or sidewalks outside of the Central Business
District without a permit issued in accordance with Section
675.08.
(Ord. No. 1382-13. Passed 6-9-14, eff. 6-12-14)
§ 675.041 Street Vendors Advisory Committee
   There is established a Street Vendors Advisory Committee consisting of three
(3) members of Council, one (1) of whom shall be designated as chairman,
appointed by the President of Council; one (1) member of the Division of
Police, appointed by the Chief of Police; and one (1) Assistant Director of
Law, appointed by the Director of Law. The Committee shall assist vendors
licensed under Section
675.03 to resolve problems relating to street sales and may communicate to the
Council recommendations for the amendment of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 210-11. Passed 4-25-11, eff. 4-25-11)
§ 675.05 Permit; Vending on Private Property
   (a)   Application. The application for the permit required by division (a)
of Section
675.04 shall be made to the Commissioner. The application shall contain the
following:
      (1)   The vendor’s name, address and vendor’s license number;
      (2)   The name and address of the owner of the private property upon
which the vendor intends to vend;
      (3)   If the vendor is the owner of the private property, documentation
of the vendor’s ownership, and if the vendor is not the owner of the private
property, documentation, signed by the property owner, of the vendor’s right to
vend on the property;
      (4)   The address of the private property on which the vendor intends to
vend;
      (5)   A statement of the duration of the proposed vending activity and
whether the applicant is seeking an annual permit or a short-term permit;
      (6)   A description of the vending device, if any, from which the vendor
intends to vend, including its size and the distance from the vending device to
public sidewalks, parking lots, driveways and other areas used or usable for
vehicular travel or parking;
      (7)   A description of proposed trash storage and waste disposal methods,
and a description of any electrical and water connections and any fuels or
electrical generators to be used on the premises;
      (8)   Unless the application is for a short-term vendor permit, a
certification that the location of the vending device will meet all building
setback requirements of the Zoning Code and will not interfere with the safe
movement of vehicles or pedestrians on the subject property; and
      (9)   Unless the application is for a short-term vending permit, if the
applicant proposes to vend on a property located in a Design Review District or
a Landmark District, the applicant shall also submit color photographs showing
all sides of the vending device, if any, and a scaled drawing showing all
proposed signs and decorative elements, including their placement, material,
and color.
   (b)   Council Notification. On receipt of a permit application, the
Commissioner shall notify the Council member in whose ward the proposed permit
location lies that the application has been received.
   (c)   Location of Vending Devices. No person shall locate a vending device
on private property so as to violate building setback requirements of the
Zoning code or so as to interfere with the safe movement of vehicles or
pedestrians on the subject property.
   (d)   Building and Housing Referral. The Commissioner shall refer all permit
applications to the Director of Building and Housing for review and approval.
As part of the review, the Director of Building and Housing shall determine
whether or not the property on which the proposed vending is to be conducted is
in a Design Review District, or a Landmark District, and shall report that
determination to the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses. The Director of
Building and Housing shall not approve the application unless he or she finds
that no provisions of the City’s Building Code or Zoning Code will be violated
by issuance of the permit, including without limitation, the following:
      (1)   Set back requirements;
      (2)   Use restrictions;
      (3)   If the vendor intends to operate from a “structure” within the
meaning of the Building Code, those provisions of the Building Code applicable
to “structures”; and
      (4)   If the vendor intends to operate from private property that is a
parking lot, those portions of the Zoning Code that require that a specified
number of parking spaces be available for the use of particular business.
   (e)   Design Review. If the vendor proposes to operate on a property which
is located in a Design Review District, the Commissioner of Assessments and
Licenses shall refer the permit application to the City Planning Commission for
design review and approval. In the case of a property located in a Landmark
District, the referral shall be made to the Landmarks Commission. Design review
shall not be required if the vendor is proposing to vend under a short-term
vending permit.
      (1)   In reviewing the application, the City Planning Commission or
Landmarks Commission, as applicable, shall determine the appropriateness of any
vending devices proposed to be used with respect to the following factors:
         A.   Physical condition and state of repair;
         B.   Compatibility with nearby structures in terms of color,
placement, heights, and general design;
         C.   Obstructions to or conflicts with vehicular or pedestrian
traffic;
         D.   Availability of electrical connections, and procedures for
garbage and waste disposal; and
         E.   Impacts on scenic views.
      (2)   The Director of the City Planning Commission or Secretary of the
Landmarks Commission shall transmit the Commission’s determination to the
Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses within thirty (30) days of the
referral of the application unless the Commission conducting the review has
granted the applicant an extension in order to allow for submission of
additional materials or revisions. The Commissions may seek advice from any
designated local design review advisory committee.
   (f)   Short-Term Permits. If the vending activity is proposed to be
conducted for a period of seven (7) days or less, the Commissioner may issue a
short-term vending permit, except that if any person or persons have obtained a
short-term vending permit for a particular location on four (4) prior occasions
in a given permit year, which shall commence August 1 and end July 31 of the
following year, then no person shall be issued a fifth or subsequent short-term
vending permit for the same location in that permit year. As used in this
division, a “particular location” shall mean a property or group of contiguous
or noncontiguous properties, whether or not under common ownership, which are
under a common street address, both as to house or building number and street
name.
   (g)   Permit Issuance and Fee. On receipt of a completed application
approved by the Director of Building and Housing and approved, if required, by
the City Planning Commission or the Landmarks Commission, and on receipt of the
applicable permit fee established by this division, the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses shall issue a permit which shall cover either a period
of seven (7) days or a period of one (1) year, commencing August 1 and ending
July 31 of the following year. The fee shall be seventy five dollars ($75.00)
for a seven (7) day permit and three hundred seventy five dollars ($375.00) for
a one (1) year permit.
   (h)   Display of Permit. The permit shall be kept on the vending device,
truck, or structure at all times during which the vendor is engaged in vending,
and shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The vendor’s name and address;
      (2)   The address of the private property on which the vendor is
authorized to vend;
      (3)   The name and address of the owner of the private property;
      (4)   A description of the vending device, truck, or temporary structure,
if any, from which vending is authorized including its size; and
      (5)   The permit number and permit expiration date.
   (i)   “Vending Device” Defined. As used in this section, “vending device”
has the same meaning as in Section
675.01, and shall also include temporary structures, trailers, and other
vehicles, carts, stands, and other devices from which vending can be conducted,
or which can be used to display goods.
(Ord. No. 210-11. Passed 4-25-11, eff. 4-25-11)
§ 675.06 Permit: Zones Within the Central Business District
   (a)   In addition to the temporary sidewalk occupancy permits issued under
Chapter
508, the Director of Capital Projects is authorized to issue permits to vend in
zones in the Central Business District established by the Director in which the
holders of the permits may vend on such days, at such times of day, and under
the conditions that the Director determines. The zones shall be created by
regulation taking into account the following factors:
      (1)   Pedestrian and vehicular traffic patterns, including possible
congestion during special events and sporting events;
      (2)   Proximity to special events and sporting events occurring in the
Central Business District and at the lakefront;
      (3)   Proximity to retail establishments; and
      (4)   Other factors deemed relevant by the Director of Capital Projects.
   (b)   The application for the permit authorized by division (a) of this
section shall be made to the Director of Capital Projects on forms prescribed
by the Director. The application shall contain the following:
      (1)   The vendor’s name, address, and vendor’s license number;
      (2)   A description of the vending device, truck, or temporary structure,
if any, from which the applicant intends to vend, including its size;
      (3)   The zone or zones for which a permit is sought; and
      (4)   A description of the items to be offered for sale.
   (c)   On receipt of a completed application and an annual permit fee of one
hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) per zone or a daily permit fee of thirty
dollars ($30.00), the Director of Capital Projects shall issue the appropriate
permit. An annual permit shall cover the period commencing August 1 and ending
July 31 of the following year.
   (d)   The permit shall be kept on the vending device, truck, or structure at
all times during the time the vendor is engaged in vending and shall contain
the following information:
      (1)   The vendor’s name and address;
      (2)   A statement of the zone or zones in the Central Business District
to which the vendor is restricted;
      (3)   A description of the vending device, truck, or temporary structure,
if any, from which vending is authorized, including its size; and
      (4)   The permit number and permit expiration date.
   (e)   The Director of Capital Projects may issue rules and regulations to
carry out the purposes of this section.
(Ord. No. 210-11. Passed 4-25-11, eff. 4-25-11)
§ 675.061 Permit: Mobile Vending Within the Central Business District
   (a)   The application for the mobile vending permit required by division (c)
of Section
675.04 shall be made to the Director of Capital Projects on forms prescribed by
the Director. On receipt of a permit application, the Director of Capital
Projects shall notify the Council member or members in whose ward or wards
within the Central Business District the vendor intends to vend that the
application has been received. The application shall contain such information
as the Director may require, including, but not limited to, the following
information:
      (1)   The vendor's name, address, and vendor's license number;
      (2)   A description of the highways, streets or sidewalks located within
the Central Business District that the mobile vendor intends to vend upon. The
statement shall specify the ward or wards in which the vendor intends to vend;
      (3)   A description of the mobile vending device or truck from which the
applicant intends to vend, including its size.
   (b)   On receipt of a completed application and a permit fee of one hundred
dollars ($100.00), the Director of Capital Projects shall issue a permit which
shall cover the period beginning August 1 and ending July 31 of the following
year.
   (c)   The permit shall be kept upon the mobile vending device or truck at
all times during which the vendor is engaged in vending and shall contain the
following information:
      (1)   The vendor's name and address;
      (2)   The ward or wards in which the vendor is authorized to vend within
the Central Business District;
      (3)   A description of the mobile vending device or truck from which
vending is authorized including its size; and
      (4)   The permit number and permit expiration date.
   (d)   No mobile vendor shall operate on a public street in a location where
on-street parking is prohibited or a location prohibited under Section
675.09; and
   (e)   No mobile vendor shall operate at the site or within five hundred
(500) feet of a special event or community event except in accordance with the
regulations of
Chapter 131 and with authorization to participate in the event.
   (f)   No mobile vendor shall operate upon or from a fixed location on a
sidewalk without a permit issued under Section
675.06 or
Chapter 508.
   (g)   The Director of Capital Projects is authorized to promulgate
additional rules and regulations necessary for the administration of this
section. Such rules and regulations shall be published in the City Record and
become effective seven (7) days after publication thereof.
(Ord. No. 1382-13. Passed 6-9-14, eff. 6-12-14)
§ 675.07 Permit; Temporary Sidewalk Occupancy Outside the Central Business
District
   (a)   The application for the permit required by division (d) of Section
675.04 shall be made to the Director of Capital Projects on forms prescribed by
the Director. On receipt of a permit application, the Director of Capital
Projects shall notify the Council member in whose ward the proposed permit
location lies that the application has been received. The application shall
contain the following:
      (1)   The vendor’s name, address, and vendor’s license number;
      (2)   A sketch and narrative indicating the location for which the permit
application is being made, with sufficient detail to enable the Director of
Capital Projects to verify the placement of the temporary vending device in
accordance with the criteria contained in Section
675.09;
      (3)   A description of the vending device, truck, or temporary structure,
if any, from which the applicant intends to vend, including its size; and
      (4)   A copy of an ordinance of Council specifying the location described
in division (a)(2) of this section and authorizing the vendor to vend from that
location.
   (b)   On receipt of a completed application and a permit fee of one hundred
dollars ($100.00), the Director of Capital Projects shall issue a permit which
shall cover the period beginning August 1 and ending July 31 of the following
year.
   (c)   The permit shall be kept upon the vending device, truck, or structure
at all times during which the vendor is engaged in vending, and shall contain
the following information:
      (1)   The vendor’s name and address;
      (2)   The address or description of the location that the vendor intends
to vend;
      (3)   The number and passage date of the ordinance described in division
(a)(4) of this section;
      (4)   A description of the vending device, truck, or temporary structure,
if any, from which vending is authorized including its size; and
      (5)   The permit number and permit expiration date.
(Ord. No. 210-11. Passed 4-25-11, eff. 4-25-11)
§ 675.08 Permit: Mobile Vending Outside the Central Business District
   (a)   The application for the permit required by division (e) of Section
675.04 shall be made to the Director of Capital Projects on forms prescribed by
the Director. On receipt of a permit application, the Director of Capital
Projects shall notify the Council member or members in whose ward or wards the
vendor intends to vend that the application has been received. The application
shall contain the following:
      (1)   The vendor’s name, address, and vendor’s license number;
      (2)   A statement that the vendor intends to move continuously from place
to place upon those highways, streets, or sidewalks that are located outside of
the Central Business District. The statement shall specify the ward or wards in
which the vendor intends to vend;
      (3)   A copy of the ordinance of Council specifying the ward or wards in
which the vendor is authorized to vend; and
      (4)   A description of the vending device, truck, or temporary structure,
if any, from which the applicant intends to vend, including its size.
   (b)   On receipt of a completed application and a permit fee of one hundred
dollars ($100.00), the Director of Capital Projects shall issue a permit which
shall cover the period beginning August 1 and ending July 31 of the following
year.
   (c)   The permit shall be kept upon the vending device, truck, or structure
at all times during which the vendor is engaged in vending and shall contain
the following information:
      (1)   The vendor’s name and address;
      (2)   The ward or wards in which the vendor is authorized to vend;
      (3)   The number and passage date of the ordinance described in division
(a)(3) of this section;
      (4)   A description of the vending device, truck, or temporary structure,
if any, from which vending is authorized including its size; and
      (5)   The permit number and permit expiration date.
(Ord. No. 210-11. Passed 4-25-11, eff. 4-25-11)
§ 675.09 Regulations Governing Vendors
   (a)   For purposes of this section:
      (1)   "Merchandise" means goods or wares, and does not include food or
beverages other than prepackaged frozen desserts commercially prepackaged foods
and beverages contained in displays of less than two hundred (200) cubic feet.
      (2)   "Street" means street, alley, highway, roadway, or avenue.
   (b)   No vendor shall sell or display merchandise:
      (1)   To the occupants of vehicles stopped in traffic;
      (2)   From any vehicle, structure, or device that is situated in any
portion of a street which is designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel;
      (3)   At a location or in a manner that hinders or restricts access to a
telephone booth, mail box, parking meter, police or fire call box, traffic
control box, fire hydrant, or sidewalk elevator, or that blocks, obstructs, or
restricts the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles in the lawful use of the
sidewalks or streets; or
      (4)   From a vending device larger than twenty-two (22) feet in length
and eight (8) feet in width.
   (c)   Unless the Director of Capital Projects makes a determination to the
contrary, which determination is reflected in the location specified on a
permit issued in accordance with this chapter, no vendor shall sell or display
merchandise:
      (1)   At any location where the sidewalk is less than ten (10) feet in
width;
      (2)   Within ten (10) feet of a crosswalk;
      (3)   Within that portion of a sidewalk bounded by the prolongation of
each intersecting abutting property line to the respective curblines or within
ten (10) feet thereof;
      (4)   Within twenty (20) feet of any doorway or the prolongation of any
doorway width to the curbline;
      (5)   Within fifty (50) feet of another permitted location, provided
however, that the distance between locations permitted pursuant to Section
675.06 shall be in accordance with the rules and regulations promulgated by the
Director of Capital Projects under division (e) of Section
675.06; or
      (6)   Within twenty-five (25) feet of any restaurant doorway, or
prolongation or extension thereof.
   (d)   No vendor shall display merchandise or place lines or other devices
for the display of merchandise on any building or on any utility pole, planter,
tree, trash container, or other sidewalk fixture.
   (e)   A vendor who has received a permit to vend upon private property shall
not encroach into any street or sidewalk in any way.
   (f)   No vendor shall place any merchandise in or upon any street or
sidewalk, and all vendors shall exercise reasonable care to ensure that their
merchandise, packaging, display equipment or other paraphernalia does not
create a health or safety hazard to customers, other users of the sidewalks and
streets, or persons on abutting property.
   (g)   No vendor shall engage in vending door-to-door on residential property
between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.
   (h)   No vendor shall leave a vending device unattended at any time, leave a
vending device on a sidewalk between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m., or
conduct business on a sidewalk or from a vending device between those hours.
   (i)   A vendor who has received a permit to vend on public property shall
obey any lawful order of a police officer to remove himself or herself and his
or her vending device entirely from the sidewalk to avoid congestion or
obstruction during an emergency.
   (j)   A vendor who is required to move continuously from place to place
shall locate any vending device, equipment and merchandise adjacent and
parallel to a curb when stopped for a sale.
   (k)   A vendor who has received a mobile vending permit shall abide by
applicable state and local traffic laws and obey any lawful order of a police
officer or traffic controller to move or relocate a vending device.
   (l)   No vendor shall make any loud or unreasonable noise for the purpose of
advertising or drawing attention to merchandise or for any other purpose.
   (m)   All vendors shall comply with all requirements of applicable state and
local law, including, without limitation, the City's Fire Prevention Code and
State of Ohio Fire Code.
   (n)   No person shall vend pre-packaged frozen desserts within the City who
has been convicted of or pled guilty to any of the following criminal offenses:
      (1)   Any offense involving a minor;
      (2)   Any sexually oriented offense, including, but not limited to,
corruption of a minor, sexual imposition, importuning, voyeurism, public
indecency, procuring, soliciting, prostitution, loitering for the purpose of
engaging in prostitution, disseminating material harmful to juveniles,
deception to obtain material harmful to juveniles, possession of obscene
material involving a minor, possession of sexually oriented material involving
a minor, possession of nudity-oriented material involving a minor, and
displaying matter harmful to juveniles;
      (3)   Any assault within seven (7) years after service of sentence after
conviction or guilty plea;
      (4)   Unlawful possession of weapons within five (5) years after
conviction or guilty plea; and
      (5)   Any homicide offense in RC Chapter 2903 or any substantially
similar homicide offense under any municipal or state law.
   (o)   Any applicant for a license or permit under this chapter to vend pre-
packaged frozen desserts shall list on the application their name, address,
date of birth, and social security number, and shall provide an affidavit
stating that the applicant has not been convicted of or pled guilty to any of
the criminal offenses listed in division (n) of this section. Any employer
applying for a permit to vend pre-packaged frozen desserts shall list the name,
address, date of birth, and social security number of each employee or person
who will be vending pre-packaged frozen desserts.
   (p)   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses shall refuse to grant a
license or permit under this chapter to vend pre-packaged frozen desserts or
shall revoke a license or permit under this chapter to vend pre-packaged frozen
desserts, for any one (1) or more of the following reasons:
      (1)   The applicant has been convicted of or pled guilty to any criminal
offense involving a minor or any other criminal offense listed in division (n)
of this section;
      (2)   The applicant fails to provide the information required by division
(o) of this section;
      (3)   The applicant makes or made a false statement in the license or
permit application; or
      (4)   The applicant fails to report a conviction that occurs during the
license or permit period.
   (q)   No person shall vend pre-packaged frozen desserts without posting the
permit in a conspicuous location in each vehicle used to vend pre-packaged
frozen desserts.
   (r)   On every permit to vend pre-packaged frozen desserts, the Commissioner
of Assessments and Licenses shall list the name of each employee or individual
authorized to vend pre-packaged frozen desserts on behalf of the applicant.
   (s)   There shall be no vending of pre-packaged frozen desserts after 9:00
p.m.
   (t)   No vendor operating pursuant to a permit granted under Section
675.06 or
675.061 shall employ more than two (2) salespersons in the operation of its
vending device or display.
(Ord. No. 1382-13. Passed 6-9-14, eff. 6-12-14)
§ 675.10 Revocation or Suspension of License or Permit; Appeals
   (a)   The Commissioner may at any time revoke or suspend any license or
permit granted by the Commissioner under the authority of this chapter for
failure to comply with the terms of this chapter or with any law, rule or
regulation relating to vendors or the conduct of their business.
   (b)   The Director of Capital Projects may at any time revoke or suspend any
permit granted by said director under the authority of this chapter for failure
to comply with the terms of this chapter or with any law, rule or regulation
relating to vendors or encroachments in the rights-of-way of the City.
   (c)   In case of the refusal to issue a license or permit or the revocation
or suspension of a license or permit by the Commissioner or by the Director of
Capital Projects, the applicant or licensee may appeal the Commissioner’s or
Director’s action to the Board of Zoning Appeals, established under Charter
Section
76-6. Notice of such appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the
Board within ten (10) days from the date of the Commissioner’s or Director’s
action. Within ten (10) days after the filing of such notice, the Board shall
proceed to hear such appeal, at which hearing all parties interested shall be
afforded an opportunity to be heard. The Board shall render a decision within
ten (10) days of the conclusion of the hearing. The Board may sustain,
disapprove or modify the Commissioner’s or Director’s action, and the Board’s
decision shall be final.
(Ord. No. 210-11. Passed 4-25-11, eff. 4-25-11)
§ 675.99 Penalty
   (a)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of
improper vending, a minor misdemeanor, and shall be fined one hundred fifty
dollars ($150.00). The fine set forth herein is mandatory and shall not be
suspended by the court in whole or in part. Each day upon which a violation
occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable
as such hereunder.
   (b)   In addition to any other method of enforcement provided for in this
chapter, the provisions of division (a) of this section may be enforced by the
issuance of a citation in compliance with Rule 4.1 of the Ohio Rules of
Criminal Procedure.
   (c)   If the offender persists in improper vending after reasonable warning
or request to desist, improper vending is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(Ord. No. 210-11. Passed 4-25-11, eff. 4-25-11)
CHAPTER 675A – STREET PERFORMERS
675A.01   Definitions
675A.02   Performances Permitted; Conditions
675A.03   Prohibitions
   Note: Pursuant to Ordinance No. 689-14, passed 5-19-14 and effective 5-20-
14, the provisions of this Chapter shall expire and be of no further force and
effect on November 30, 2014, unless the Council, by ordinance, expressly renews
this Chapter. Pursuant to Ordinance No. 1470-14, passed 1-26-15 and effective
1-28-15, the provisions of this Chapter were renewed with no further set
expiration.
§ 675A.01 Definitions
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   "Perform" includes, but is not limited to, the following activities:
acting, singing, playing musical instruments, pantomime, juggling, magic,
dancing, reciting and clowning, and accepting or soliciting contributions of
money or property in exchange for such activities.
   (b)   "Performer" means any person who performs as defined in division (a)
of this section and accepts or solicits contributions of money or property in
exchange for a performance.
   (c)   "Public place" means a publicly owned building and premises
appurtenant thereto, and any public park, sidewalk or tree lawn and includes
any public right-of-way.
   (d)   "Public right-of-way" means any way which has been deeded to the
public or dedicated to the public use for pedestrian or vehicular travel
including but not limited to alleys, bridges, buildings, driveways, parking
lots, parks, plazas, skywalks and streets.
   (e)   "Street" means all alleys, streets, avenues, lanes, courts, roads,
boulevard medians and park roads in the City.
(Ord. No. 979-13. Passed 7-10-13, eff. 7-16-13)
§ 675A.02 Performances Permitted; Conditions
   (a)   (1)   Any person may perform in a public place except as may be
otherwise provided in this chapter.
      (2)   Any person may perform on private property if the performer has
obtained written permission from the owner of the property or other person with
authority to grant permission with respect to the property. Such permission
shall be carried by the performer at all times unless the owner of the property
or other person with authority has granted permission and is present at the
performance.
   (b)   Performers may perform during the following times:
      (1)   Between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. on Mondays through
Fridays;
      (2)   Between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. on Saturdays;
      (3)   Between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. on Sundays in the
downtown area of the City and during special events, parades and festivals
taking place on Sundays in areas of the City not in the downtown area; and
      (4)   Between the hours of 1 p.m. and 9 p.m. on Sundays in any area of
the City not the downtown area, except as noted in division (b)(3) of this
section.
   (c)   Performers may accept contributions of money or property in any type
of receptacle.
(Ord. No. 979-13. Passed 7-10-13, eff. 7-16-13)
§ 675A.03 Prohibitions
   (a)   No person may perform in a public building in the City.
   (b)   No person may perform in a street unless such street has been closed
to vehicular traffic.
   (c)   No performer shall hinder or prevent the movement of persons on a
public street, road, highway, sidewalk or right-of-way, or to, from, within or
upon public or private property, so as to interfere with the rights of others.
   (d)   No performer shall continue to perform in any public place which does
not provide sufficient area to accommodate any group of persons observing the
performer so as to allow the free passage of any person upon public property or
to or from private property.
(Ord. No. 979-13. Passed 7-10-13, eff. 7-16-13)
CHAPTER 676 – JUNK AND SECONDHAND DEALERS
676.01   Definitions; Junk Carts; Scope of Provisions
676.02   License Required; Display
676.03   License Application
676.04   License Fees
676.05   Sales Restricted
676.06   Dealers in Scrap Iron, Metal, and Waste Materials to Keep Record of
Transactions
676.061   Duties With Respect to Special Purchase Articles
676.062   Electronic Recording of Identification
676.063   Exempt Transactions
676.064   Scrap Metal Dealers to Electronically Submit to the Division of
Police the Records of Transactions Required to be Kept
676.07   Secondhand Dealer’s License Fee
676.08   Duty of Dealer in Secondhand Articles; Identification Required from
Seller; Records
676.09   Plastic Crates or Trays Used to Carry Milk or Baked Goods
676.10   Secondhand Dealer’s Minimum Holding Period – Repealed
676.11   Peddlers of Old Clothes; Further Limitations on Secondhand Dealers –
Repealed
676.12   License Revocation: Appeals
676.13   Screening of Junk Yards
676.14   Responsibility of the Licensee
676.15   Violations
676.99   Penalties
Cross-reference:
   Pawnbrokers, CO
Ch. 681
Statutory reference:
   Dealing with minors; hours regulated, RC 4737.03
   Goods improperly marked as sterling, coin silver, RC 1329.26, 1329.27
   Power to regulate, RC 715.61
   Record of transactions required, RC 4737.01, 4737.02
   Secondhand dealers, RC Ch. 4737
   State licensing and required fencing of junk yards, RC 4737.05 et seq.
§ 676.01 Definitions; Junk Carts; Scope of Provisions
   (a)   As used in this chapter:
      (1)   “Junk” means old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, trash, waste,
batteries, paper, rubber, iron, steel, and other old or scrap ferrous or
nonferrous materials, but does not include scrap tires as defined in RC
3734.01.
(RC 4737.05(A))
      (2)   “Junk cart” means any vehicle in the streets of the City used for
the purpose of collecting, transporting or selling junk.
      (3)   “Junk dealer” means anyone dealing in the purchase or sale of junk,
except a motor vehicle salvage dealer, salvage motor vehicle auction, or
salvage motor vehicle pool licensed pursuant to RC Chapter 4738 or a scrap
metal processor.
      (4)   “Junk yard” means an establishment or place of business that is
maintained or operated for the purpose of storing, keeping, buying, or selling
junk. For purposes of Section
676.13, “junk yard” includes “scrap metal processing facility.”
(RC 4737.05(B))
      (5)   “Person” includes an individual, corporation, business trust,
estate, trust, partnership, and association.
(RC 1.59(C))
      (6)   “Scrap metal processor” means any person who processes iron, steel,
or nonferrous scrap, and whose principal product is scrap iron and steel or
nonferrous scrap for sale for remelting purposes.
      (7)   “Scrap metal processing facility” means an establishment having
facilities for processing iron, steel, or nonferrous scrap and whose principal
product is scrap iron and steel or nonferrous scrap for sale for remelting
purposes.
(RC 4737.05(D))
      (8)   “Secondhand dealer” means a person other than a scrap metal dealer
as defined in Section
676.06 that purchases, sells, exchanges, or receives secondhand articles of any
kind other than special purchase articles as defined in Section
676.06, scrap iron, and scrap metal.
(RC 4737.01(B))
   (b)   Any person who uses a vehicle for the purpose of collecting,
transporting or selling any junk shall affix to a conspicuous and indispensable
part of the vehicle a junk cart plate issued by the Commissioner of Assessments
and Licenses. The plate shall clearly set forth the official number of the junk
cart and contain the words “Junk Cart” and the date of license expiration. The
design or color of this plate shall be changed at the beginning of each license
year. This division shall not apply to scrap metal processors who have obtained
a license pursuant to Sections
676.02 through
676.04.
   (c)   This section shall not apply to persons dealing in the purchase or
sale of secondhand pianos, books, magazines, rugs, tapestries, burlaps,
paintings, drawings, etchings and engravings, nor to exchanges, returns or
credits of merchandise where the article or articles exchanged, returned or
credited are accepted in full or part payment for new merchandise; nor to
persons who deal exclusively in heavy industrial equipment, furniture or
secondhand automobiles.
(Ord. No. 329-11. Passed 4-25-11, eff. 4-29-11)
§ 676.02 License Required; Display
   No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of junk dealer
or scrap metal processor or operate a junk cart or scrap metal processing
facility unless and until licensed as provided in this chapter. Upon receipt of
a junk dealer license or a scrap metal processor license issued pursuant to
this chapter, the licensee shall post the license or a copy thereof in a
conspicuous publicly-accessible place at the licensee’s place of business and
at all other locations where the licensee stores junk or scrap metal.
(Ord. No. 2704-A-90. Passed 6-15-92, eff. 6-24-92)
§ 676.03 License Application
   (a)   Every applicant for a junk dealer license or scrap metal processor
license shall make application in writing to the Commissioner of Assessments
and Licenses, which application shall set forth the name under which the
business is to be conducted, the name of every person interested therein, and
each location where the business is to be carried on or junk or scrap metal is
to be stored. If the applicant has no shop or warehouse, his or her home shall
be designated as his or her place of business. The application shall also set
forth a description of each vehicle used in the business, including license
plate number. Such application shall also contain a statement stating whether
the applicant has previously been convicted of receiving stolen property. Such
application shall also contain references of at least two (2) other residents
of the City as to the character of the applicant. Such application shall also
contain an affidavit, signed by the applicant, and in a form prescribed by the
Commissioner of Environment, to the effect that there is no environmental
contamination of the premises for which the license is sought and (1) that the
applicant has no history of criminal convictions or civil liability related to
environmental conditions, other than those which resulted in a consent decree
or decrees with which the applicant is now fully in compliance; or (2) a
demonstration that any such conviction or liability should not prevent the
applicant from receiving a license (the “Environmental Affidavit”), and upon
receipt of the license application, said application shall be transmitted to
the Commissioner of Building and Housing, who shall verify that any premises in
which junk or scrap metal is stored or which is used as a junk yard or a scrap
metal processing facility has an applicable Certificate of Occupancy; and who
shall inspect each premises listed thereon for compliance with Section
676.13 and applicable Building and Zoning Codes. The application shall also be
transmitted to the Commissioner of Environment, who shall inspect the premises
for compliance with the Health and other applicable codes. The Commissioner of
Environment may require the applicant, at the applicant’s own expense, to
demonstrate that the statements contained in an Environmental Affidavit are
true.
   (b)   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses shall disapprove any
initial or renewal application for a junk dealer’s license or scrap metal
processor’s license for any of the following reasons:
      (1)   Failure to be currently in compliance with any statute, ordinance,
rule or regulation applicable to the conduct or maintenance of the operation,
business or premises for which the license is sought, including the provisions
of this chapter and applicable Building, Zoning and Health Codes;
      (2)   Material information in the application is found to be false,
misleading, or not included;
      (3)   The premises for which the license is sought is not in compliance
with Section
676.13;
      (4)   The statements contained in the Environmental Affidavit are false
or Affidavit are false or the Commissioner of the Environment, the Commissioner
of the Environment refuses to issue a statement of environmental compliance;
      (5)   The applicant has been convicted of receiving stolen property;
      (6)   The applicant is not in current compliance with the payment of
property taxes for the premises for which the license is sought.
   (c)   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses may disapprove any
initial or renewal application for a junk dealer’s license or scrap metal
processor’s license for any of the following reasons:
      (1)   Evidence of past failure to comply with statutes, ordinances, rules
or regulations applicable to junk yards or scrap metal processing facilities by
the applicant;
      (2)   Evidence of past incidents of receiving, retaining or disposing of
property, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the property was
obtained through commission of a theft offense;
      (3)   If the applicant is a corporation or partnership, and any officer,
director, or partner of the applicant has been guilty of any act or omission
which would be cause for refusing or revoking a license issued to the officer,
director, or partner as an individual;
      (4)   If any person actively engaged in the management or operation of
the junk or scrap metal processing facility for which the license is sought has
been guilty of any act or omission which would be cause for refusing or
revoking a license issued to that person as an individual.
(Ord. No. 1304-97. Passed 12-14-98, eff. 12-24-98)
§ 676.04 License Fees
   The operator of a junk cart shall pay an annual license fee of twenty-five
dollars ($25.00) for each junk cart operated. Every junk dealer shall pay an
annual license fee of two hundred twenty dollars ($220.00) for each place of
business licensed. Every scrap metal processor shall pay an annual license fee
of two hundred twenty dollars ($220.00) for each place of business licensed.
All junk cart licenses, junk dealer licenses, and scrap metal processor
licenses shall be issued as of September 1 and expire on August 31 next
succeeding the date of issuance.
(Ord. No. 1437-06. Passed 11-20-06, eff. 11-27-06)
§ 676.05 Sales Restricted
   No junk dealer or scrap metal processor shall carry on business at any place
other than the one designated in the license, provided that nothing in this
section shall be construed to prohibit the collection of materials by mobile
units at locations other than the one which is designated in the junk dealer’s
license or scrap metal processor’s license, nor to prohibit at such locations
partial processing that is incidental to collection. No junk dealer or scrap
metal processor shall continue to carry on business after such license has been
suspended or revoked, or has expired. No junk dealer or scrap metal processor
shall purchase any goods, articles or things whatsoever from any minor or
apprentice, knowing or having reason to believe the person to be such, or from
any person whatsoever, between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(Ord. No. 2704-A-90. Passed 6-15-92, eff. 6-24-92)
§ 676.06 Dealers in Scrap Iron, Metal, and Waste Materials to Keep Record of
Transactions
   (a)   As used in this section and Sections
676.061,
676.062,
676.063 and
676.064:
      (1)   “Scrap metal dealer” means the owner or operator of a business that
purchases or receives scrap metal.
      (2)   “Special purchase article” means all of the following:
         A.   Beer kegs;
         B.   Cable, wire, electrical components, and other equipment used in
providing cable service or any utility service, including, but not limited to,
copper or aluminum coverings, housings, or enclosures related thereto;
         C.   Grave markers, sculptures, plaques, and vases made out of metal,
the appearance of which suggest that the articles have been obtained from a
cemetery;
         D.   Guard rails for bridges, highways, and roads; highway and street
signs; street light poles and fixtures; manhole covers, water meter covers, and
other similar types of utility access covers; traffic directional and control
signs and light signals, metal marked with the name of a political subdivision
of the state, and other metal articles that are purchased and installed for use
upon authorization of the state or any political subdivision of the state;
         E.   Historical, commemorative, and memorial markers and plaques made
out of metal;
         F.   Four (4) wheel metal carts, commonly referred to as “grocery
carts,” that are generally used by individuals to collect and transport
consumer goods while shopping;
         G.   Four (4) wheel metal carts, commonly referred to as “metal
bossies,” that are used to transport or merchandise food products that are
stored in crates, shells, or trays.
      (3)   “Common recycled matter” means bottles and other containers made
out of steel, tin, or aluminum and other consumer goods that are metal that are
recycled by individual consumers and not in the bulk or quantity that could be
supplied or recycled by large business establishments. “Common recycled matter”
does not include a metal tray used by a product producer, distributor,
retailer, or agent of a product producer, distributor, or retailer as a means
for the bulk transportation, storage, or carrying of retail containers of milk,
baked goods, eggs, or bottled beverage products.
      (4)   “Consumer goods” has the same meaning as in RC 1309.102.
      (5)   “Recyclable materials” means the metal materials described in
division (b)(5) of this section, on the condition that those metal materials
are not special purchase articles.
      (6)   “Motor vehicle” has the same meaning as in RC 4501.01.
   (b)   Every scrap metal dealer shall maintain a record book or electronic
file, in which the dealer shall keep an accurate and complete record of all
articles purchased or received by the dealer in the course of the dealer’s
daily business. On and after the effective date of this amendment, every entry
in the record book or electronic file shall be numbered consecutively. Every
dealer shall maintain the record for each article purchased or received for a
minimum period of one (1) year after the date the dealer purchased or received
the article. Said records shall contain all of the following:
      (1)   Name and residence of the person from whom said articles were
purchased or received and a copy of that person’s personal identification card;
      (2)   The date and time the scrap metal dealer purchased or received the
articles;
      (3)   If the seller or provider of the articles arrives at the dealer’s
place of business in a motor vehicle, the license plate number of that motor
vehicle along with the state that issued the license plate;
      (4)   For metal articles that are not recyclable materials, a full and
accurate description of each article purchased or received by the dealer that
includes identifying letters or marks written, inscribed, or otherwise included
on the article and the name and maker of the article if known;
      (5)   For recyclable materials that are not special purchase articles, a
scrap metal dealer shall use the following category codes to identify the
recyclable materials that the dealer receives:
         A.   “Number one (1) copper.” which includes clean copper pipe, clean
copper wire, or other number one (1) copper that does not have solder, paint,
or coating;
         B.   “Number two (2) copper,” which includes unclean copper pipe,
unclean copper wire, or other number two (2) copper;
         C.   “Sheet copper,” which includes copper roofing, copper gutters,
copper downspouts, and other sheet copper;
         D.   “Insulated copper wire”;
         E.   “Aluminum or copper radiators,” which includes aluminum
radiators, aluminum copper radiators, and copper radiators;
         F.   “Red brass,” which includes red brass values and other red brass;
         G.   “Yellow brass,” which includes yellow brass fixtures, yellow
brass valve and fitting, ornamental brass, and other yellow brass;
         H.   “Aluminum sheet”;
         I.   “Aluminum extrusions,” which includes aluminum bleachers,
aluminum benches, aluminum frames, aluminum pipe, and other aluminum
extrusions;
         J.   “Cast aluminum,” which includes aluminum grills, lawnmower decks
made of aluminum, aluminum motor vehicle parts and rims, and other cast
aluminum;
         K.   “Clean aluminum wire”;
         L.   “Unclean aluminum wire”;
         M.   “Aluminum exteriors,” which includes aluminum siding, aluminum
gutters and downspouts, aluminum shutters, aluminum trim, and other aluminum
exterior items;
         N.   “Contaminated aluminum”;
         O.   “Stainless steel,” which includes, sinks, appliance housing,
dishes, pots, pans, pipe, and other items made out of stainless steel;
         P.   “Large appliances,” which includes consumer and other appliances;
         Q.   “Miscellaneous steel,” which includes steel grates, steel farm
machinery, steel industrial machinery, steel motor vehicle frames, and other
items made out of steel;
         R.   “Sheet irons,” which includes bicycles, motor vehicle body parts
made of iron, and other items made using sheet iron;
         S.   “Motor vehicle nonbody parts,” which includes motor vehicle
batteries, radiators, and other nonbody motor vehicle parts;
         T.   “Catalytic converters”;
         U.   “Lead”;
         V.   “Electric motors”.
   (c)   All journal brasses, and other railroad metals, other than purchases
and sales under RC 4973.13 to 4973.16, shall be held by the dealer for a period
of thirty (30) days after being purchased or acquired.
   (d)   The records required under division (b) of this section shall be open
for inspection by the representative of any law enforcement agency and the
director of public safety or the director’s designated representative during
all business hours. A scrap metal dealer shall provide a copy of those records
to any law enforcement agency that requests the records or to the director or
director’s representative, upon request. Records submitted to any law
enforcement agency pursuant to this section are not public records for purposes
of RC 149.43. A person who claims to own a stolen article that may be
identified in those records, or an agent of that person, who provides proof of
having filed a stolen property report with the appropriate law enforcement
agency, may request those records. The law enforcement agency shall provide
those records upon a request made by such a person or that person’s agent, but
the law enforcement agency shall redact information that reveals the name of
the seller of any article and the price the dealer paid for any article the
dealer purchased or the estimated value of any article the dealer received. The
law enforcement agency shall determine which records to provide, based upon the
time period that the alleged theft is reported to have taken place. A law
enforcement agency may charge or collect a fee for providing records as
required by this section.
   (e)   (1)   No scrap metal dealer shall purchase or receive any metal
articles from a person who refuses to show the dealer the person’s personal
identification card.
      (2)   The law enforcement agency that serves the jurisdiction in which a
scrap metal dealer is located shall provide a list, as that agency determines
appropriate, of the names and descriptions of persons known to be or who are
suspected to be thieves or receivers of stolen property. No scrap metal dealer
shall purchase or receive articles from any person identified on the list the
dealer receives from the law enforcement agency.
      (3)   No scrap metal dealer shall purchase or receive any special
purchase articles from any person who is under eighteen (18) years of age.
      (4)   No scrap metal dealer shall purchase or receive any special
purchase article without complying with division (b) of this section and
division (b), (c), or (d) of Section
676.061.
      (5)   No scrap metal dealer shall purchase or receive more than one (1)
catalytic converter per day from the same person except from a motor vehicle
dealer as defined in RC 4517.01.
      (6)   No scrap metal dealer shall treat a transaction as exempt from
Section
676.06 or
676.061 unless the seller provides evidence of satisfying division (d)(3) of
Section
676.063.
   (f)   Every scrap metal dealer shall post a notice in a conspicuous place on
the dealer’s premises notifying persons who may wish to transact business with
the dealer of the penalties applicable to any person who does any of the
following:
      (1)   Provides a false personal identification card to the dealer;
      (2)   With purpose to defraud, provides any other false information to
the dealer in connection with the dealer’s duty to maintain the records
required under division (b) of this section;
      (3)   Violates RC 2913.02.
   (g)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in the second paragraph of division
(e) of this section, a chief of police, marshal, or other chief law enforcement
officer, a sheriff, constable, or chief of police of a township police
department or police district police force, and a deputy, officer, or employee
of the law enforcement agency served by the marshal or the municipal or
township chief, the office of the sheriff, or the constable is immune from
liability in a civil action, including an action for defamation, libel, or
slander, to recover damages for injury, death, or loss to persons or property
or reputation allegedly caused by an act or omission in connection with
compiling and providing the list required by division (e) of this section.
      (2)   The immunity described in division (g)(1) of this section does not
apply to a person described in that division if, in relation to the act or
omission in question, any of the following applies:
         A.   The act or omission was manifestly outside the scope of the
person’s employment or official responsibilities;
         B.   The act or omission was with malicious purpose, in bad faith, or
in a wanton or reckless manner;
         C.   Liability for the act or omission is expressly imposed by a
section of the Ohio Revised Code.
(RC 4737.04; Ord. No. 329-11. Passed 4-25-11, eff. 4-29-11)
§ 676.061 Duties With Respect to Special Purchase Articles
   A scrap metal dealer shall do all of the following with respect to each
special purchase article the scrap metal dealer purchases or receives:
   (a)   Comply with the requirements of this section in addition to complying
with the requirements of Section
676.06;
   (b)   Take a photograph of each special purchase article;
   (c)   Obtain from the seller or provider of the special purchase article
proof that the seller or provider owns the special purchase article;
   (d)   If payment is rendered for the special purchase articles, issue a
check for the purchase of the special purchase articles:
   (e)   Withhold payment for the purchase of the special purchase articles for
a period of two (2) days after the day the special purchase articles are
purchased;
   (f)   If an asserted owner of stolen special purchase articles or that
owner’s agent provides proof of having filed a stolen property report with the
appropriate law enforcement agency, make records describing special purchase
articles the scrap metal dealer purchased or received after the alleged date of
theft available for inspection to the asserted owner or owner’s agent for a
period of six (6) months after the alleged date of theft of the articles,
except that the scrap metal dealer shall withhold the name of the person from
whom the special purchase articles were purchased or received and the amount
paid for the special purchase articles.
(RC 4737.041; Ord. No. 329-11. Passed 4-25-11, eff. 4-29-11)
§ 676.062 Electronic Recording of Identification
   A scrap metal dealer and a person who purchases, sells, exchanges, or
receives secondhand articles may use an electronic device that decodes and
records information contained in the metallic strip on a personal
identification card to record a person’s name, address, and photograph in lieu
of making a copy of a person’s personal identification card to comply with the
requirements of Sections
676.08,
676.06 and
676.061, on the condition that the dealer or person retains that recorded
information and makes it available in accordance with the requirements to make
copies available under those sections.
(RC 4737.042; Ord. No. 329-11. Passed 4-25-11, eff. 4-29-11)
§ 676.063 Exempt Transactions
   Sections
676.06 and
676.061 do not apply with respect to any of the following:
   (a)   The donation of articles to nonprofit organizations or to any other
person, on the condition that the person donating the articles receives no
payment or any other valuable consideration in exchange for or due to donating
the articles;
   (b)   The sale or donation of common recycled matter;
   (c)   Sales transacted between a scrap metal dealer and an organization that
is exempt from federal taxation under section 501(c)(3) of the “Internal
Revenue Code of 1986,” 100 Stat. 285, 26 U.S.C. 501(c)(3), as amended, and that
collects, for its own fundraising purposes, scrap ferrous and nonferrous metals
for recycling rather than disposal;
   (d)   Sales transacted between a scrap metal dealer and a government unit or
another business, including a demolition company, public utility company, or
another scrap metal dealer, on the condition that the government unit or
business satisfies the following criteria:
      (1)   In the course of providing the government unit’s or business’s
services to others or maintaining the government unit’s or business’s property,
whether onsite or offsite, the government unit or business generates scrap
ferrous and nonferrous metals for recycling rather than disposal;
      (2)   If the sales transaction involves a government unit, reference to
the government unit as a bona fide unit of government can be readily found by
the public;
      (3)   If the sales transaction involves a business, the business
satisfies one (1) of the following criteria:
         A.   The business is registered with the secretary of state;
         B.   The business has been issued a license under RC 5739.17;
         C.   The business advertises its services in a newspaper of general
circulation once a week for not less than six (6) consecutive months or
provides a receipt showing payment for such advertising, a telephone book,
electronic media that is available to the public, or some other type of media
that is owned and operated by a person other than the business and, if an
individual operates the business, the individual advertising the business has a
specific place of business that is not the individual’s permanent home
residence.
      (4)   The government unit provides proof of compliance with division (d)
(2) of this section or the business provides proof of compliance with division
(d)(3) of this section to the scrap metal dealer with whom the government unit
or business transacts business.
   (e)   Sales transacted between a scrap metal dealer and a person whose
primary business is to create products that result in bulk quantities of
ferrous and nonferrous metal used for recycling rather than disposal.
   (f)   Sales of catalytic converters transacted between a scrap metal dealer
and a motor vehicle dealer as defined in RC 4517.01.
(RC 4737.043; Ord. No. 329-11. Passed 4-25-11, eff. 4-29-11)
§ 676.064 Scrap Metal Dealers to Electronically Submit to the Division of
Police the Records of Transactions Required to be Kept
   Findings. This Council finds that the only practicable way to review the
large volume of records required to be kept by scrap metal dealers both by RC
Chapter 4737 and this chapter is in an electronic format. The requirement
imposed upon scrap metal dealers by this section that they submit reports of
their transactions to the Division of Police in an electronic format is
complimentary to the requirement of recordkeeping already imposed by state law
and furthers the same law enforcement purposes as the recordkeeping
requirements.
   (a)   No scrap metal dealer shall fail to submit to the Division of Police
each day the records of transactions required to be kept under Sections
676.06,
676.061,
676.062 and
676.063 utilizing a computer program to be provided by the Division of Police
for use by scrap metal dealers and accessible to them via the internet.
   (b)   The Director of Public Safety may issue rules and regulations to
effectuate the electronic reporting requirement imposed by this section, which
shall take effect fourteen (14) days after their publication in the City
Record.
(Ord. No. 329-11. Passed 4-25-11, eff. 4-29-11)
   Note: Pursuant to Section 5 of Ord. No. 329-11, the electronic reporting
requirements imposed upon scrap metal dealers by this section shall take effect
120 days after the passage of the ordinance.
§ 676.07 Secondhand Dealer’s License Fee
   The annual license fee for each dealer in secondhand articles shall be one
hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00). All licenses shall be issued as of
October 1 each year and expire on September 30 next succeeding the date of
issuance.
(Ord. No. 2393-02. Passed 2-3-03, eff. 2-3-03)
§ 676.08 Duty of Dealer in Secondhand Articles; Identification Required from
Seller; Records
   (a)   “Personal identification card” means a current and valid driver’s
license, military identification card, state identification card issued under
RC 4507.50 to 4507.52, or a state identification card issued by another state
on the condition that that card contains information substantially similar to
the information contained on a state identification card issued under RC
4507.50 to 4507.52 and also contains a photograph of the person to whom the
card is issued.
   (b)   A person other than a scrap metal dealer, as defined in Section
676.06, purchasing, selling, exchanging, or receiving secondhand articles of
any kind other than special purchase articles as defined in Section
676.06 scrap iron, and scrap metal, shall post in a conspicuous place in or
upon the person’s shop, store, wagon, boat, or other place of business, a sign
having the person’s name and occupation legibly inscribed thereon, and shall
keep a separate record book or electronic file in which shall be written, in
the English language, at the time of the purchase or exchange of such articles,
a description thereof, the name, description, and residence of the person from
whom purchased and received, and the day and time when such purchase or
exchange was made, and shall make and keep a copy of the person’s personal
identification card. Every entry shall be numbered consecutively, commencing
with number one (1).
   The purchaser shall retain the record book or electronic file and copies of
personal identification cards for at least one (1) year after the purchase or
exchange date and shall make the record or file and copies available for
inspection by any law enforcement officer at all reasonable times.
(RC 4737.01; Ord. No. 329-11. Passed 4-25-11, eff. 4-29-11)
§ 676.09 Plastic Crates or Trays Used to Carry Milk or Baked Goods
   (a)   No person shall sell or purchase a plastic crate or tray that is used
for the carrying of retail containers of milk or baked goods and that has
embossed upon it a company logo.
(RC 1333.71)
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(RC 1333.99; Ord. No. 329-11. Passed 4-25-11, eff. 4-29-11)
§ 676.10 Secondhand Dealer’s Minimum Holding Period – Repealed
(Ord. No. 329-11. Passed 4-25-11, eff. 4-29-11)
§ 676.11 Peddlers of Old Clothes; Further Limitations on Secondhand Dealers –
Repealed
(Ord. No. 329-11. Passed 4-25-11, eff. 4-29-11)
§ 676.12 License Revocation: Appeals
   (a)   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses, upon the recommendation
of the Chief of Police, or the Commissioner of Environment, or the Commissioner
of Building and Housing may at any time revoke or suspend any license granted
under the authority of this chapter for failure to comply with the terms of
this chapter, or any of the laws or ordinances relating to the business so
licensed.
   (b)   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses, upon the Commissioner’s
own initiative or upon the recommendation of the Chief of Police, the
Commissioner of Environment or the Commissioner of Building and Housing, may at
any time revoke or suspend any junk dealer license or scrap metal processor
license granted under the authority of this chapter for any of the following
reasons:
      (1)   Failure to be currently in compliance with any statute, ordinance,
rule or regulation applicable to the conduct or maintenance of the operation,
business or premises for which the license is issued, including the provisions
of this chapter and applicable Building, Zoning or Health Codes;
      (2)   Material information in the application is found to be false,
misleading, or not included;
      (3)   The premises for which the license is issued is not in compliance
with Section
676.13;
      (4)   The statements contained in the Environmental Affidavit are found
to be false or environmental contamination of the junk yard or scrap metal
processing facility is found;
      (5)   The license holder is not in current compliance with the payment of
property taxes for the location of the licensed operation;
      (6)   There is found to be evidence of past failure to comply with
statutes, ordinances, rules or regulations applicable to junk yards or scrap
metal processing facilities by the license holder;
      (7)   If the license holder is a corporation or partnership and any
officer director, or partner of the applicant is found to have been guilty of
any act or omission which would be cause for refusing or revoking a license
issued to the officer, director, or partner as an individual;
      (8)   Evidence of past incidents of receiving, retaining or disposing of
property, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the property was
obtained through commission of a theft offense;
      (9)   If any person actively engaged in the management or operation of
the junk yard or scrap metal processing facility for which the license is
sought is found to have been guilty of any act or omission which would be cause
for refusing or revoking a license issued to that person as an individual.
   (c)   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses, upon the Commissioner’s
own initiative or upon the recommendation of the Chief of Police, shall at any
time revoke or suspend any license granted under the authority of this chapter
if the applicant has been convicted of receiving stolen property.
   (d)   In case of the refusal to issue a license or the revocation or
suspension of a license by the Commissioner, the applicant or licensee may
appeal the Commissioner’s action to the Board of Zoning Appeals, established
pursuant to Charter Section
76-6. Notice of such appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the
Board within ten (10) days from the date of the Commissioner’s action. Within
ten (10) days after the filing of such notice, the Board shall proceed to hear
such appeal, at which hearing all parties interested shall be afforded an
opportunity to be heard. No notice of the hearing is required to be provided to
adjoining property owners. The Board shall render a decision within ten (10)
days of the conclusion of the hearing. The Board may sustain, disapprove or
modify the Commissioner’s action, and the Board’s decision shall be final.
   (e)   In the absence of conditions posing an imminent threat to health,
safety, or property, as determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals, applicants
lawfully operating on the day prior to the effective date of this section or
subject to revocation, suspension, or refusal to renew a license may continue
operating during the pendency of an appeal under this section.
(Ord. No. 1304-97. Passed 12-14-98, eff. 12-24-98)
§ 676.13 Screening of Junk Yards
   (a)   Every junk dealer who stores junk in a junk yard shall provide visual
screening for the said junk yard achieving one hundred percent (100%) year-
round opacity from all directions and of sufficient height, not less than seven
(7) feet, to conceal the junk or other merchandise from view from the ground
floor level of adjoining properties and from the street. The screening required
by this section may take the form of:
      (1)   A landscaped earthen berm;
      (2)   A concrete or masonry wall;
      (3)   A wood, wrought iron, or similar decorative fence:
      (4)   A compact hedge or other live evergreen vegetation barrier; or
      (5)   A combination thereof.
   (b)   Fences or walls provided shall be set back at least five (5) feet from
the lot line, shall display a finished face of uniform color toward the
perimeter of the premises and shall be maintained in good condition, free from
peeling paint, rust or missing or broken pieces. Said fences and walls shall be
kept plumb, with no more than a four (4) inch deflection from a vertical
position. Dead vegetation shall be promptly replaced.
   (c)   No junk shall be stored outside of the screen barrier required by this
section.
   (d)   Notwithstanding division (a) of this section, fences and walls in
existence on the effective date of this section shall be deemed in compliance
with this section if such fence or wall meets the maintenance provisions of
division (b) of this section and the opacity and height provisions of division
(a) of this section. Upon substantial replacement of any such wall or fence,
all of the provisions of this section shall apply.
(Ord. No. 1555-A-90. Passed 5-13-91, eff. 5-22-91)
§ 676.14 Responsibility of the Licensee
   Every act or omission of an agent or employee which constitutes a violation
of any provision of this chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of the
licensee if such act or omission occurs with the authorization, knowledge, or
approval of the licensee, or as a result of the licensee’s negligent failure to
supervise the agent’s or employee’s conduct. The licensee shall also be
punished for such act or omission in the same manner as if the licensee
committed the act or caused the omission.
(Ord. No. 2704-A-90. Passed 6-15-92, eff. 6-24-92)
§ 676.15 Violations
   No license holder shall violate any provision of this chapter or any
statute, ordinance, rule or regulations applicable to the conduct or
maintenance of the operation, business or premises for which the license is
issued. Any business found in violation of the licensing requirement shall be
ordered closed immediately.
(Ord. No. 1132-04, § 3. Passed 7-12-06, eff. 7-14-06)
§ 676.99 Penalties
   (a)   Whoever violates divisions (b), (c), (d), (e) or (f) of Section
676.06, Section
676.061, division (a) of Section
676.064, Section
676.08, or any other provision of this chapter that does not specify another
penalty shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on the first
offense, a misdemeanor of the third degree on the second offense, and a
misdemeanor of the first degree on the third and any subsequent offense. Each
day during which noncompliance or a violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
   (b)   An organization that violates any of the above provisions in division
(a) of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on
the first offense, a misdemeanor of the third degree on the second offense, and
a misdemeanor of the first degree on the third and any subsequent offense and
subject to the fines under Section
601.99(c). Each day during which noncompliance or a violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 973-13. Passed 7-10-13, eff. 7-16-13)
CHAPTER 676A – MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR GARAGES
676A.01   Definitions
676A.02   License Required; Application; Fees
676A.03   Maintenance of Premises
676A.04   Revocation, Suspension or Denial of License
676A.05   Appeals
676A.99   Penalty
§ 676A.01 Definitions
   For purposes of this chapter:
   (a)   “Commissioner” shall mean the Commissioner of Assessments and
Licenses.
   (b)   “Motor vehicle repair garage” shall mean a business or individual
regularly engaged in the repair of motor vehicles, except:
      (1)   A business which performs motor vehicle servicing solely to the
extent of fueling, checking fluid levels, replacing filters, and other minor
servicing functions;
      (2)   A garage or shop engaged exclusively in repairing the motor
vehicles of its own fleet.
   (c)   “Refuse” shall include without limitation trash, debris, discarded or
abandoned parts, containers and tools, and abandoned motor vehicles.
   (d)   “Repair” shall mean mechanical repairs, service, maintenance,
alterations, diagnostic testing or body work, or the addition of equipment,
supplies or parts to a motor vehicle.
(Ord. No. 1584-A-90. Passed 4-29-91, eff. 6-8-91)
§ 676A.02 License Required; Application; Fees
   (a)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle repair garage without a
license issued under this chapter, which license shall be permanently and
conspicuously displayed at the location to which it applies.
   (b)   Every person desiring to operate a motor vehicle repair garage shall
make application to the Commissioner for a license on forms prescribed by the
Commissioner. The forms shall include:
      (1)   The name, address, and social security number of each applicant,
each partner in the case of a partnership and each officer and Director in the
case of a corporation;
      (2)   The name and address of the motor vehicle repair garage; and
      (3)   Other information as the Commissioner of Building and Housing may
require to ensure that the applicant meets the requirements of these Codified
Ordinances as they relate to motor vehicle repair garages.
   (c)   A business operating more than one (1) motor vehicle repair garage may
file a single license application so long as the application contains all of
the information required by division (b) of this section with respect to each
separate location, and, in addition, indicates the manager of each location.
   (d)   On receipt of a completed license application, the Commissioner shall
inspect each location for compliance with the provisions of Chapter
657 and shall transmit the application to the Commissioner of Building and
Housing, who shall verify the existence of a valid Certificate of Occupancy for
each location and inspect each location for compliance with Section
676A.03.
   No motor vehicle repair garage license shall be issued or renewed until the
Commissioner of Building and Housing certifies to the Commissioner that the
applicant is in compliance with Section
676A.03 and the Commissioner determines that the applicant is in compliance
with Chapter
657.
   (e)   The annual license fee for a motor vehicle repair garage shall be
seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for each separate location. On receipt of a
completed application, the certifications referred to in division (d) of this
section and the annual fee, the Commissioner shall issue an annual license
which shall cover the period of June 1 to May 31.
(Ord. No. 2393-02. Passed 2-3-03, eff. 2-3-03)
§ 676A.03 Maintenance of Premises
   With respect to motor vehicle repair garages:
   (a)   All refuse must be stored in a completely enclosed building, a
completely enclosed trash transport or covered cans. All odorous materials must
be stored in airtight containers to avoid emissions of obnoxious odors. Each
storage area for a transport or covered cans shall be located in such a manner
as to not be visible from the public right-of-way or from any residential lot,
or shall be screened with opaque fencing not lower than the height of the
transport or covered cans stored therein. All refuse containers shall be
constructed of noncombustible materials and shall be placed on a concrete slab.
   (b)   Outdoor customer parking areas shall not be used for overnight storage
of more than four (4) vehicles.
   (c)   Outdoor storage areas other than customer parking areas shall be
located behind the building line, as defined in Section
325.11, and shall be screened on each side which is not immediately adjacent to
the motor vehicle repair garage by a wall or opaque fence not less than seven
(7) feet high. The screening may also be accomplished through use of an open
fence or wall supplemented by evergreen plantings sufficient to provide a
substantially opaque screen at least seven (7) feet in height by the end of the
second growing season.
   (d)   The surface of outdoor storage areas other than customer parking areas
shall be paved or constructed of crushed stone or slag; shall be level; and
shall be kept reasonably dust-free.
(Ord. No. 1584-A-90. Passed 4-29-91, eff. 6-8-91)
§ 676A.04 Revocation, Suspension or Denial of License
   The Commissioner may at any time revoke or suspend the license granted under
authority of this chapter, or may deny renewal of the license, for failure to
comply with the terms of this chapter or Chapter
657. Upon the recommendation of the Commissioner of Building and Housing or the
Chief of Police, the Commissioner may at any time revoke or suspend the license
granted under authority of this chapter, or may deny renewal of the license,
for failure to comply with any laws or regulations of the City or the State of
Ohio relating to motor vehicle repair garages, including without limitation the
provisions of the Building Code.
(Ord. No. 234-92. Passed 3-9-92, eff. 3-17-92)
§ 676A.05 Appeals
   If the Commissioner refuses to issue or revokes or suspends a license, the
applicant or licensee may appeal such order to the Board of Zoning Appeals
established pursuant to Charter Section
76-6. Written notice of such appeal shall be filed with the Board within ten
(10) days after the making of such order. Within ten (10) days after the filing
of such notice, the Board shall proceed to hear such appeal, at which hearing
all parties interested shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard. The Board
shall approve, modify or annul the order from which the appeal has been
perfected and the finding of the Board shall be final with respect to all
parties thereto.
(Ord. No. 1584-A-90. Passed 4-29-91, eff. 6-8-91)
§ 676A.99 Penalty
   (a)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00),
or sentenced to not more than six (6) months imprisonment, or both.
   (b)   Each day upon which any violation occurs or continues shall constitute
a separate offense, punishable as such hereunder.
(Ord. No. 1584-A-90. Passed 4-29-91, eff. 6-8-91)
CHAPTER 676B – GARAGE AND RESIDENTIAL PERSONAL PROPERTY SALES
676B.01   Definitions
676B.02   Property Permitted to be Sold
676B.03   Exceptions
676B.04   General Regulations
676B.05   Prohibitions
676B.99   Penalty
§ 676B.01 Definitions
   (a)   “Garage Sale or other Residential Personal Property Sale” shall mean
all general sales, open to the public, conducted from or on a residential
premises in any residential zone as defined by the Zoning Ordinance of the
City, for the purpose of disposing of personal property, including, but not
limited to, all sales commonly referred to as “garage”, “lawn”, “yard”,
“attic”, “porch”, “room”, “backyard”, “patio”, “flea market”, or “rummage”
sale.
   (b)   “Personal Property” shall mean property which is owned, utilized and
maintained by an individual or members of his or her residence and which has
been acquired in the normal course of living in or maintaining a residence.
(Ord. No. 400-97. Passed 4-27-98, eff. 5-6-98)
§ 676B.02 Property Permitted to be Sold
   No person, whether as owner, lessee, manager, occupant or any agent thereof,
shall sell, offer for sale, conduct or permit a sale of property other than
personal property at a garage sale or other residential personal property sale.
(Ord. No. 400-97. Passed 4-27-98, eff. 5-6-98)
§ 676B.03 Exceptions
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to an officer executing
process or order of any court having jurisdiction within the State of Ohio for
selling property, directed by law, court order or local process to be sold on
the property where the same is located or to the sale or offering for sale of
personal property as defined herein.
(Ord. No. 400-97. Passed 4-27-98, eff. 5-6-98)
§ 676B.04 General Regulations
   (a)   No garage or other residential personal property sales shall be
permitted except between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., nor shall
exceed more than four (4) consecutive days in duration.
   (b)   No more than three (3) garage or other residential personal property
sales shall be conducted or permitted on or at a residential premises, as
defined by Section
676B.01, during any year unless permitted by the Director of Public Safety or
the Director’s designee after obtaining the approval of the City Councilmember
for that ward.
   (c)   A garage or other residential personal property sale conducted or
managed on or at a residential premises, whether directly or indirectly, by any
person other than the owner, lessee, manager, occupant or agent thereof, of the
premises where said sale is conducted shall be included for purposes of
calculation of the number of garage or other residential property sales
permitted under this section.
(Ord. No. 400-97. Passed 4-27-98, eff. 5-6-98)
§ 676B.05 Prohibitions
   No person whether as owner, lessee, manager, occupant or any agent thereof,
or any person other than the owner, lessee, manager, occupant or agent thereof,
shall conduct, permit or manage whether, directly or indirectly, a garage sale,
or other residential personal property sale in violation of Sections
676B.02 or divisions (a) or (b) of Section
676B.04.
(Ord. No. 400-97. Passed 4-27-98, eff. 5-6-98)
§ 676B.99 Penalty
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
minor misdemeanor, and shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00). The fine set forth herein is mandatory and shall not be suspended by
the court in whole or in part. Each day upon which a violation occurs or
continues shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such
hereunder.
(Ord. No. 400-97. Passed 4-27-98, eff. 5-6-98)
CHAPTER 677 – METER READERS
677.01   Badges Required
677.02   Form and Exhibit of Badges and Identification Cards
677.03   Notification of Issue; Loss or Theft
677.04   Consumers to be Notified of Badges
677.05   Entering Without Badge, with Someone Else’s Badge
677.99   Penalty
   Note: The legislative history of this chapter, except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 63410-A, passed
September 22, 1924.
Statutory reference:
   Gas and electric meter inspection, RC 743.32, 4933.10
§ 677.01 Badges Required
   Any person or corporation operating in the City a public utility for
supplying the inhabitants of such City with heat, electricity, gas or telephone
service, and any department of the City operating a Municipally owned or
controlled utility, shall supply all employees authorized in the discharge of
their duties to enter dwellings or other buildings for the reading of meters,
the inspection of equipment or for any other purpose, with suitable badges as
prescribed in this chapter.
§ 677.02 Form and Exhibit of Badges and Identification Cards
   Each badge shall be made of metal and shall be conspicuously and
consecutively numbered, and no two (2) badges issued by the same person,
corporation or City department operating a utility shall bear the same number.
Each badge shall bear the name of the person, corporation or City department by
which it is issued. Each employee authorized to enter dwellings or buildings
shall, while engaged in the discharge of such duty, wear such badge over the
left breast of the outer garment, so placed as to be readily seen and examined.
Each authorized meter reader, tester or inspector shall also carry with him or
her at all times while engaged in the discharge of his or her duties, an
identification card bearing the name of the person and company or City
department issuing the same. Each card shall state concisely the name, age,
height, weight and complexion, as well as the color of hair and eyes of the
person carrying the same. The form, style and character of cards and badges
shall be approved by the Director of Public Service, but the cards and badges
of no two (2) persons or corporations shall be of the same color or design. No
card or badge to which such approval has not been given by the Director of
Public Service shall be worn by any person.
§ 677.03 Notification of Issue; Loss or Theft
   When any such badge or card has been delivered to any employee, the person,
corporation or City department issuing the same shall furnish to the Director
of Public Service the number of such badge and a duplicate of the
identification and description contained in the card. In case any badge or card
so issued has been lost, mislaid or stolen, or has not been returned by any
employee after his or her authority to enter dwellings or other buildings has
ceased, then the person, corporation or City department which has issued the
same shall immediately notify the Director of such fact.
§ 677.04 Consumers to be Notified of Badges
   Every person or corporation operating in the City a public utility for
supplying the inhabitants of the City with heat, electricity, gas or telephone
service, and any department of the City operating a Municipally owned or
controlled utility, shall supply each and every subscriber or consumer with a
card showing a facsimile of the badge worn by his, her or its employees who are
authorized to enter dwellings or other buildings for the purpose of reading
meters and inspecting equipment, or for any other purpose. Such cards shall
also bear the number of the meter or telephone instrument of such consumer or
subscriber. All such persons and corporations shall supply all their meter
readers, inspectors or such other persons who may be authorized to enter
dwellings or buildings with the numbers of such meters and instruments on their
respective routes for the purpose of comparison.
§ 677.05 Entering Without Badge, with Someone Else’s Badge
   No person, other than the one to whom or for whom such badge or card is
issued, shall wear, carry or use such badge or card. None of the aforesaid
employees shall enter any dwelling house or other building for the purposes
aforesaid unless he or she wears and carries with him or her the badge and
card. No person not such an employee shall attempt to enter or claim the right
or privilege of entering any dwelling house or building for the purposes
aforesaid.
§ 677.99 Penalty
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not
less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) or
be imprisoned for sixty (60) days, or both.
CHAPTER 677A – TOW TRUCKS
677A.01   Definitions
677A.02   License Required
677A.03   License Application
677A.04   Issuance of License
677A.05   Term of License
677A.06   Assignment or Transfer of License
677A.07   Denial, Suspension or Revocation of License
677A.08   Appeal from License Denial, Suspension or Revocation
677A.09   Liability Insurance Required
677A.10   Tow Truck Identification
677A.11   Responding to the Scene of an Accident
677A.12   Transport Sheet Required
677A.13   Records
677A.14   Drivers’ Licenses
677A.15   Convictions Barring Issuance of License
677A.16   Drivers’ Photographs
677A.17   Issuance, Form and Term of License
677A.18   Temporary Permits
677A.19   License Certificate
677A.20   Renewal of License
677A.21   License Fees
677A.22   Suspension or Revocation of License
677A.23   Records of Licenses
677A.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Commercial and heavy vehicles, CO
Ch. 439
   Impounding, CO
Ch. 405
   Towing requirements, CO
439.10
§ 677A.01 Definitions
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   “Driver” or “operator” means a person who drives or is in actual
physical control of a tow truck on a public street or public right-of-way in
the City.
   (b)   “Person” means a natural person, firm, copartnership, association or
corporation.
   (c)   “Tow truck” means a truck or any other vehicle adapted or used for the
purpose of towing, winching or otherwise removing disabled motor vehicles.
   (d)   “Tow truck owner” means a person engaged in the business of offering
towing services for compensation, and includes a lessee in operation of a tow
truck.
   (e)   “Towing” means the act of pulling or dragging a vehicle behind the tow
truck which is doing such pulling or dragging. “Towing” includes flat bed
towing. The towed vehicle can be self-supporting, carried on a dolly-type
platform or supported on any other item necessary to facilitate such towing.
(Ord. No. 1053-A-80. Passed 1-12-81, eff. 2-21-81)
§ 677A.02 License Required
   (a)   No owner of a tow truck shall permit such tow truck to be used for the
purpose of towing in the City unless a valid tow truck owner’s license,
obtained pursuant to this chapter, has been issued and is in force for that tow
truck.
   (b)   This section does not apply when the property being towed is owned by
the person doing the towing, and is being transported for recreation, sport or
show, or when the property being towed has been picked up outside the City and
is either in the process of being delivered to a location in the City, or is
being towed through the City to be delivered elsewhere.
   (c)   Evidence of the ownership of a vehicle being towed shall be presented
to a police officer or inspector upon demand and shall consist of either a
certificate of title or a bill of sale for the vehicle.
(Ord. No. 1053-A-80. Passed 1-12-81, eff. 2-21-81)
§ 677A.03 License Application
   (a)   An application for the license required by Section
677A.02 shall be made in person at the office of the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses on forms provided and information as the Commissioner
may deem necessary shall be given under oath. It shall be mandatory rejection
of the application or revocation of an issued license if any of the required
application information is misrepresented or untrue.
   (b)   Each application for the license shall be accompanied by a fee of one
hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) for the original license and thirty
dollars ($30.00) for each additional license if a person licenses more than one
(1) vehicle. Each application for the replacement of a lost, stolen, or missing
license shall be accompanied by a fee of thirty dollars ($30.00).
(Ord. No. 2393-02. Passed 2-3-03, eff. 2-3-03)
§ 677A.04 Issuance of License
   Upon approval of the application provided for in Section
677A.03, the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses shall issue the license
and, as evidence thereof, a metal tag bearing the number of the license. The
tag shall be six (6) inches by eight (8) inches and of an annual contrasting
color as determined by the Commissioner. The tag shall be permanently fixed to
the front bumper of the licensed tow truck.
(Ord. No. 1053-A-80. Passed 1-12-81, eff. 2-21-81)
§ 677A.05 Term of License
   All licenses issued pursuant to Section
677A.04 shall be issued for a period of two (2) years, expiring on the 30th day
of September in odd numbered years, unless sooner revoked by the Commissioner,
provided, however, that any license issued pursuant to Section
677A.04 between the effective date of this section and September 30, 1993 shall
expire on September 30, 1995 unless sooner revoked by the Commissioner.
(Ord. No. 228-93. Passed 2-8-93, eff. 2-16-93)
§ 677A.06 Assignment or Transfer of License
   No license issued pursuant to Section
677A.04 shall be assigned or transferred to any other tow truck.
(Ord. No. 1053-A-80. Passed 1-12-81, eff. 2-21-81)
§ 677A.07 Denial, Suspension or Revocation of License
   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses may deny the issuance of a tow
truck owner’s license to a person who, upon investigation, clearly lacks the
qualifications and fitness to be licensed under this chapter. A license granted
or issued pursuant to the terms of Section
677A.04 may be suspended or revoked at any time by the Commissioner upon:
   (a)   Satisfactory proof of a violation of this chapter for reasons which
could have been grounds for the refusal to issue an original license; or
   (b)   Satisfactory proof that the tow truck owner has failed to resolve
complaints involving parts or property taken from an impounded vehicle or
damage to an impounded vehicle when such complaints are substantiated by
information contained in forms prescribed in rules and regulations promulgated
by the Director of Public Safety.
(Ord. No. 1053-A-80. Passed 1-12-81, eff. 2-21-81)
§ 677A.08 Appeal from License Denial, Suspension or Revocation
   License issuance shall be authorized and under the control of the
Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses. In case of the refusal to issue a
license or the revocation or suspension of a license by the Commissioner, the
applicant or licensee may appeal from such order to the Board of Zoning Appeals
established pursuant to Charter Section
76-6, provided that written appeal is filed with the Board Secretary within ten
(10) days of the date the decision being appealed was made. The Board shall
conduct a hearing and render a decision in accordance with City ordinances and
regulations governing its conduct and procedure.
(Ord. No. 1053-A-80. Passed 1-12-81, eff. 2-21-81)
§ 677A.09 Liability Insurance Required
   Each owner of a tow truck shall furnish, at the time of application and/or
renewal of such license, a certificate of insurance or an acknowledgment
thereof, by an insurance carrier licensed to do business in the State, evidence
of garagekeepers’ legal liability, to protect property left in his or her care,
custody or control, in an amount not less than one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) and general liability in an amount not less than three hundred
thousand dollars ($300,000.00). The provisions of this section relating to
garagekeepers’ legal liability shall not apply to a tow truck owner who
establishes to the satisfaction of the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses
that such owner does not own, operate or maintain garage or vehicular storage
facilities.
(Ord. No. 1053-A-80. Passed 1-12-81, eff. 2-21-81)
§ 677A.10 Tow Truck Identification
   Any person engaged in the business of offering towing services shall have
imprinted on both sides of any vehicle used as a tow truck, slide or tilt-bed
carrier, or car hauler, the name, address and telephone number of the person
owning such vehicle. The name shall be printed in letters at least three (3)
inches high and not less than three-eighths (3/8) of an inch wide, while the
address, place and phone number shall be in letters two (2) inches high and not
less than three-eighths (3/8) of an inch wide. Lettering shall be done in color
which will contrast sharply with the background upon which it is painted and
shall be placed in such position as to be easily seen by anyone wishing to
identify the vehicle. Markings shall be kept clear and distinct at all times.
(Ord. No. 1053-A-80. Passed 1-12-81, eff. 2-21-81)
§ 677A.11 Responding to the Scene of an Accident
   No person licensed under Section
677A.02, or any of his or her agents or employees, shall respond to the scene
of an accident unless either summoned by a person having a direct interest in
the vehicle or vehicles involved or dispatched thereto as provided in the rules
and regulations promulgated by the Director of Public Safety pursuant to
Chapter
135.
(Ord. No. 1053-A-80. Passed 1-12-81, eff. 2-21-81)
§ 677A.12 Transport Sheet Required
   Tow truck operators shall at all times maintain a current transport sheet
containing the following information in the proper sequence on motor vehicles
that are moved from one (1) location to another:
   (a)   Date and time;
   (b)   Moved vehicle owner’s name and address;
   (c)   Moved vehicle’s serial or license number; serial number required if
vehicle is taken anywhere other than licensee’s lot;
   (d)   Year, make and model of moved motor vehicle;
   (e)   Location of origin of transport;
   (f)   Location of destination of transport;
   (g)   Amount of charges;
   (h)   Name of person who authorized transport.
   Such entries on the transport sheet are to be made at the time of each act
and recorded legibly, accurately and completely as directed in this section.
These transport sheets shall be made available for inspection upon the request
of any police officer. This section shall not apply to salvage motor vehicle
dealers.
   No tow truck shall have in tow a motor vehicle for which the operator does
not have in his or her possession authorization to remove such vehicle. The
authorization of the owner or of an officer of the Police Division shall
include, but not be limited to, the name of the owner of such motor vehicle,
the name and telephone number of the person authorizing the moving of the motor
vehicle, the motor vehicle registration number and/or the vehicle
identification number.
(Ord. No. 1053-A-80. Passed 1-12-81, eff. 2-21-81)
§ 677A.13 Records
   The owner of a truck shall maintain an accurate and complete file of
transport sheets for each driver employed by him or her, including the owner if
he or she is also an operator. Transport sheets shall be filed by date of
occurrence and retained for a period of six (6) months. Upon the request of the
Director of Public Safety or his or her designee, such sheets shall be
immediately available for inspection.
(Ord. No. 1053-A-80. Passed 1-12-81, eff. 2-21-81)
§ 677A.14 Drivers’ Licenses
   Every person driving a tow truck shall be licensed. Each applicant for a
driver’s license shall:
   (a)   Be eighteen (18) years of age or over and an American citizen (or have
declared his or her intention to become a citizen) on the date of such
application;
   (b)   Be of sound physique, with good eyesight and not subject to epilepsy,
vertigo, heart trouble or any other infirmity of body and mind which might
render him or her or her unfit for the safe operation of a public vehicle;
   (c)   Exhibit minimal competency in reading and writing the English
language;
   (d)   Produce, on forms provided by the Commissioner of Assessments and
Licenses, two (2) character references of persons not related to the applicant;
and
   (e)   Fill out, on a form provided by the Commissioner, a statement giving
his or her full name, residence and places of residence for five (5) years
previous to moving to his or her present address; his or her age, height, color
of eyes and hair and place of birth; the length of time he or she has resided
at his or her present address; whether or not he or she is a citizen of the
United States; places of previous employment; whether or not he or she has ever
been arrested or convicted of a felony or misdemeanor; whether or not he or she
has been summoned to court; whether or not he or she has previously been
licensed as a driver or chauffeur, and if so, whether or not his or her license
has ever been revoked and for what cause. Such statement shall be signed and
sworn to by the applicant, and filed with the Commissioner, as a permanent
record.
   Any false statement made by the applicant shall be promptly reported by the
Commissioner to the prosecuting attorney. The Commissioner is authorized to
establish such additional rules and regulations, covering the issuance of
drivers’ licenses, not inconsistent with this chapter, as may be necessary and
reasonable.
(Ord. No. 1551-10. Passed 12-6-10, eff. 12-10-10)
§ 677A.15 Convictions Barring Issuance of License
   No driver’s license provided for in Section
677A.14 shall be issued or renewed if the applicant therefor has been convicted
of any of the following offenses:
   (a)   Manslaughter or negligent homicide, resulting from the operation of a
motor vehicle;
   (b)   Driving a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating
liquors or drugs. A conviction under this subsection shall not bar the issuance
of a license if the conviction occurred more than five (5) years prior to the
date of application or, upon a recommendation of the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses, more than three (3) years prior to the date of
application.
   (c)   A felony, in the commission of which a motor vehicle was used;
   (d)   Failure to stop and render aid as required under the laws of the
State, or leaving the scene of an accident as specified by the laws of the
State;
   (e)   Perjury or false swearing in making a statement under oath in
connection with his or her application for a driver’s license;
   (f)   Conviction, or forfeiture of bail, not vacated, upon three (3) charges
of a violation of the motor vehicle laws of the State within a period of twelve
(12) months;
   (g)   Conviction of a violation of a law involving violence, theft or any
form of stealing, or a crime involving moral turpitude that is reasonably
related to the license referred to in this chapter, within five (5) years
preceding the filing of the application for such license;
   (h)   Repeated violations of City ordinances, which affect the safety of
human life or limb on the streets of the City; or
   (i)   Possession by a tow truck driver, in his or her tow truck, of opened
or unopened beer, whiskey or wine; of drugs or other stimulants not
specifically prescribed for him or her by a medical doctor for his or her
private use; or of gambling equipment or paraphernalia, stolen goods or
contraband property of any kind.
(Ord. No. 1053-A-80. Passed 1-12-81, eff. 2-21-81)
§ 677A.16 Drivers’ Photographs
   (a)   Each applicant for the driver’s license provided for in Section
677A.14 shall file with his or her application three (3) unmounted, unretouched
photographs of himself or herself, in such position as the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses may direct, taken within thirty (30) days preceding
the filing of his or her application. Photographs shall be of a size which may
be easily attached to his or her license. One (1) of the photographs shall be
attached to his or her license when issued, and the others shall be filed with
the application in the office of the Commissioner.
   The photograph shall be so attached to the license that it cannot be removed
and another photograph substituted without detection. Each licensed driver
shall, on demand of an inspector of licenses, a policeman or an affected
citizen, exhibit his or her license and photograph for inspection.
   Where the application for a license is denied, two (2) copies of the
photograph shall be returned to the applicant by the Commissioner.
   (b)   Applications with photographs attached shall forthwith be forwarded to
the Bureau of Criminal Identification, Police Division. No license shall be
issued under this chapter until the receipt in writing from such Bureau of a
report showing the result of the investigation of the application.
(Ord. No. 1053-A-80. Passed 1-12-81, eff. 2-21-81)
§ 677A.17 Issuance, Form and Term of License
   Upon satisfactory fulfillment of the applicable requirements of this
chapter, there shall be issued to the applicant a license, which shall be in
such form as to contain the photograph and name of the licensee. A licensee who
defaces, removes or obliterates an official entry made on his or her license,
shall be punished by revocation of his or her license. Such license shall be
issued for a period of one (1) year commencing on February 21, unless
previously revoked.
(Ord. No. 1053-A-80. Passed 1-12-81, eff. 2-21-81)
§ 677A.18 Temporary Permits
   Except when an extraordinary public emergency arises adversely affecting
transportation on the streets in the City, temporary permits when issued shall
be on such terms and conditions as the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses
provides. However, such temporary permits shall in no event be granted for a
longer period than fifteen (15) days and may be renewable for similar periods,
as necessary, only on the written recommendation of the Commissioner made to
Council and approved thereby.
   The fee for such a temporary permit is three dollars ($3.00) for the driver.
(Ord. No. 1053-A-80. Passed 1-12-81, eff. 2-21-81)
§ 677A.19 License Certificate
   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses shall issue a license
certificate, bearing the photograph of the licensee, to each person licensed as
the driver of a tow truck. Such license certificate must, under penalty of
suspension or revocation of the license, be conspicuously displayed at all
times in the vehicle operated by such licensee and in the manner required by
the Commissioner. The certificate shall be of such form and design as the
Commissioner prescribes.
(Ord. No. 1053-A-80. Passed 1-12-81, eff. 2-21-81)
§ 677A.20 Renewal of License
   Renewal of a driver’s license issued under this chapter shall be in
accordance with the procedure prescribed by the Commissioner of Assessments and
Licenses.
(Ord. No. 1053-A-80. Passed 1-12-81, eff. 2-21-81)
§ 677A.21 License Fees
   A license fee of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be paid for an original driver’s
license or for a renewal of a license.
(Ord. No. 2393-02. Passed 2-3-03, eff. 2-3-03)
§ 677A.22 Suspension or Revocation of License
   A driver’s license issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked at
any time by the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses on his or her own
initiative or on the recommendation of the Chief of Police. Before suspending
or revoking such license, the Commissioner shall afford the licensee the
opportunity of a hearing on the charges. The licensee may appeal from such
order in the manner provided in Section
677A.08. A second suspension for the same reason, or a third suspension in any
case, of a driver’s license shall operate as a revocation of such license. No
driver whose license has been revoked shall again be licensed as a tow truck
driver in the City without the presentation of reasons satisfactory to the
Commissioner. The Commissioner shall notify the Police Division of all
suspensions or revocations of drivers’ licenses.
(Ord. No. 1053-A-80. Passed 1-12-81, eff. 2-21-81)
§ 677A.23 Records of Licenses
   There shall be kept in the office of the Commissioner of Assessments and
Licenses a complete record of each driver’s license issued to a driver under
this chapter, and of all renewals, suspensions and revocations thereof, which
record shall be kept on file with the original application of the driver for
such license.
(Ord. No. 1053-A-80. Passed 1-12-81, eff. 2-21-81)
§ 677A.99 Penalty
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor of the second degree and shall be fined not more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00) or imprisoned not more than ninety (90) days, or both.
Any such violation shall constitute a separate offense on each consecutive day
continued.
(Ord. No. 1053-A-80. Passed 1-12-81, eff. 2-21-81)
CHAPTER 678 – MOTOR VEHICLES AND PARTS
678.01   Reserved
678.02   Definition
678.03   Used Vehicle Reports
678.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Automobile dealers and salesmen, RC Ch. 4517
§ 678.01 Reserved
§ 678.02 Definition
   As used in this chapter, “dealer in used vehicles, parts or accessories of
used vehicles” means any person, firm or corporation who buys, purchases,
obtains by trade or exchange, or who otherwise acquires, any used vehicle or a
part or accessory thereof for the purpose of selling, exchanging or trading it.
For purposes of this chapter a used vehicle includes the current year’s model
and the five (5) prior years’ models.
(Ord. No. 341-73. Passed 5-7-73, eff. 5-9-73)
§ 678.03 Used Vehicle Reports
   (a)   Every dealer in used vehicles or parts or accessories thereof shall
submit a full, complete description of each used vehicle, or part or accessory
of a used vehicle bought, purchased or otherwise acquired for the purpose of
sale, exchange or trade. The description shall be submitted on a form furnished
by the Department of Public Safety for such purpose, which form shall require
the serial number, make, year, name and address of the previous owner and title
number. The form shall be signed at the bottom by the dealer and shall indicate
the dealer’s address and telephone number.
   (b)   The dealer shall prepare a list twice a month enumerating all used
vehicles, parts or accessories acquired by any means during the preceding semi-
monthly period. Such list shall be delivered to the Chief of Police no later
than the eighteenth day of the month for the first semi-monthly period and no
later than the third day of the month for the second semi- monthly period. The
reports received pursuant to this section shall be maintained for a period of
two (2) years after which time the custodian of these reports may purge his or
her files.
   (c)   This section shall not apply to dealers in possession of parts and/or
accessories which were obtained in any manner from a licensed salvage or parts
dealer.
(Ord. No. 341-73. Passed 5-7-73, eff. 5-9-73)
§ 678.99 Penalty
   Any person or persons, who either for themselves or as an officer, agent or
employee of any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions
of Section
678.03 shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) plus the cost of prosecution, or be imprisoned
not more than six (6) months, or both.
(Ord. No. 90-96. Passed 3-18-96, eff. 3-26-96)
CHAPTER 679 – MOVERS
679.01   License Required
679.02   Exceptions
679.03   License Application; Fee
679.04   Contents of Application
679.05   License Investigation; Rejection; Appeal
679.06   Fee Disposition
679.07   Licenses Not Transferable
679.08   License Issuance
679.09   License Fees
679.10   License Tag Display
679.11   Records Required; Contents
679.12   Licensee’s Weekly Reports
679.13   Misrepresentation
679.14   Maximum Rates
679.15   Price Schedules
679.16   Notice of Price Schedule Changes
679.17   Special Rate Contracts
679.18   License Revocation; Appeal
679.99   Penalty
   Note: The legislative history of this chapter, except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 63410-A, passed
September 22, 1924.
Cross-reference:
   Commercial and heavy vehicle regulations, CO
Ch. 439
§ 679.01 License Required
   No person, firm or corporation shall offer his, her or its services to the
public or engage in or carry on the business of a mover of household goods or
personal effects in bulk, or pianos, for hire within the City without first
obtaining from the City and holding in full force and effect a license to
engage in and carry on such business.
§ 679.02 Exceptions
   The moving of household goods or personal effects by the piece (except
pianos) shall not come within the provisions of this chapter.
§ 679.03 License Application; Fee
   The person, firm or corporation desiring to secure the license provided for
in this chapter shall apply in writing to the Commissioner of Assessments and
Licenses for a license and shall pay the license fee and tag cost hereinafter
provided. Such application shall be in the form prescribed in this chapter and
shall be filed at least ten (10) days prior to the time of granting such
license.
§ 679.04 Contents of Application
   Every license applicant shall file with the Commissioner of Assessments and
Licenses a written application stating his or her name and address, including
street number. If a corporation, such application shall state the names and
addresses, with street numbers, of all officers and the manager who will have
charge of such moving business, together with the address of the business
office of such corporation. Each application shall state whether or not each
person therein named is a citizen of the United States.
§ 679.05 License Investigation; Rejection; Appeal
   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses shall cause an investigation to
be made of the character of the applicant, or if the applicant is a
corporation, of the officers and business manager who will have the management
of the business. An applicant shall be rejected if the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses finds any one of the persons named in the application
not of good moral character. Rejection shall be made by the Commissioner in
writing to the applicant, stating reasons the applicant shall have the right to
appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals, established pursuant to Charter Section
76-6. The Board has full power to confirm such rejection or to order that a
license be issued to the applicant upon the filing of a schedule of rates by
the applicant as provided by the terms of this chapter. To perfect appeal, the
applicant shall give notice in writing to the Board within ten (10) days after
receiving notice of rejection. Such hearing upon appeal shall be had within ten
(10) days after such notice is filed with the Board. No license shall be
granted to any applicant so rejected, on a subsequent application, until six
(6) months have elapsed from the date of such final rejection.
§ 679.06 Fee Disposition
   All moneys received by way of license and tag fees under this chapter shall
be paid daily into the General Fund of the City.
§ 679.07 Licenses Not Transferable
   There shall be no transfers of licenses issued under the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 679.08 License Issuance
   After the provisions made requisite by this chapter have been fulfilled, the
Commissioner shall issue such mover’s license to such applicant upon the
delivery of the applicant’s schedule of rates as hereinafter provided. Such
license shall set forth the number or numbers to be placed upon the metal tags
to be attached to each vehicle used in such business.
§ 679.09 License Fees
   The fees to be paid for such mover’s license shall be seven dollars and
fifty cents ($7.50), which shall include tags for one (1) vehicle, and the
further sum of two dollars ($2.00) for two (2) tags for each additional vehicle
used by the licensee in such business. Such tags shall be in the form
prescribed by the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses. The license shall
expire on June 1 following the date of its issue. All licenses applied for and
issued in the sixty (60) days preceding June 1 in any year shall be in force
from date of issue until June 1 of the next year.
§ 679.10 License Tag Display
   No person, firm or corporation to whom or to which a license has been issued
shall use any vehicle or conveyance in a moving business without displaying
upon each side of the vehicle in a conspicuous place, near the driver’s seat,
the metal tag bearing the owner’s license number.
§ 679.11 Records Required; Contents
   No person, firm or corporation to whom or to which a license is issued shall
fail or refuse to make and keep a record of each and every resident of the City
whose household goods or personal effects are being moved in bulk or whose
pianos are being moved from one (1) place to another by the licensee, his, her
or its servants or agents. The record shall contain the full name and address
of the licensee; the full name of the person for whom the articles are moved;
the address from which articles are moved; when the articles are moved out of
the City, the railroad depot, dock or wharf to which household goods or
personal effects or pianos are moved; and when household goods, personal
effects or pianos are moved from a railroad depot, warehouse, dock or wharf to
an address in the City, the name of the owner of the goods or personal effects
or pianos, the railroad depot, warehouse, dock or wharf from which and the
address to which such articles were moved.
§ 679.12 Licensee’s Weekly Reports
   Every person, firm or corporation to whom a license is granted, on Monday of
each week, shall file upon blanks furnished without charge in the office of the
Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses, a full and correct statement of all
information required to be kept by Section
679.11, covering all movings and removals of the preceding week. No person,
firm or corporation shall fail or refuse to file such report or file a false
report. Such statement shall be placed on file in the offices of the
Commissioner and kept for two (2) years from the date of filing and a register
shall be made and kept by him or her of all changes of address and new
addresses, which register shall be open to the inspection of the public at all
reasonable hours.
§ 679.13 Misrepresentation
   No person shall give a fictitious or incorrect name to the mover for his,
her or its record of removal or practice any deceit of any character whatsoever
to conceal or mislead in respect to a change of address.
§ 679.14 Maximum Rates
   The rates to be charged for the use of any vehicle licensed under this
chapter and for the loading and unloading of the same shall not exceed the
following:
   (a)   For household goods and personal effects, not including pianos one
dollar and fifty cents ($1.50) per hour for the use of a horse-drawn vehicle,
including services of driver; two dollars and fifty cents ($2.50) per hour for
the use of a motor vehicle, including services of driver. For the service of
each additional man, fifty cents ($0.50) per hour; if charge is made for time
going from the barn or garage to the first point of moving or for time going
from the last point of moving back to the barn or garage, the basis of
computation of such time shall be twenty (20) minutes per mile or fraction
thereof for a horse-drawn vehicle or ten (10) minutes per mile or fraction
thereof for motor vehicle;
   (b)   For pianos where the distance between the two (2) points of moving to
be traveled is three (3) miles or less, four dollars ($4.00); for each
additional mile or part thereof, one dollar ($1.00). Such charge shall include
loading and unloading such piano from and to ground levels, up and down not
more than six (6) steps at either place; for flights of more than six (6)
steps, fifty cents ($0.50) for each flight. For each use of a hoist an
additional charge of five dollars ($5.00) may be made.
§ 679.15 Price Schedules
   Before doing business under the provisions of this chapter each licensee
shall file with the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses, his, her or its
complete schedule of prices by the hour for household goods and personal
effects, and by mileage for pianos, not in excess of the charges established by
Section
679.14, and a copy of the same shall be conspicuously posted and kept in the
business offices of the licensee. However, such schedule of prices by the hour
shall set forth the point at which such time shall commence and end and how
much time shall be deducted for lunch.
§ 679.16 Notice of Price Schedule Changes
   To change the schedule, it shall be necessary for a licensee to give notice
in writing of such proposed change, together with such proposed schedule, to
the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses at least sixty (60) days before
such change shall go into effect.
§ 679.17 Special Rate Contracts
   The amount to be charged for loading, transporting or transmitting and
unloading merchandise, household or office furniture, or other bulky articles,
by a public mover may be agreed upon in advance. Such contract or agreement
shall control and regulate the employment. In every case where such agreement
is entered into, the public mover shall furnish the person with whom he or she
contracts a written memorandum, to be signed by both parties or their
responsible and authorized representatives, setting forth clearly the terms of
the contract. This memorandum shall be upon blanks to be approved by the
Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses.
§ 679.18 License Revocation; Appeal
   A license may be revoked by the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses for
a second violation, within the term of the license, of ordinances and laws
applying to such license. The Commissioner, ten (10) days before such
revocation, shall notify the licensee in writing of reasons for such proposed
revocation and the licensee shall have the right of appeal therefrom in the
manner stated in Section
679.05.
§ 679.99 Penalty
   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this chapter
or does anything declared herein to be unlawful shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and fined not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than fifty
dollars ($50.00). The second conviction of a person, firm or corporation
engaged in the business of moving household goods or personal effects in bulk,
or pianos, for hire in the City shall cause a revocation of the license granted
to such person, firm or corporation. Thereafter no such person, firm or
corporation shall carry on such business in the City during the remainder of
the period of time for which such license was granted.
CHAPTER 679A – DONATION BOXES
679A.01   Definitions
679A.02   General Prohibition on Placement
679A.03   Registration and Permit Application, Renewal and Fee
679A.04   Standards
679A.05   Location and Maximum Number of Boxes Per Property
679A.06   Correction Orders and Removal
679A.07   Disposition of Impounded Donation Box
679A.99   Penalty
§ 679A.01 Definitions
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   "Donation box" means a receptacle designed with a door, slot, or other
opening that is intended to accept and store donated items, such as, but not
limited to, clothing or household items. The definition of a donation box shall
not include trailers where personnel are present to accept donations at all
times that the trailer is present and accepting donated items.
   (b)   "Owner" means a person or an agent or officer of a person in whom is
vested ownership, dominion, control or title of a donation box.
(Ord. No. 976-13. Passed 9-30-13, eff. 1-1-14)
§ 679A.02 General Prohibition on Placement
   No owner of a donation box shall place or maintain a donation box on any
property in the City of Cleveland unless such owner shall register with and
obtain a permit for such donation box from the Commissioner of Assessments and
Licenses in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. A donation box
located inside of a building shall not require a permit.
(Ord. No. 976-13. Passed 9-30-13, eff. 1-1-14)
§ 679A.03 Registration and Permit Application, Renewal and Fee
   (a)   Eligibility. The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses shall not
issue a permit to any donation box owner who:
      (1)   is not a tax-exempt organization under 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3);
      (2)   does not maintain a donation box in accordance with the physical
standards established under Section
679A.04;
      (3)   would otherwise as a result of such approval be in violation of a
prohibited location or maximum under Section
679A.05; or
      (4)   is subject to any correction or removal order under Section
679A.06.
   (b)   Before placing a donation box on any property in the City of
Cleveland, the owner of the donation box shall file a permit application with
the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses containing the following:
      (1)   The name, address, phone, fax and e-mail of the owner;
      (2)   The name, address, phone, fax and e-mail of a person or persons
primarily responsible for placing, emptying, servicing, maintaining, and
removing the donation box;
      (3)   A one hundred dollar ($100.00) fee, per donation box, which shall
not be prorated based upon the time of the year the permit application is
filed;
      (4)   The name and address of the party in control of the private
property upon which the donation box will be placed, and written authorization
from the party in control of the private property, including the terms of its
placement by lease or otherwise;
      (5)   Such other information or material as the Commissioner may require.
   (c)   The Commissioner shall refer all permit applications to the Director
of Building and Housing for review and approval. The Director of Building and
Housing shall not approve the application unless he or she finds that no
provisions of the City's Building Code or Zoning Code will be violated by
issuance of the permit, including without limitation the following:
      (1)   Set back requirements;
      (2)   Use restrictions;
      (3)   Those portions of the Zoning Code that require that a specified
number of parking spaces be available for the use of a particular business.
   (d)   Permit Term. Permits shall be valid from the date of issuance until
September 30th of each year. Prior to expiration of a permit, any owner who
intends to place, display or maintain a donation box shall obtain a new permit
for the next calendar year.
(Ord. No. 976-13. Passed 9-30-13, eff. 1-1-14)
§ 679A.04 Standards
   Every donation box shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition and in
good repair at all times. Specifically, but without limiting the forgoing, each
donation box shall be serviced and maintained so that it is free of dirt and
grease, free of chipped, faded, peeling, and cracked paint, free of rust and
corrosion, and free of cracks, dents, blemishes, and discoloration. Donation
boxes shall be emptied regularly and within forty-eight (48) hours of the
primary contact person being notified by any City official that the box is
full. Each donation box shall clearly state the name, address, and phone number
of the charity to which the donated items will benefit.
(Ord. No. 976-13. Passed 9-30-13, eff. 1-1-14)
§ 679A.05 Location and Maximum Number of Boxes Per Property
   (a)   No person shall place or maintain and no property owner or tenant
shall permit or maintain any donation box in any location that obstructs the
sight lines of vehicular traffic.
   (b)   No more than two (2) outdoor donation boxes shall be permitted on any
parcel of property.
(Ord. No. 976-13. Passed 9-30-13, eff. 1-1-14)
§ 679A.06 Correction Orders and Removal
   (a)   Upon determination of the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses
that a donation box has been placed or is being maintained in violation of this
chapter, an order to correct the offending condition shall be served on the
donation box owner or primary contact person designated by the permit holder by
certified mail. If no permit application for the donation box has been filed
with the City, as required by Section
679A.03, the order shall be served on the party in control of the property in
person or by certified mail. The order shall describe the offending condition
and actions necessary to correct the condition. The order shall provide that
the permit holder shall correct the offending condition within five (5)
business days after receipt of the order, or to file an appeal from the order
with the Board of Zoning Appeals. If a violation is neither remedied nor
appealed within the time period set forth in the Order, the Commissioner shall
transmit notification to the Director of Public Works who thereafter may
impound the donation box that has been determined to be in violation of this
Chapter.
   (b)   Appeals of a person adversely affected by any order, requirement,
decision or determination by the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses under
this chapter, including a denial of a permit, shall be heard and decided by the
Board of Zoning Appeals. The Board may affirm, disaffirm, or grant exception
from the order, requirement, decision or determination from which the appeal
has been taken. If the Board affirms an order of the Commissioner issued
pursuant to division (a) of this section, the owner shall have three (3)
working days to correct the violation or remove the donation box in question;
if the owner fails to correct the violation within that time, the Commissioner
shall transmit notification to the Director of Public Works who thereafter may
impound the donation box. Within two (2) days of the date of an impoundment
made pursuant to this division, notice of the impoundment, including the
reasons therefor shall be served by certified mail to the donation box owner or
primary contact person designated by the permit holder. If no permit
application for the donation box has been filed with the City, as required by
Section
679A.03, the notice of impoundment shall be served on the party in control of
the property in person or by certified mail.
(Ord. No. 976-13. Passed 9-30-13, eff. 1-1-14)
§ 679A.07 Disposition of Impounded Donation Box
   Unless the donation box and its contents are being held as evidence in a
criminal prosecution, the owner of a donation box may, at any time after
impoundment, recover the donation box and its contents upon payment of an
impound fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) plus the reasonable additional
costs, if any, of impounding the donation box, including a storage charge of
one dollar ($1.00) per box per day for each day in excess of five (5) working
days after notification is given to the owner that the donation box is in the
possession of the City.
(Ord. No. 976-13. Passed 9-30-13, eff. 1-1-14)
§ 679A.99 Penalty
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a fourth
degree misdemeanor on the first offense, a misdemeanor of the third degree on
the second offense, and a misdemeanor of the first degree on the third and any
subsequent offense. Each day during which noncompliance or a violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 976-13. Passed 9-30-13, eff. 1-1-14)
CHAPTER 680 – NEWSPAPER DISPENSING DEVICES
680.01   Definitions
680.02   General Prohibition on Placement
680.03   Notice of Location; Permit Application; Insurance; Renewal; Fee
680.04   Permits
680.05   Criteria for Installation, Placement and Maintenance of Newspaper
Dispensing Devices
680.051   Exceptions to Newspaper Dispensing Devices Color; Maintenance, and
Identification Criteria
680.06   Violation Notice; Hearing; Appeal; Removal; Abandonment
680.07   Disposition of Impounded Newspaper Dispensing Devices
§ 680.01 Definitions
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   “Crosswalk” means that part of a street at intersections which is
ordinarily included within the projected prolongation of property and curb
lines, or, in the absence of curbs, the edges of the traversable roadway; or
any portion of a street at an intersection or elsewhere, distinctly indicated
for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the street surface.
   (b)   “Director” means the Director of Public Service.
   (c)   “Group of newspaper dispensing devices” means any two (2), three (3)
or four (4), five (5) or six (6) adjacent newspaper dispensing devices.
   (d)   “Newspaper dispensing device” means any self-service or coin-operated
box, container, storage unit or dispenser installed, used, or maintained for
the display, distribution and sale of newspapers, periodicals or other
publications.
   (e)   “Owner” means a person or an agent or officer of a person in whom is
vested ownership, dominion, control or title of a newspaper dispensing device.
   (f)   “Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company, organization or legal entity of any kind.
   (g)   “Public right-of-way” means any way which has been deeded to the
public or dedicated to the public use for pedestrian or vehicular travel.
   (h)   “Roadway” means that portion of a street intended for the use of
vehicular travel.
   (i)   “Sidewalk” means that portion of a street between the curb line or the
lateral line of the roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for the
use of pedestrians.
   (j)   “Street” means the entire width between the boundary lines of every
way open to the use of the public as a thoroughfare for purposes of pedestrian
and vehicular travel.
   (k)   “Traffic Sign” means any sign placed or erected by a public body or
official for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding vehicular travel,
excluding “no parking” and “no stopping” signs.
(Ord. No. 1375-02. Passed 11-25-02, eff. 12-3-02)
§ 680.02 General Prohibition on Placement
   No person shall install, place or maintain a newspaper dispensing device
within the public right-of- way unless a permit has been previously issued
therefor in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 1953-B-85. Passed 1-26-87, eff. 1-29-87)
§ 680.03 Notice of Location; Permit Application; Insurance; Renewal; Fee
   (a)   Before the installation or placement of a newspaper dispensing device
within the public right-of- way, the owner of the device shall file a permit
application with the Director containing the following information:
      (1)   The name, address, and telephone number of the owner;
      (2)   The name, address, and telephone number of the individual or other
person to whom the City shall serve in person or by mail any notice or order
required by this chapter;
      (3)   A sketch and narrative indicating the location and dimensions of
each newspaper dispensing device for which permit application is being made,
with sufficient detail to enable the Director to verify that the installation
and placement of a newspaper dispensing device in accordance with the permit
application will meet the criteria contained in Section
680.05.
   (b)   One (1) application may be submitted to include any number of
newspaper dispensing devices and shall be signed by the owner.
   (c)   A twenty-five dollar ($25.00) fee for each newspaper dispensing device
must accompany the permit application to defray the expenses incident to the
administration of the provisions of this chapter.
   (d)   In addition to submitting the permit application and fee required by
divisions (a) and (c) of this section, the owner of a newspaper dispensing
device who seeks a permit shall:
      (1)   Provide the Director with the insurance documentation required by
division (e) of this section; and
      (2)   Demonstrate to the Director’s satisfaction that the device weighs
at least one hundred sixty (160) pounds when empty.
   (e)   The owner of each newspaper dispensing device shall hold the City
harmless from any and all liability, for any reason whatsoever, occasioned upon
the installation and use of each device, other than liability arising from any
negligent act or omission which is solely attributable to the City, and shall
furnish, at the owner’s expense, commercial general liability insurance as
shall protect the owner and the City from all claims for damage to property or
bodily injury, including death, which may arise from operation under the permit
or in connection therewith. The policy shall include the City as an additional
insured, shall be in an amount of not less than one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) combined single limit for any injury to persons and/or damage to
property. A certificate of the insurance shall be provided to the City with the
applications referred to in divisions (a) and (h) of this section and the
required insurance coverage shall be maintained before and during the
installation of the device and throughout the period that the permit for the
device is in effect.
   (f)   Permits shall be issued by the Director under Section
680.04. Permits so issued shall be valid for a period of one (1) year, or any
portion of a year. Permits shall expire on the last day of April of each year.
   (g)   The owner must promptly notify the Director in writing of any change
in the information required by division (a) of this section. If the owner
proposes to change the location of a newspaper dispensing device, a new permit
application, together with a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) fee to defray the
expenses incident to the administration of the provisions of this chapter, must
be filed prior to the change in location.
   (h)   Every owner desiring to renew a newspaper dispensing device permit
shall file a permit renewal application with the Director containing the
information required by division (a) of this section. A permit renewal
application must be filed no sooner than forty (40) days prior to the date of
expiration of the existing permit and no later than the date of expiration of
the existing permit. A twenty-five dollar ($25.00) fee for each newspaper
dispensing device must accompany each permit renewal application to defray the
expenses incident to the administration of this chapter.
   (i)   If the number of permit applications exceed the number of newspaper
dispensing devices which may be placed adjacent to each other and which are
otherwise permissible under division (a) of Section
680.05, the Director shall determine which of the newspaper dispensing devices
comply with the requirement based upon the order in which the permit
applications were filed under this section.
(Ord. No. 599-11. Passed 6-6-11, eff. 6-13-11)
§ 680.04 Permits
   Upon receipt of the information and documentation required by Section
680.03, payment of the required fees to the Director and verification by the
Director that the installation and placement of a newspaper dispensing device
in accordance with the permit application will meet the criteria contained in
Section
680.05, a permit shall be issued or renewed for each newspaper dispensing
device. All permits shall be issued, renewed or denied within fifteen (15)
working days of the filing of the permit application. The permit shall indicate
the location of the newspaper dispensing device for which the permit has been
issued. Notice of a permit denial shall be served in person or by certified
mail to the individual or other person identified in the permit application as
required by division (a)(2) of Section
680.03. Any permit issued pursuant to this section shall not be assigned or
transferred to any other owner of a newspaper dispensing device.
(Ord. No. 2436-A-90. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 6-20-91)
§ 680.05 Criteria for Installation, Placement and Maintenance of Newspaper
Dispensing Devices
   (a)   Location. No newspaper dispensing device shall be installed, placed or
maintained:
      (1)   in such manner as to rest, in whole or in part, in, on or over any
portion of a roadway;
      (2)   in One-Family, Two-Family or Multi- Family districts of the City
except in the vicinity of public bus stops and public bus shelters in
accordance with the following:
         A.   where there is a concrete pad underlying a public bus stop which
has no shelter, a newspaper dispensing device or devices may be placed within
two (2) feet of that edge of the concrete pad which is perpendicular to the
curb edge of the roadway and furthest forward in the direction of traffic on
the street (the “leading edge”). In the event that a bus company installs a
concrete pad at a public bus stop where there is no shelter and subsequently
makes application to the City to install a shelter upon that pad, any permit
which has been issued for a newspaper dispensing device which is located upon
that pad and which will not comply with the distance requirements contained in
division (a)(2)B. of this section after installation of the shelter shall
terminate upon notice from the City that the City has issued to the bus company
a permit to erect a shelter;
         B.   where there is a concrete pad underlying a shelter at a public
bus stop, a newspaper dispensing device or devices may be placed within two (2)
feet of the leading edge of the concrete pad, provided that such placement will
result in a clear space of five (5) feet along the entire width of the pad
between the shelter and the newspaper dispensing device or devices;
         C.   The requirement set forth in division (a)(12) of this section
shall not apply to any newspaper dispensing device which is in compliance with
division (a)(2)A. or (a)(2)B. of this section;
         D.   Notwithstanding the provisions at the end of this division (a), a
newspaper dispensing device which is in compliance with division (a)(2)A. or
(a)(2)B. of this section may be placed more than thirty- six (36) inches from
the curb edge of the roadway;
      (3)   within five (5) feet of any crosswalk; provided that in cases where
there is a handicapped ramp to the street adjacent to a crosswalk, the five (5)
feet required by this division shall be measured from the edge of the
handicapped ramp that is furthest from the crosswalk;
      (4)   within five (5) feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box or police
call box;
      (5)   within five (5) feet of any driveway;
      (6)   except in One-Family, Two-Family, or Multi-Family Districts:
         A.   where there is no bus shelter at a bus stop, within forty (40)
feet back of a sign identifying a particular bus company or bus route number
and marking a designated bus stop;
         B.   where there is a bus shelter at a bus stop, within five (5) feet
forward and forty (40) feet back of the end of the shelter that is closest to
the sign identifying a particular bus company or bus route number and marking a
designated bus stop;
      (7)   within three (3) feet of any traffic sign;
      (8)   within three (3) feet of any public utility pole, provided further
that placement adjacent to a public utility pole shall be limited to one (1)
side of the pole;
      (9)   within that portion of the sidewalk parallel to an area designated
for handicapped parking, a taxi stand or a commercial loading or unloading
zone;
      (10)   within the entire width of the area that is included in the
prolongation, projected to the curb or the edge of the traversable roadway, or
any primary entrance of a building; provided that for purposes of this
division, a “primary entrance” is a building entrance with more than one (1)
multi-leafed door;
      (11)   within three hundred (300) feet of any other newspaper dispensing
device on the same side of the street in the same block which contains the same
issue or edition of the same newspaper periodical or other publication;
      (12)   within three (3) feet of any public area improved with lawn,
flowers, shrubs, trees, tree wells or tree grates;
      (13)   on a manhole cover, pull box or any other area of access to
underground utilities;
      (14)   on either side of East 6th Street between Euclid Avenue and
Superior Avenue and on either side of East 9th Street between Prospect Avenue
and Lakeside Avenue, where the continuous, undivided space for the passageway
of pedestrians is reduced to less than twelve (12) feet, and in all other
areas, where the continuous, undivided space for the passageway of pedestrians
is reduced to less than six (6) feet; and
      (15)   in a manner that unreasonably blocks, obstructs or restricts the
free passage of pedestrians in the lawful use of the sidewalk.
   In the Central Business District, except as noted below, newspaper
dispensing devices shall not be permitted to be located alone and shall be
placed in a group of newspaper dispensing devices adjacent to each other
provided that no more than six (6) newspaper dispensing devices are adjacent to
each other. For purposes of this provision, “adjacent” means flush against each
other. If there is no group of newspaper dispensing devices within three
hundred (300) feet of a proposed location for a single newspaper dispensing
device, then that single device may stand alone subject to all other location
restrictions. The prohibition on the location of single newspaper dispensing
devices also shall not apply if the proposed single newspaper dispensing device
is on the opposite side of the street or on a different block from the group.
No group of newspaper dispensing devices shall be placed within fifty (50) feet
of any other group of newspaper dispensing devices or single newspaper
dispensing device. If an owner proposes a location in the Central Business
District in which that owners’ newspaper dispensing device would be standing
alone, the Director shall notify that owner of the nearest group of dispensing
devices.
   Outside of the Central Business District, newspaper dispensing devices may
be placed adjacent to each other provided that no more than four (4) newspaper
dispensing devices are adjacent to each other. For purposes of this provision,
“adjacent” means flush against each other. No group of newspaper dispensing
devices shall be placed within fifty (50) feet of any other group of newspaper
dispensing devices.
   When a person requests the placement of a newspaper dispensing device
outside of the Central Business District, the Director must send notice of such
request to the councilmember of the ward in which the requested newspaper
dispensing box is to be placed.
   Newspaper dispensing devices shall be placed parallel to a curb, shall face
away from the roadway and shall be placed no less than twenty-four (24) inches
and no further than thirty-six (36) inches from the curb edge of the roadway.
   (b)   Installation; Removal. Newspaper dispensing devices shall be anchored
to the sidewalk by a method approved by the Director of Capital Projects and
shall not be cabled or chained or otherwise attached to any object or building
except to any other newspaper dispensing devices. Upon removal of a newspaper
dispensing device, the owner of such device shall be responsible for repairing
any damage to the sidewalk caused by the installation or placement of such
device. The extent of the repairs to the sidewalk shall be determined by the
Director, provided that any such determination may be appealed to and reviewed
by the Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance with the requirements contained in
Section
680.06.
   (c)   Size; Color; Maintenance. Except as may be temporarily permitted under
Section
680.051, all newspaper dispensing devices shall:
      (1)   not exceed fifty (50) inches in height, twenty (20) inches in width
or twenty (20) inches in depth;
      (2)   be white in color and be of one (1) of the two (2) designs which
have been approved and are on file with the City Planning Commission, one (1)
of which shall be a size which accommodates full sheet publications (the “full
sheet device”) and one (1) of which shall be a size which accommodates tabloid
publications (the “tabloid device”);
      (3)   have a functioning coin return mechanism if a fee is charged;
      (4)   have affixed in a readily visible place a permit sticker and a
notice setting forth the title, address and telephone number of a responsible
officer or agent of the owner to contact to report a malfunction of the coin
return mechanism;
      (5)   be maintained in a properly functioning, clean, neat and attractive
condition, free of rust;
      (6)   not be used for advertising, signs or publicity purposes other than
for the display, sale or purchase of the newspaper, periodical or publication
therein; and
      (7)   not be stacked one on top of another.
   (d)   Identification Signs.
      (1)   The name of the publication using either the full sheet device or
the tabloid device may be displayed within an area that is fifteen (15) inches
in width and twelve (12) inches in height on the rear of the device. The letter
size in this area shall not be larger than four (4) inches, the font shall be
Univers and the color shall be PMS 300, a.k.a. Blue Scotchlite Ink 883, or its
equivalent.
      (2)   On the front of the full sheet device, the name of the publication
using the device may be displayed within an area that is fifteen (15) inches in
width and twelve (12) inches in height. On the front of a tabloid device, the
name of the publication using the device may be displayed within an area that
is twelve and one-half (12-1/2) inches in width and eleven (11) inches in
height. On either the full sheet device or the tabloid device, this area shall
be called the “frontal area”.
      (3)   The frontal area of any device may be configured as a slip panel to
accommodate changeable advertising related only to the publication or its non-
commercial contents.
      (4)   No publication may display its name or any other materials on the
sides of the device.
   (e)   The City Planning Commission shall create a special district for
newspaper dispensing devices on Public Square because of the unique pedestrian
and vehicular traffic patterns thereon. The Commission’s resolution effecting
the creation of such district shall specify the design or designs of newspaper
dispensing devices within the district and the locations within the district
upon which newspaper dispensing devices may be located, notwithstanding any
other provisions of this section to the contrary. In determining the specific
locations of newspaper dispensing devices within the district, the City
Planning Commission shall apply standards that are no more restrictive, and may
be less restrictive, than the provisions of division (a) of this section. The
provisions of this section shall apply to all newspaper dispensing devices on
Public Square. For purposes of this division, “Public Square” means the four
(4) quadrants of Public Square and the sidewalks on either side of the roadways
that bound and that intersect said quadrants.
   (f)   (1)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in division
(a)(2)B., (a)(6)B., (c)(1), (c)(2) or (c)(7) of this section, newspaper
dispensing devices may be installed, placed, and maintained directly adjacent
to and flush against that side of a public bus shelter which is perpendicular
to the curb edge of the roadway and furthest forward in the direction of
traffic on the street (the “downstream side”); provided, however, that if more
than one (1) owner desires to install a device at any one (1) public bus
shelter, only multiple-dispensing-device modular units may be installed,
placed, and maintained at such location. No modular unit shall be installed
unless and until the City Planning Commission has approved the design thereof.
Where more than one (1) newspaper dispensing device is located in the vicinity
of the downstream side of a public bus shelter as of January 1, 1991, said
devices may be moved adjacent to the downstream side of the shelter until such
time as the City Planning Commission approves the design of a modular unit for
that location. Owners installing modular units shall be responsible for their
maintenance and shall purchase such units on terms and conditions upon which
said owners mutually agree. Newspaper dispensing devices or modular units
installed and maintained directly adjacent to the downstream side of public bus
shelters may be placed so that the front of the device is perpendicular to or
at an angle to the roadway; so long as such device or modular unit is placed
adjacent to the downstream side of the shelter.
      (2)   If a bus company presents to the City Planning Commission a bus
shelter design which incorporates newspaper dispensing devices or a modular
frame therefor into the bus shelter, and if the City Planning Commission
approves said design, the following shall not apply to any newspaper dispensing
device which is incorporated into any such bus shelter or inserted into any
such modular frame, provided that the bus shelter is installed pursuant to a
permit duly issued by the City:
         A.   the weight requirements contained in division (d)(2) of Section
680.03;
         B.   the distance requirements contained in divisions (a)(2)B., (a)
(6)B., and (a)(12) of this section; and
         C.   the design requirements contained in divisions (c)(1), (c)(2),
and (c)(7) of this section.
   (g)   Subject to the provisions of the following sentences in this division
and notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in divisions (a)(2)A. or
(a)(2)B. of this section, if a newspaper dispensing device is in place on a
concrete pad at a public bus stop or public bus shelter in a One-, Two-, or
Multi-Family District as of January 1, 1991, and if said device would otherwise
not be permitted to remain at such location because the concrete pad is of
insufficient size to accommodate the placement of such device in accordance
with the provisions of divisions (a)(2)A. or (a)(2)B. of this section, said
device may remain at the location it occupied as of January 1, 1991 until such
time as the concrete pad underlying such public stop or public bus shelter is
extended by the bus company and the pad is of sufficient size to accommodate
the placement of such device. Any newspaper dispensing device that is permitted
to remain at a public bus stop or public bus shelter as a result of the
provisions of this division shall be removed by its owner if a public bus
company installs a shelter on the concrete pad underlying a public bus stop or
enlarges an existing shelter unless:
      (1)   the bus company enlarges the concrete pad underlying the public bus
stop or bus shelter sufficiently to accommodate placement of the device in
accordance with division (a)(2)A. or (a)(2)B. of this section; or
      (2)   the owner of the device extends the bus company’s concrete pad
sufficiently to accommodate placement of the device in accordance with division
(a)(2)A. or (a)(2)B. of this section. In the event that the owner installs such
an extension:
         A.   the owner shall be responsible for maintaining the extension of
the concrete pad; and
         B.   if the owner removes the device, the owner shall promptly:
            1.   remove the extension of the concrete pad and restore the
property underlying said extension to its condition prior to the installation
of the extension; or
            2.   transfer its interest in the extension of the concrete pad to
another owner on terms and conditions upon which the two (2) owners mutually
agree; or
            3.   transfer its interest in the extension of the concrete pad to
the public bus company on terms and conditions upon which the owner and the
public bus company mutually agree;
provided that the Directors of Capital Projects and City Planning may, in their
sole discretion, permit such concrete pad to remain in place, absent a transfer
of interest pursuant to paragraph (2)B.2. or (2)B.3. of this division, upon
such terms and conditions as said Directors mutually agree.
   (h)   Subject to the provisions of the following sentences in this division
and notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in divisions (a)(6) or
(a)(12) of this section, if a newspaper dispensing device is in place on a
concrete pad at a public bus stop or public bus shelter outside of the Central
Business District as of January 1, 1991, and if such device would otherwise not
be permitted to remain in the vicinity because a relocation of said device in
order to comply with the distance requirements of this section would result in
the placement of said device at a prohibited location, said device may remain
at the location it occupied as of January 1, 1991. Any newspaper dispensing
device that is permitted to remain at a public bus stop or public bus shelter
as a result of the provisions of this division shall be removed by its owner if
a public bus company installs a shelter on the concrete pad underlying a public
bus stop or enlarges an existing shelter unless:
      (1)   the bus company enlarges the concrete pad underlying the public bus
stop or bus shelter sufficiently to accommodate placement of the device in
accordance with division (a)(2)A. or (a)(2)B. of this section; or
      (2)   the owner of the device extends the bus company's concrete pad
sufficiently to accommodate placement of the device in accordance with division
(a)(2)A. or (a)(2)B. of this section. In the event that the owner installs such
an extension:
         A.   the owner shall be responsible for maintaining the extension of
the concrete pad; and
         B.   if the owner removes the device, the owner shall promptly:
            1.   remove the extension of the concrete pad and restore the
property underlying said extension to its condition prior to the installation
of the extension; or
            2.   transfer its interest in the extension of the concrete pad to
another owner on terms and conditions upon which the two (2) owners mutually
agree; or
            3.   transfer its interest in the extension of the concrete pad to
the public bus company on terms and conditions upon which the owner and the
public bus company mutually agree;
provided that the Directors of Capital Projects and City Planning may, in their
sole discretion, permit such concrete pad to remain in place, absent a transfer
of interest pursuant to paragraph (2)B.2. or (2)B.3. of this division, upon
such terms and conditions as said Directors mutually agree.
   (i)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in division (a)
(6)A. or (a)(8) of this section, any newspaper dispensing device that is in
place at a public bus stop and at least six (6) inches forward of a bus company
sign which is located on a utility pole as of January 1, 1991, but that would
not be permitted to remain at such location because of the requirements of
division (a)(8) of this section, may remain at such location until such time as
the bus sign is moved so as to allow sufficient space for the newspaper
dispensing device to be located forward of the sign without violating any
provision of this section; and, other than on Euclid Avenue, any newspaper
dispensing device that is in place more than eight (8) feet back of a bus
company sign at a public bus stop as of January 1, 1991 may remain at such
location until such time as the bus sign is moved so as to allow sufficient
space for the newspaper dispensing device to be located forward of the sign
without violating any provision of this section.
(Ord. No. 407-12. Passed 3-26-12, eff. 3-29-12)
§ 680.051 Exceptions to Newspaper Dispensing Devices Color; Maintenance, and
Identification Criteria
   (a)   Notwithstanding and as an exception to divisions (c) and (d) of
Section
680.05, the Director of Capital Projects, with prior concurrence of the
Director of City Planning, may approve, based upon an application from the
owner of a Newspaper Dispensing Device (“Device”), a change, for a temporary
period not longer than six (6) months, to the appearance and/or identification
of the device that those divisions prescribe if the Directors determine that
the proposed change will serve a civic purpose. The application shall be
submitted no less than thirty (30) days prior to the first date on which a
changed Device would be displayed at its location and shall include, at least,
for the Device:
      (1)   The reason for the change(s) to the Device for which approval is
requested;
      (2)   The specific location and identification of the Device and a copy
of or all information on the permit sticker affixed to the Device;
      (3)   The first and last dates of the continuous temporary period during
which the owner desires to display the changed Device;
      (4)   The name, title, address, telephone number(s), and e-mail address
of the responsible officer, agent, or other contact person of the Device owner;
      (5)   A color photograph of the Device at its location taken within sixty
(60) days prior to the application and from a distance sufficient to see both
its detail and the streetscape context in which it is placed; and
      (6)   A detailed color representation of the changed appearance and/or
identification of the Device requested or its design.
   (b)   Upon expiration of the approved temporary period for display of a
changed Device, the owner shall immediately restore the Device to its former
appearance and/or identification and location, or other appearance and/or
identification that complies with Section
680.05. If the owner fails to do so, the City may remove and store the Device
in the City’s custody, at the owner’s sole liability and costs fixed by the
Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses, until the owner restores or replaces
it with a complying Device. The City shall exercise reasonable care in removing
and storing a Device under this division (b) but shall have no liability for
the condition of the Device or any damage to it in connection with removal and
storage.
(Ord. No. 407-12. Passed 3-26-12, eff. 3-29-12)
   Note: Pursuant to Section 4 of Ord. No. 407-12, the provisions of this
section would have expired and would have been of no further force and effect
six months after the date of passage; however, Section 4 of Ord. No. 407-12 was
repealed by Ord. No. 1459-12, passed 11-26-12 and effective 11-28-12.
§ 680.06 Violation Notice; Hearing; Appeal; Removal; Abandonment
   (a)   Upon a determination by the Director that a newspaper dispensing
device has been installed, placed, or maintained in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter or of any regulation promulgated by the Director
pursuant thereto, the Director shall issue an order to remedy the violation.
The order shall be served in person or by certified mail to the individual or
other person identified in the permit application as required by division (a)
(2) of Section
680.03. If no permit application for the newspaper dispensing device has been
filed within the City, as required by Section
680.03, the order shall be served on the owner in person or by certified mail.
The order shall state the nature of the violation and provide that the owner
has seven (7) calendar days after receipt of the order to remedy the violation
or to file an appeal from the order with the Board of Zoning Appeals.
   (b)   If a violation is neither remedied nor appealed within the time period
set forth in the order issued pursuant to division (a) of this section, the
newspaper dispensing device which has been determined to be in violation may be
impounded by the Director.
   (c)   Following the remedying of a violation or the reinstallation of a
newspaper dispensing device after impoundment, the Director shall cause the
newspaper dispensing device to be inspected. In addition to all other fees and
charges required under this chapter, the owner of the newspaper dispensing
device shall be charged a one dollar ($1.00) inspection fee for each such
device so inspected.
   (d)   Appeals of a person adversely affected by any order, requirement,
decision or determination by the Director under this chapter, including a
denial of a permit pursuant to Section
680.04, shall be heard and decided by the Board of Zoning Appeals. The Board
shall commence to hear the merits of an appeal within thirty (30) days of the
filing of an appeal. The Board shall render a decision within ten (10) days of
the date of the hearing, which decision may affirm, disaffirm, or grant
exception from the order, requirement, decision or determination from which the
appeal has been taken. If the Board affirms an order of the Director issued
pursuant to division (a) of this section, the owner shall have three (3)
working days to correct the violation or remove the newspaper dispensing device
in question; if the owner fails to correct the violation within that time, the
newspaper dispensing device may be impounded by the Director.
   (e)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the Director
shall take immediate steps necessary to remove and impound any newspaper
dispensing device upon the Director’s determination that such device has been
installed, placed or maintained in a manner which presents a clear and present
danger to the public health or safety. Within two (2) days of the date of an
impoundment made pursuant to this division, notice of the impoundment including
the reasons therefor shall be served in person or by certified mail to the
individual or other person identified in the permit application as required by
division (a)(2) of Section
680.03. If no permit application for the newspaper dispensing device has been
filed with the City, the order shall be served on the owner in person or by
certified mail. The owner of the impounded newspaper dispensing device may file
an appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals which shall commence to hear the
merits of such an appeal at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Board
provided that such meeting is no less than three (3) days after the filing of
an appeal in which event the appeal shall be heard at the following regularly
scheduled meeting of the Board. The Board shall render a decision at or before
the first regularly scheduled meeting of the Board following the hearing of the
appeal. If the Board reverses the Director’s order to impound, the Board shall
order an immediate return of the newspaper dispensing device and its contents
to the owner without assessment of an impoundment fee or other costs.
   (f)   In the event a newspaper dispensing device remains empty for a period
of at least thirty (30) consecutive days, said device shall be deemed
abandoned. The Director may treat an abandoned device in the same manner as
provided in this section for newspaper dispensing devices which are determined
to be in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 2436-A-90. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 6-20-91)
§ 680.07 Disposition of Impounded Newspaper Dispensing Devices
   Unless the newspaper dispensing device and its contents are being held as
evidence in a criminal prosecution, the owner of an impounded newspaper
dispensing device may, at any time after impoundment, recover the newspaper
dispensing device upon payment of an impound fee of twenty-five dollars
($25.00) plus the reasonable additional costs, if any, of impounding the
newspaper dispensing device, including a storage charge of one dollar ($1.00)
per device per day for each day in excess of five (5) working days after
notification is given to the owner that said device is in the possession of the
City. Unless the contents of the newspaper dispensing device are being held as
evidence in a criminal prosecution, the owner of the contents of an impounded
newspaper dispensing device may recover those contents at any time after
impoundment.
(Ord. No. 2436-A-90. Passed 6-17-91, eff. 6-20-91)
CHAPTER 680A – CIGARETTE ADVERTISING ON PUBLICLY VISIBLE LOCATIONS
680A.01   General Requirements
680A.99   Penalty
§ 680A.01 General Requirements
   (a)   Cigarette Advertisements. No person may place or display any sign,
poster, placard, device, graphic display, or other form of advertising that
advertises cigarettes in a publicly visible location or at any location visible
from a sidewalk, street, or highway. As used in this section, “Publicly Visible
Location” includes outdoor billboards, sides of buildings, roofs of buildings,
and freestanding signboards.
   (b)   This section shall not apply to the following:
      (1)   The placement or display of signs, including advertisements:
         A.   Inside any building used by a holder of cigarette business
“license” as prescribed in RC 5743.15 and intended to be read from inside the
building; or
         B.   On commercial vehicles used for transporting cigarettes.
      (2)   Any banners, inflatable signs, or pennants located at a special
event, for which a temporary sign permit has been issued by the Division of
Building and Housing, provided that the temporary sign permit limits the
display of said banners, inflatable signs, or pennants to no more than fourteen
(14) calendar days.
      (3)   Any sign other than a neon or electrically charged sign that only
displays the word “cigarette(s)” without listing a brand name or price and
without use of accompanying artwork, photographs or other graphics.
      (4)   Any sign located:
         A.   In the Central Business District;
         B.   In the Flats-Oxbow Business Revitalization District;
         C.   In such manner that the advertisement on the sign is visible only
from the rights-of-way of Interstate Routes 71, 77, 90, 480 and 490; or
         D.   In an Unrestricted Industry District located more than one
thousand (1,000) feet from the boundary of any zone other than the Central
Business District, the Flats-Oxbow Business Revitalization District, or an
Unrestricted Industry District.
(Ord. No. 988-97. Passed 2-23-98, eff. 3-4-98)
   Note: Pursuant to Section 2 of Ord. No. 988-97, the provisions of Chapter
680A of the Codified Ordinances of Cleveland, Ohio, 1976, as enacted by this
ordinance, shall be effective as follows:
   From and after the effective date of this ordinance, no advertisement shall
be placed or displayed contrary to the provisions of this chapter, except that:
   (a)   For any advertisement placed or displayed pursuant to a contract
executed prior to the effective date of this ordinance, the provisions of this
chapter shall require the removal of such advertisement upon the expiration of
the current term of the contract, or one year after the effective date of this
ordinance, whichever is sooner.
   (b)   For any advertisement placed or displayed prior to the effective date
of this ordinance that is not being displayed pursuant to an existing
contractual commitment, the advertisement shall be removed within sixty (60)
days of the effective date of this ordinance.
§ 680A.99 Penalty
   Whoever violates the provisions of Section
680A.01 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or shall be sentenced to a prison term of six
(6) months, or both. Said fine or prison term shall not be suspended, waived,
or otherwise reduced below the amount or term indicated herein. Each day upon
which the violation of Section
680A.01 continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 988-97. Passed 2-23-98, eff. 3-4-98)
   Note: See Section 2 note from Ord. No. 988-97 under
680A.01.
CHAPTER 680B – ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE ADVERTISING ON PUBLICLY VISIBLE LOCATIONS
680B.01   General Requirements
680B.99   Penalty
§ 680B.01 General Requirements
   (a)   Alcoholic Beverage Advertisements. No person may place or display any
sign, poster, placard, device, graphic display, or other form of advertising
that advertises alcoholic beverages in a publicly visible location or at any
location visible from a sidewalk, street, or highway. As used in this section,
“Publicly Visible Location” includes outdoor billboards, sides of buildings,
roofs of buildings, and freestanding signboards.
   (b)   This section shall not apply to the following:
      (1)   The placement or display of signs, including advertisements:
         A.   Inside any building used by a holder of any liquor permit as
prescribed in RC Chapter 4303 and intended to be read from inside the building;
or
         B.   On commercial vehicles used for transporting alcoholic beverages;
or
         C.   In conjunction with a one (1) day liquor permit or a temporary
permit granted by the Liquor Control Commission.
      (2)   Any banners, inflatable signs, or pennants located at a special
event, for which a temporary sign permit has been issued by the Division of
Building and Housing, provided that the temporary sign permit limits the
display of said banners, inflatable signs, or pennants to no more than fourteen
(14) calendar days;
      (3)   Any sign placed in conformity with division (F) of OAC 4301:1-1-44.
Nothing in this section, however, shall abrogate any ordinance, rule or
regulation of the City concerning the total area of window space that may be
devoted to interior signs;
      (4)   Any sign located:
         A.   In the Central Business District;
         B.   In the Flats-Oxbow Business Revitalization District;
         C.   In such manner that the advertisement on the sign is visible only
from the rights-of-way of Interstate Routes 71, 77, 90, 480, and 490; or
         D.   In an Unrestricted Industry District located more than one
thousand (1,000) feet from the boundary of any zone other than the Central
Business District, the Flats-Oxbow Business Revitalization District, or an
Unrestricted Industry District.
(Ord. No. 989-97. Passed 2-23-98, eff. 3-4-98)
   Note: Pursuant to Section 2 of Ord. No. 989-97, the provisions of Chapter
680B of the Codified Ordinances of Cleveland, Ohio, 1976, as enacted by this
ordinance, shall be effective as follows:
   From and after the effective date of this ordinance, no advertisement shall
be placed or displayed contrary to the provisions of this chapter, except that:
   (a)   For any advertisement placed or displayed pursuant to a contract
executed prior to the effective date of this ordinance, the provisions of this
chapter shall require the removal of such advertisement upon the expiration of
the current term of the contract, or one year after the effective date of this
ordinance, whichever is sooner.
   (b)   For any advertisement placed or displayed prior to the effective date
of this ordinance that is not being displayed pursuant to an existing
contractual commitment, the advertisement shall be removed within sixty (60)
days of the effective date of this ordinance.
§ 680B.99 Penalty
   Whoever violates the provisions of Section
680B.01 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or shall be sentenced to a prison term of six
(6) months, or both. Said fine or prison term shall not be suspended, waived,
or otherwise reduced below the amount or term indicated herein. Each day upon
which the violation of Section
680B.01 continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 989-97. Passed 2-23-98, eff. 3-4-98)
   Note: See Section 2 note from Ord. No. 989-97 under
680B.01.
CHAPTER 681 – PAWNBROKERS
681.01   Definition
681.02   License Required; Application; Notice
681.03   License Issuance and Fee; Name
681.04   Licensee’s Bond
681.05   Register Required; Inspection
681.06   Daily Report by Licensee
681.07   Minimum Holding Period
681.08   Receipts
681.09   Interest and Storage Charges
681.10   Foreclosure; Sale; Notice
681.11   Hours of Operation
681.12   Prohibited Customers; Business Practices
681.13   Regulations for Mechanics’ Tools
681.14   License Revocation
681.99   Penalty
   Note: The legislative history of this chapter, except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 63410-A, passed
September 22, 1924.
Cross-reference:
   Falsification, CO
615.02
Statutory reference:
   Daily report to police, RC 4727.09
   General provisions, RC Ch. 4727
   License revocation, RC 2961.03
   Maximum interest and charges allowed, RC 4727.06
   Power to regulate, RC 715.61
   Purchase from minor, intoxicated person, or thief prohibited, RC 4727.10
§ 681.01 Definition
   As used in this chapter, “pawnbroker” means any person, firm or corporation
who lends money on deposit of pledges, personal property or purchases property
or choses in action on condition of selling them back again at a stipulated
price.
§ 681.02 License Required; Application; Notice
   No person, firm or corporation shall engage in or carry on the business of a
pawnbroker in the City until he or she has first obtained a license to engage
in and carry on such business. Every license applicant shall make an
application in writing to the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses, which
shall set forth the name under which the business is to be conducted, the name
of every person interested in the business and the location where the business
is to be carried on. The application must be made by the person or persons who
are to carry on the business and must contain references of at least two (2)
other residents of the City as to the character of the applicant or applicants.
The Commissioner shall cause notice of the filing of an application to be
published in the City Record at least twice, after which the Commissioner may
grant the application and issue a license.
§ 681.03 License Issuance and Fee; Name
   Licenses for carrying on the business of a pawnbroker shall be issued
annually and shall expire annually on September 30. The license fee shall be
five dollars ($5.00) for each year. The license shall contain the name under
which the business is to be conducted, the name of every person interested in
the business and the location where the business is to be carried on. Licenses
issued under this chapter shall not be transferable to any other person, and
the business may be conducted only at the location for which the license is
issued.
§ 681.04 Licensee’s Bond
   Every Licensee under this chapter shall execute and file a bond of five
hundred dollars ($500.00) with surety to the satisfaction of the Director of
Law that such licensee will conform to the requirements of City law and
ordinances.
§ 681.05 Register Required; Inspection
   A person so licensed shall keep a correct list and description, in a book
for that purpose, of each article pledged or deposited with him or her, or on
which advances of money have been made, or which has been purchased by him or
her. A pawnbroker shall not accept any deposit, pledge, or purchase without
first ascertaining the identity of the prospective depositor by being presented
a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification card
issued by the State of Ohio. The social security number, name, age and place of
residence of the depositor and the date and hour when the deposit was made
shall be entered and kept in the book for a period of not less than two (2)
years from the date of the deposit, pledge or purchase. The book shall also
contain any entry setting forth the interest to be charged on the amount of
money loaned. Entries shall be written in ink in the English language, and no
entry shall be erased, obliterated or defaced. The book shall be open to
inspection at all reasonable times by the Commissioner of Assessments and
Licenses, any person deputed by him or her, the Chief of Police, any police
officer deputed by him or her, the Mayor, or any person deputed by him or her.
Upon demand of any of such officials, the licensee shall produce and show any
article listed and described in the book, which is in his or her possession.
(Ord. No. 2704-A-90. Passed 6-15-92, eff. 6-24-92)
§ 681.06 Daily Report by Licensee
   Every licensed dealer shall on every weekday before 12:00 noon make out a
report on a blank to be furnished by the Division of Police for that purpose, a
legible and correct copy of the record required to be kept, containing a clear
description of all personal property, bonds, notes or other securities,
received on deposit or purchased during the preceding day, with the hour at
which the article was received, and a description of the person by whom it was
left in pledge, or from whom purchased. Such report shall be delivered to the
Chief of Police, or his or her authorized representative, or shall be mailed to
such address as the Chief may designate.
(Ord. No. 83022. Passed 10-22-28)
§ 681.07 Minimum Holding Period
   Bonds, notes, securities or personal property received on deposit, purchase
or pledge by a pawnbroker shall not be sold, redeemed or removed from his or
her place of business for twenty-four (24) hours after the copy and statement
provided in Section
681.06 have been delivered.
§ 681.08 Receipts
   A receipt shall be given to every pledger at the time the property is
received, which receipt shall contain the name and address of the pledger, a
description of the property received, the amount of money loaned, the rate of
interest, the date and hour when the property was received and the date when
the loan is due. When payments are made by the pledger, receipts for the
payments shall be given to him or her, which receipts shall show the amount
previously paid and the balance due.
§ 681.09 Interest and Storage Charges
   The rate of interest that may be charged on money advanced by pawnbrokers
shall not exceed the rate of one percent (1%) per month and shall be computed
on the amount of money actually advanced, and no interest shall be collected in
advance. A pawnbroker may charge one-half of one percent (0.5%) per month of
the amount of the money loaned to cover the cost of storage and insurance of
the articles pawned. The rate of interest and the percentage for storage and
insurance allowed to be charged in this chapter shall include all the
compensation the pawnbroker may receive. No other charges of any kind shall be
made except in the case of foreclosure.
§ 681.10 Foreclosure; Sale; Notice
   After the expiration of twelve (12) months after the maturity of the pledge
the pawnbroker may proceed to sell the pawned property in the manner provided
in this chapter. At least ten (10) days’ notice must be given the pledger by
mail before the date of sale and also a notice of the proposed sale shall be
published in a newspaper printed in and of general circulation within the City
at least once, which publication shall be made at least ten (10) days before
the date of sale. The sale shall be by public auction and by an auctioneer
approved by the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses. From the proceeds of
the sale there shall be deducted the amount of the loan, the accrued interest
and the expense of the sale and the balance shall be paid to the pledger.
§ 681.11 Hours of Operation
   A person so licensed shall not receive on deposit or purchase personal
property, bonds, notes, securities or articles, property or things before 6:00
a.m. nor after 8:00 p.m. during the months of January, February, March, April,
October, November and December of each year, or after 9:00 p.m. during the
months of May, June, July, August and September of each year.
§ 681.12 Prohibited Customers; Business Practices
   A person so licensed shall not take or receive in pawn or pledge for money
lent, or take, receive or purchase property, bonds, notes, securities or
articles from a minor, or the ownership of which is in or is claimed by a
minor, or may be in the possession or under the control of a minor, or a person
appearing to be intoxicated or known to be a thief or known to have been
convicted of larceny or burglary. A person so licensed shall not carry on
another business or avocation in the building in which pawnbroking is carried
on, nor employ a person under the age of sixteen (16) years to take pledges in
pawn.
§ 681.13 Regulations for Mechanics’ Tools
   When any person presents to any pawnbroker for the purpose of pledging the
same as security for a loan, any implements or tools commonly used by
mechanics, the pawnbroker shall require such person to give proof that he or
she is the owner of the tools so offered as a pledge. When the tools so offered
are stamped with the name or any initials or symbols the pawnbroker shall
require the person offering such tools or implements to produce the stamp by
which such name, initials or symbols were imprinted, or if unable to produce
such stamp, the person shall be required to establish his or her identity.
§ 681.14 License Revocation
   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses, upon conviction of a person
for the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or of any penal
statute relating to pawnbrokers, shall revoke his or her license.
§ 681.99 Penalty
   Any person either for himself or herself or as an officer, agent or employee
of any person, firm or corporation, who violates any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree and fined not less
than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first offense; guilty of a misdemeanor
of the second degree and fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for
a second offense; and guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and fined not
less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a third and each subsequent
offense.
(Ord. No. 2704-A-90. Passed 6-15-92, eff. 6-24-92)
CHAPTER 681A – PRECIOUS METALS DEALERS
681A.01   Definition
681A.02   State License Required
681A.99   Penalty
§ 681A.01 Definition
   As used in this chapter, "precious metals dealer" means a person who is
engaged in the business of purchasing articles made of or containing gold,
silver, platinum, or other precious metals or jewels of any description if, in
any manner, including any form of advertisement or solicitation of customers,
the person holds himself, herself, or itself out to the public as willing to
purchase such articles.
(Ord. No. 1125-12. Passed 11-19-12, eff. 11-21-12)
§ 681A.02 State License Required
   No person shall act as a precious metals dealer unless that person has a
current, valid license issued under RC Chapter 4727 or 4728, when required to
be licensed under those chapters.
(Ord. No. 1125-12. Passed 11-19-12, eff. 11-21-12)
§ 681A.99 Penalty
   (a)   Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
   (b)   This section shall not apply whenever the conduct prohibited by this
section constitutes a felony under RC 4728.99.
(Ord. No. 1125-12. Passed 11-19-12, eff. 11-21-12)
CHAPTER 682 – ITINERANT VENDORS AND WHOLESALE PRODUCE DEALERS
682.01   License Required
682.02   License Recording; Duration
682.03   License Application; False Statements
682.04   Applicant’s Bond
682.05   Agent for Service of Process
682.06   License Fee
682.07   License Not Transferable; Display
682.08   Fee Disposition
682.09   Itinerant Wholesale Produce Dealer Defined
682.10   Itinerant Wholesale Produce Dealer License Required
682.11   Itinerant Wholesale Produce Dealer License Term; Fee
682.12   Itinerant Wholesale Produce Dealer’s Bond
682.13   Itinerant Wholesale Produce Dealer License Issuance; Sign Plates
682.14   Farmers Exempted
682.15   Produce Sales Slips Identified
682.99   Penalty
   Note: The legislative history of this chapter, except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 63410-A, passed
September 22, 1924.
   Pursuant to Section 6 of Ord. No. 1428-92, the title to Chapter
682 of the Codified Ordinances shall be amended to read “Itinerant Vendors and
Wholesale Produce Dealers”.
Cross-reference:
   Itinerant wholesale produce dealers, CO
675.07 et seq.
Statutory reference:
   Home solicitation sales, RC 1345.21 et seq.
   License revocation, RC 2961.03
   Power to regulate, RC 715.61 et seq.
§ 682.01 License Required
   No itinerant vendor shall sell or offer for sale any goods, wares or
merchandise without first having procured a license to do so as provided in
this chapter.
§ 682.02 License Recording; Duration
   (a)   Upon the written application of any itinerant vendor, setting forth
all the facts required, and duly verified upon oath before an officer empowered
by the laws of Ohio to take acknowledgment of deeds, and upon the payment of a
license fee and upon it appearing that the applicant has procured such license
as may be required by the laws of the State then in force, the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses shall issue to such applicant a license permitting the
applicant, for the period for which such license fee is paid, to sell in
temporary quarters such goods, wares or merchandise as such itinerant vendor
may otherwise lawfully sell.
   (b)   The Commissioner, before issuing to the itinerant vendor the license
provided for herein, shall record in a proper book to be kept for that purpose,
the State license in full, and shall endorse upon the State license “local
license fees paid,” and shall affix his or her official signature with the date
of such endorsement upon the license. The Commissioner shall then issue the
local license which shall entitle the itinerant vendor to conduct sales
thereunder for any period less than one hundred twenty (120) days from the date
thereof.
§ 682.03 License Application; False Statements
   (a)   In the license application, or in the separate affidavit to accompany
such application and to be filed therewith, the applicant shall state under
oath all of the facts relating to the reasons for and the character of the
temporary business which he or she desires to transact, including a true
statement of the names and addresses of persons, firms or corporations from
whom the goods, wares or merchandise was last taken; the names and addresses of
the owners or persons in whose interest such business is conducted; the places
and dates where the applicant for the past eighteen (18) months has been
engaged in business, stating the nature and character of the business; all
details necessary to exactly locate and fully identify all goods, wares or
merchandise to be sold; and the length of time for which the store or place
where goods, wares or merchandise is to be sold has been or is to be leased.
The fact that such store or place of business has been or is to be leased for a
period less than one hundred twenty (120) days shall be in all cases prima
facie evidence that the business is of a temporary or transient character
within the meaning of this chapter.
   (b)   Any false or misleading statements made in such application or
affidavit or in any advertising matter, or orally by any person connected with
the licensee, issued or made to further the sale of that merchandise, shall
render the license issued to the applicant making such false statements null
and void, and shall forfeit to the City the license fee already paid, and
subject such applicant to the full penalty provided in this chapter.
   (c)   Upon receiving complaints as to any such false or misleading
statements, the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses shall forthwith
investigate and make demand for access to all books and papers pertaining to
the business of the licensee, which may assist the Commissioner in determining
whether or not a false or misleading statement has been made, and further, he
or she may put under oath and command answers to any questions that may be
necessary to be propounded to divulge the facts, from any and all persons who
may have any connection with the business of the licensee.
§ 682.04 Applicant’s Bond
   Before a license is issued, the applicant shall execute and deliver to the
Department of Finance a good and sufficient bond with good and sufficient
surety or sureties to be approved by the Director of Law, in the sum of five
hundred dollars ($500.00), which bond shall be conditioned as to indemnify or
reimburse any purchaser of goods, wares or merchandise in a sum equal to at
least the amount of any payment or payments such purchaser may have been
induced to make through misrepresentation as to the kind, quality or value of
such goods, wares or merchandise whether the misrepresentation was made by the
owners or by their servants, agents or employees, either at the time of making
the sale, or through any advertisement of any character whatsoever, printed or
circulated with reference to the stock of goods, wares and merchandise, or any
part thereof.
§ 682.05 Agent for Service of Process
   Before a license is issued, the applicant shall file with the Department of
Finance an instrument in writing, nominating and appointing the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses, or the person performing the duties of such position,
his or her true and lawful agent, with full power and authority to acknowledge
service of notice of process for and on behalf of the applicant in respect to
any matters connected with or arising out of the license, and the bond given as
required by the provisions of Section
682.04 or for the performance of the condition of such bond, or for any breach
thereof. The instrument in writing so nominating and appointing the
Commissioner shall contain recitals to the effect that the license applicant
consents and agrees that service of any notice or process may be made upon the
agent, and when so made shall be taken and held as valid as if personally
served upon the person applying for a license, according to the laws of this or
any other state and waiving all claim or right of error by reason of such
acknowledgment of service or manner of service.
§ 682.06 License Fee
   A license fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each week or fraction
thereof during which he or she desires to sell his or her goods, shall be paid
by such itinerant vendor prior to the issuance of a license.
§ 682.07 License Not Transferable; Display
   No license issued under this chapter shall be transferable, nor shall it be
used by any person, firm or corporation other than as named in the license. A
licensee shall conspicuously display the license in his or her place of
business so that the same is plainly visible to the public.
§ 682.08 Fee Disposition
   All fees collected by the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses under the
provisions of this chapter shall be paid by him or her to the City Treasurer,
and credited to the General Fund.
§ 682.09 Itinerant Wholesale Produce Dealer Defined
   As used in Sections
682.10 through
682.15, “itinerant wholesale produce dealer” means a person, firm, corporation
or association who sells or offers for sale from a cart, wagon, truck,
automobile or other vehicle operated or propelled over and upon the streets of
the City, any fruits, vegetables, garden produce, butter, eggs, meat, game and/
or live or dressed poultry to any person, firm, corporation or association
engaged in the business of the resale at retail or wholesale of the same
produce within the City, or to any hospital, club, restaurant or hotel in the
City. “Itinerant wholesale produce dealer” does not include any person, firm,
corporation or association who operates in the City a regularly established
store or warehouse and/or trucking and distributing business for the purpose of
wholesale merchandising of fruits, vegetables, garden produce, butter, eggs,
meat, game, and/or live or dressed poultry, nor to any person selling or
offering for sale produce of his or her own raising or producing.
(Ord. No. 1428-92. Passed 7-22-92, eff. 7-24-92)
§ 682.10 Itinerant Wholesale Produce Dealer License Required
   No person, firm, corporation or association shall engage in the business of
itinerant wholesale produce dealer in the City unless he or she has first been
duly licensed to do so as provided in this chapter. Every applicant for a
license shall make an application in writing to the Commissioner of Assessments
and Licenses, which application sets forth the name under which the business is
to be conducted, and the name of every person interested in the business. Such
application shall contain as reference the names of at least two (2) citizens
of the City as to the character of the applicant or applicants.
(Ord. No. 1428-92. Passed 7-22-92, eff. 7-24-92)
§ 682.11 Itinerant Wholesale Produce Dealer License Term; Fee
   Itinerant wholesale produce dealer licenses shall be issued annually, shall
expire on December 31 of each year, and shall not be transferable. No
deductions shall be allowed from the fee for any such license for any part of
the year during which the licensee does not exercise the right of such license.
The license fee for carrying on the business of an itinerant wholesale produce
dealer by means of a cart, truck, wagon, automobile or other vehicle operated
upon the streets, thoroughfares and public places shall be two hundred dollars
($200.00).
(Ord. No. 1428-92. Passed 7-22-92, eff. 7-24-92)
§ 682.12 Itinerant Wholesale Produce Dealer’s Bond
   Every person licensed as an itinerant wholesale produce dealer shall execute
and file a bond of five hundred dollars ($500.00). The bond must be approved by
the Director of Law as to sureties and form, and shall be conditioned upon the
faithful observance of the provisions of this chapter and of all ordinances of
the City and laws of the State concerning or regulating the merchandise and
handling of produce dealt in by the licensee. The bond shall also be
conditioned as to indemnify any person obtaining a judgment against the
licensee because of any damage sustained on account of the violation by the
licensee of such ordinances or laws, or because of misrepresentation or
deception which may have been practiced on such person by the licensee while
carrying on his or her licensed business.
(Ord. No. 1428-92. Passed 7-22-92, eff. 7-24-92)
§ 682.13 Itinerant Wholesale Produce Dealer License Issuance; Sign Plates
   Upon the filing of the bond and a completed application, and upon payment of
the license fee required in this chapter, the Commissioner of Assessments and
Licenses shall issue to the applicant an itinerant wholesale produce dealer
license, and shall furnish the licensee with two (2) metal signs not less than
six (6) inches wide and nine (9) inches long, upon which shall be inscribed
“Itinerant Wholesale Produce Dealer’s License, Cleveland, Ohio, No.
__________,” giving in the blank space the number of such license and the year
during which the same shall be in force. The metal signs shall be securely
fastened in plain view on both sides of the vehicle used by the licensee
whenever he or she is engaged in operating under such license.
(Ord. No. 1428-92. Passed 7-22-92, eff. 7-24-92)
§ 682.14 Farmers Exempted
   No itinerant wholesale produce dealer license shall be required of any
farmer, producer or other person selling produce of his or her own raising or
producing.
(Ord. No. 1428-92. Passed 7-22-92, eff. 7-24-92)
§ 682.15 Produce Sales Slips Identified
   At the time of making any sale of produce, a licensee shall deliver to the
purchaser a sales slip which shall contain in a conspicuous place the license
number assigned to such licensee.
(Ord. No. 1428-92. Passed 7-22-92, eff. 7-24-92)
§ 682.99 Penalty
   (a)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of Sections
682.01 to
682.07 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than
twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each
day upon which any such violation occurs or continues shall constitute a
separate offense; provided that Sections
682.01 to
682.07 shall not apply to any farmer or producer who sells any article,
provision or vegetables produced or grown by him or her, nor to the
manufacturer of any article made or manufactured by him or her, nor to sales
made to dealers by commercial travelers or selling agents in the usual course
of business, nor to bona fide sales of goods, wares and merchandise by sample
for future delivery.
   (b)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of Sections
682.10 to
682.15 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Each day upon
which any such violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Ord. No. 1428-92. Passed 7-22-92, eff. 7-24-92)
CHAPTER 682A – RENTAL AGENCIES
682A.01   Definitions
682A.02   License Required
682A.03   License Application
682A.04   Display, Assignability and Transferability of License; Name and
Address Changes
682A.05   License Fee; Expiration Date
682A.06   Failure to Obtain License
682A.07   Revocation or Suspension of License
682A.08   Bond
682A.09   Rules of Operation
682A.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Real estate transactions, CO
Ch. 183
   Rental dwelling standards, CO
Ch. 371
Statutory references:
   Real estate brokers, RC Ch. 4735
§ 682A.01 Definitions
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   “List” means a compilation gathered by a rental agency, purporting to
contain real estate available for lease where such compilation is utilized by a
rental listing organization in a transaction which is calculated to result in
the lease of real estate.
   (b)   “Rental agency” means an individual, partnership, partner, firm,
company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate or other
legal entity, or its legal representatives, agents, assigns, employees or
successors, whose primary business is to list residential housing for rental,
lease or sublease and, for a fee, to refer customers to such residential
housing.
   (c)   “Residential housing” means a single or multi-family dwelling,
apartment or room, the intended use of which is not commercial. This definition
applies to furnished and unfurnished residential housing.
(Ord. No. 224-81. Passed 5-4-81, eff. 5-7-81)
§ 682A.02 License Required
   No person shall maintain, own, operate or advertise a business as a rental
agency unless such person is so licensed by the Commissioner of Assessments and
Licenses.
(Ord. No. 224-81. Passed 5-4-81, eff. 5-7-81)
§ 682A.03 License Application
   (a)   Every rental agency shall make an annual application to the
Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses for the license required in Section
682A.02. Such application shall be on a form provided by the Commissioner, such
form having been reviewed by the Director of the Office of Consumer Affairs or
a person designated by him or her for that purpose. The application form shall
contain the full name and address of the applicant, the name under which the
business is to be conducted, the name of every person with a financial or
proprietary interest in the business, the names and residences of the principal
officers of the business, the locations where the business is to be carried on
and such other information relative to the business as may be deemed necessary
by the Commissioner with the advice of the Director of the Office of Consumer
Affairs.
   (b)   Each rental agency must procure a separate license for each location
at which business is conducted.
(Ord. No. 224-81. Passed 5-4-81, eff. 5-7-81)
§ 682A.04 Display, Assignability and Transferability of License; Name and
Address Changes
   (a)   Each license issued under this chapter shall at all times be posted in
a conspicuous place at the place of business of the licensee.
   The failure to display a valid current license or the display of an expired
license, by a rental agency is a violation of this chapter.
   (b)   No license shall be assignable or transferable.
   (c)   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses shall be notified in
writing of any change in the licensee’s name or business address. A licensee
who fails to notify the Commissioner of such a change within ten (10) days of
the change shall forfeit his or her license.
(Ord. No. 224-81. Passed 5-4-81, eff. 5-7-81)
§ 682A.05 License Fee; Expiration Date
   The annual fee for a license issued under this chapter is twenty-five
dollars ($25.00). Such license shall be renewed annually upon application made
prior to the expiration of the previous license, unless the previous license
was suspended or revoked. All licenses shall expire on May 1 of each year.
(Ord. No. 224-81. Passed 5-4-81, eff. 5-7-81)
§ 682A.06 Failure to Obtain License
   A person who engages in business as a rental agency while not duly licensed
pursuant to this chapter is in violation of the Consumer Protection Code (Title
Three of this Offenses and Business Activities Code) and is subject to the
penalty provided in Section
682A.99.
(Ord. No. 224-81. Passed 5-4-81, eff. 5-7-81)
§ 682A.07 Revocation or Suspension of License
   The license of a rental agency held pursuant to this chapter may be
suspended or revoked, or the renewal thereof denied, by the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses upon a determination made by the Director of the
Office of Consumer Affairs, after due notice and hearing, that a licensee has:
   (a)   Practiced fraud or misrepresentation upon a consumer;
   (b)   Practiced fraud or misrepresentation in establishing his or her
qualifications for a license under this chapter;
   (c)   Aided or abetted another in practicing fraud or misrepresentation upon
a consumer or in establishing qualifications for a license under this chapter;
   (d)   Engaged in or aided or abetted another in engaging in untrue,
misleading or deceptive advertising or selling practices as defined by the
statutes, ordinances or regulations of the State, the City or the Federal
Government; or
   (e)   Violated the Consumer Protection Code (Title Three of this Offenses
and Business Activities Code) or the regulations promulgated thereunder, or
knowingly caused, permitted, aided or abetted another in committing such a
violation.
(Ord. No. 224-81. Passed 5-4-81, eff. 5-7-81)
§ 682A.08 Bond
   Every applicant for a license issued under this chapter shall, upon approval
of his or her application, furnish and file with the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses a bond in the sum of two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00), to be approved as to form by the Director of Law and as to
sufficiency by the Director of Finance, guaranteeing full and faithful
compliance by the applicant with this chapter and binding the surety thereon to
indemnify a consumer who suffers a loss by reason of the failure of such rental
agency to comply with this chapter.
(Ord. No. 224-81. Passed 5-4-81, eff. 5-7-81)
§ 682A.09 Rules of Operation
   No rental agency or agent or employee thereof shall advertise or otherwise
solicit consumers for the rental agency business in the City unless the
following procedures are followed:
   (a)   Payment; Contracts.
      (1)   The rental agency shall not require payment by a consumer of a
charge or fee in excess of ten dollars ($10.00) at any time prior to the
consumer’s entering into a rental agreement or lease with a landlord as a
result of information provided by the rental agency. A conspicuous sign shall
be posted in the rental agency office in an area in which the agency conducts
business with consumers, stating that no fee in excess of ten dollars ($10.00)
may be collected until the consumer has entered into a rental agreement or
lease as a result of rental information provided by the agency.
      (2)   The agency’s agreement with each consumer shall be evidenced by a
written, dated contract which contains the following notice:
   PROCEDURE FOR PAYMENT
   The complete charge for services provided by ________________ is
$__________. Upon registering with ________________, you will be required to
pay an initial nonrefundable fee of ten dollars ($10.00). If you rent housing
through listings provided by ________________, the balance of the fee for
services must be paid to _________________ not later than thirty (30) days from
the date of rental.
   (b)   Advertisements and Listings.
      (1)   No residential housing shall be listed by a rental agency unless
the rental agency has received express permission to list the property from the
person responsible for showing, renting, leasing or subleasing such property,
and has knowledge that such residential housing is available for rental, lease
or sublease at the time it is placed on the list. A list of residential housing
for rental, lease or sublease prepared by a rental agency shall be accurate and
current.
      As used in this subsection, “current” means that the availability of
residential housing listed shall be verified at least once every forty-eight
(48) hours by the rental agency. Such verification may come only as a result of
actual contact with the person responsible for showing, renting, leasing or
subleasing such property or with a person expressly authorized by him or her to
give such information.
      (2)   All advertisements placed by a rental agency, including, but not
limited to, those which describe specific residential housing, shall include
the words “rental information services.” Availability of rental properties
appearing in newspaper advertisements must be verified within forty-eight (48)
hours of the time the advertisement appears. All advertisements running in
daily newspapers must be ordered to run for one (1) day only or in such a
manner as to permit immediate deletions from those advertisements as listings
become unavailable.
      (3)   A list of residential housing for rental, lease or sublease
prepared by a rental agency shall contain the following information for each
listing, such information to be disclosed to the consumer as part of a
residential housing referral:
         A.   The complete street address of the residential housing, and the
apartment or room number;
         B.   The rental agency charge and whether or not the rental charge is
computed weekly, monthly or otherwise;
         C.   Which utilities, if any, are included in the rental charge. If no
utilities are included in the rental charge, this fact shall be disclosed;
         D.   The number of rooms;
         E.   The period of tenancy;
         F.   Any other restriction or limitation (e.g., the impermissibility
of children or pets);
         G.   The name and telephone number of the person who is responsible
for showing, renting, leasing or subleasing the residential housing;
         H.   The date the residential housing was placed for listing with the
rental agency;
         I.   The source of the listing (e.g., landlord, superintendent,
newspaper advertisement, etc.). If the source is a person or business entity,
the name of the person or business entity shall be disclosed. If the source is
a newspaper advertisement, the name of the newspaper and the date of
publication shall be disclosed. The source of the listing shall be a newspaper
advertisement if the rental agency’s initial contact with the listing was a
newspaper advertisement.
      A list or listing of residential housing provided by a rental agency
shall be clearly written, typewritten or otherwise clearly reproduced.
      (4)   If twenty percent (20%) or more of the listings of a rental agency
have been advertised in a newspaper by an individual or business entity other
than the rental agency, this fact shall be disclosed by a sign. Such sign
shall:
         A.   Measure no less than thirty-six (36) inches by twenty-four (24)
inches;
         B.   State the following in solid black letters measuring no less than
one and one-half (1-1/2) inches in height:
   A substantial number of apartments and houses listed by our service can be
found in the classified section of local newspapers.
         C.   Be conspicuously displayed near the entrance of the rental
agency.
      (5)   When the rental agency refers listings to the consumer over the
telephone, the following information shall be disclosed whether or not the
consumer specifically requests such information:
         A.   The complete street address of the residential housing, the
apartment or room number, the rental charge, included utilities, the number of
rooms, the period of tenancy and other restrictions or limitations; and
         B.   The name and telephone number of the person who is responsible
for showing, renting, leasing or subleasing the residential housing.
      (6)   Rental agencies shall, upon request made by the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses or the Director of the Office of Consumer Affairs,
provide copies of all agreements entered into between the rental agency and its
subscribers.
      (7)   Records of all listings and information required by paragraphs (b)
(3) and (b)(6) hereof shall be maintained by rental agencies for a period not
less than one (1) year from the date of the listing and subscription
respectively.
(Ord. No. 224-81. Passed 5-4-81, eff. 5-7-81)
§ 682A.99 Penalty
   Whoever falsely represents that he or she is licensed, or holds himself or
herself out to be licensed, by this chapter, or who otherwise violates any
provision of this chapter, is guilty of a first degree misdemeanor and shall be
fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisoned not more
than six (6) months, or both.
(Ord. No. 224-81. Passed 5-4-81, eff. 5-7-81)
CHAPTER 683 – SOUND DEVICES
683.01   Playing of Sound Devices Prohibited; When
683.02   Playing of Sound Devices in Motor Vehicles Prohibited; When
683.03   Permit Required for Sound Amplifying Devices
683.04   License and Permit Application; Fees; Issuance; Renewal; Fee
683.05   Regulations Governing Sound Amplifying Devices on Vehicles
683.06   Permit Required for Sound Devices or Sound Amplifying Devices Which
Promote Commercial Activities
683.07   Permit Application; Fees; Issuance
683.08   Regulations Governing Sound Devices or Sound Amplifying Devices Which
Promote Commercial Activities
683.09   Revocation or Suspension of License or Permit
683.10   Appeals
683.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Unnecessary noise, CO
605.10
Statutory reference:
   Power to regulate advertising, RC 715.65
§ 683.01 Playing of Sound Devices Prohibited; When
   (a)   No person shall play any radio, music player, television, audio system
or musical instrument in such a manner or at such volume as to annoy or disturb
the quiet, comfort or repose of neighboring inhabitants or at a volume which is
plainly audible to persons other than those who are in the room in which such
device or instrument is played and who are voluntary listeners thereto.
   (b)   Except for organized events which have received any type of permit
from the City in conjunction with the event, no person shall play any radio,
music player, television or audio system upon a public right-of-way or upon
other public property in such a manner or at such a volume as to disturb the
quiet, comfort or repose of other persons.
(Ord. No. 2487-A-89. Passed 6-18-90, eff. 6-27-90)
§ 683.02 Playing of Sound Devices in Motor Vehicles Prohibited; When
   No person shall play any radio, music player or audio system in a motor
vehicle at such volume as to disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of other
persons or at a volume which is plainly audible to persons other than the
occupants of said vehicle.
(Ord. No. 2487-A-89. Passed 6-18-90, eff. 6-27-90)
§ 683.03 Permit Required for Sound Amplifying Devices
   (a)   No person shall install, operate or cause to be installed or operated
any sound amplifying device, other than a warning signal, mounted upon any
vehicle which is propelled over the streets of the City or stationed thereon or
so close thereto as to be plainly audible to persons upon the streets or in
public places without first obtaining a permit therefor in accordance with
Section
683.04.
   (b)   For purposes of this chapter, “sound amplifying device” shall mean a
machine or device for the amplification of the human voice, music or any other
sound. “Sound amplification device” shall not include factory-installed
automobile radios when used and heard only by occupants of the vehicle in which
the device was installed, or warning devices on authorized emergency vehicles
or vehicles used solely for traffic safety purposes.
(Ord. No. 2487-A-89. Passed 6-18-90, eff. 6-27-90)
§ 683.04 License and Permit Application; Fees; Issuance; Renewal; Fee
   (a)   Every person desiring to operate a sound amplifying device mounted on
a vehicle shall make a separate application to the Commissioner of Assessments
and Licenses, upon forms prescribed by the Commissioner for each vehicle.
   (b)   On receipt of a fifty dollar ($50.00) fee, the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses shall issue a license which shall cover the calendar
year in which the application is made.
   (c)   In addition to the license referred to above, each person desiring to
operate a sound amplifying device mounted on a vehicle must obtain a permit
from the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses each time the person desires
to operate the device.
   (d)   On receipt of a ten dollar ($10.00) fee, the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses, with the approval of the Director of Public Safety,
shall issue a permit which specifies the date of operation, the time during
which the device may be operated, the exact location where the operation will
be permitted and the specific purpose of the device’s operation.
(Ord. No. 2393-02. Passed 2-3-03, eff. 2-3-03)
§ 683.05 Regulations Governing Sound Amplifying Devices on Vehicles
   (a)   No sound amplifying device mounted on a vehicle shall operate with a
power output in excess of twenty (20) watts, nor with maximum distortion of
sound and volume in excess of two percent (2%) at full volume.
   (b)   No sound amplifying device mounted on a vehicle shall be operated
between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. or at any time within five
hundred (500) feet of any school, church or hospital.
   (c)   No sound amplifying device mounted on a vehicle shall be operated on a
Sunday; provided that any such device may be operated in substitution for a
band as part of a parade held after 1:00 p.m. on Sunday under the auspices of
any organization authorized to hold such a parade, if the permit issued
pursuant to Section
683.04 so indicates.
   (d)   No sound amplifying device mounted on a vehicle shall operate within
the area bounded on the west by West 9th Street, on the north by Lake Erie, on
the east by East 22nd Street and on the south by Woodland Avenue (the “Downtown
Area”), except when the Director of Public Safety determines that operation of
the sound amplifying device will not unduly disrupt the conducting of
businesses in the Downtown Area. No sound amplifying device mounted on a
vehicle shall operate within any of the residential districts described in
Chapter
337, except when the Director of Public Safety determines that operation of the
sound amplifying device will not unduly disrupt the district or districts in
which the permit applicant intends to operate said device. In either of such
cases the determination of the Director of Public Safety shall be noted on the
permit issued pursuant to division (c) of Section
683.04.
   (e)   No sound amplifying device shall be installed or operated on a vehicle
unless the license and permit required by Section
683.04 are conspicuously displayed on said vehicle.
   (f)   The provisions of this section do not apply to sound amplifying
devices mounted on emergency vehicles owned and controlled by the Divisions of
Police, Fire or Emergency Medical Services or to private ambulances which are
engaged in responding to emergency calls.
(Ord. No. 2487-A-89. Passed 6-18-90, eff. 6-27-90)
§ 683.06 Permit Required for Sound Devices or Sound Amplifying Devices Which
Promote Commercial Activities
   (a)   No person shall play or use any drum, loudspeaker, radio, audio system
or other instrument or sound amplifying device for the purpose of creating
noise to attract attention to any performance or show or any sale or display of
merchandise without first obtaining a permit therefor in accordance with
Section
683.07.
   (b)   No owner, agent or operator of a commercial enterprise located within
a permanent structure or building shall use, set up or operate a sound
amplifying system which is deliberately directed and placed so as to be plainly
audible outside the structure or building and which is used to transmit any
type of music or message advertising products sold on the premises or inviting
the public to patronize the establishment located on the premises without first
obtaining a permit therefor in accordance with Section
683.07
(Ord. No. 2487-A-89. Passed 6-18-90, eff. 6-27-90)
§ 683.07 Permit Application; Fees; Issuance
   (a)   Every person desiring to conduct the activities described in division
(a) or (b) of Section
683.06 shall make application for a permit to the Commissioner of Assessments
and Licenses on forms prescribed by the Commissioner.
   (b)   On receipt of a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) fee, the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses shall issue the permit, provided that:
      (1)   The Director of Public Safety is satisfied that the permit’s
issuance will not result in unnecessary and unseemly noise to the detriment of
the health or comfort of any individuals; and
      (2)   No permit shall be issued for more than fourteen (14) consecutive
days and no permit or combination of permits shall be issued to exceed a total
of thirty (30) days in any calendar year for a specific location.
   (c)   The permit shall specify the exact location at which the activity for
which the permit is issued may occur and the day or days during which the
activity may take place.
(Ord. No. 2393-02. Passed 2-3-03, eff. 2-3-03)
§ 683.08 Regulations Governing Sound Devices or Sound Amplifying Devices Which
Promote Commercial Activities
   (a)   No device described in Section
683.06 shall be used for the purposes set forth therein:
      (1)   On Sunday;
      (2)   On any day between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; or
      (3)   Within five hundred (500) feet of any school, church or hospital.
   (b)   No device described in Section
683.06 shall operate within a power output in excess of twenty (20) watts nor
with maximum distortion of sound and volume in excess of two percent (2%) at
full volume.
(Ord. No. 2487-A-89. Passed 6-18-90, eff. 6-27-90)
§ 683.09 Revocation or Suspension of License or Permit
   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses, upon the recommendation of the
Chief of Police, may at any time revoke or suspend the license or permits
granted under authority of this chapter for failure to comply with the terms of
this chapter or with any laws or regulations relating to the operation of sound
devices or sound amplifying devices.
(Ord. No. 2487-A-89. Passed 6-18-90, eff. 6-27-90)
§ 683.10 Appeals
   If the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses refuses to issue or revokes
or suspends a license or permit, the applicant licensee, or permittee may
appeal such order to the Board of Zoning Appeals established pursuant to
Charter Section
76-6. Written notice of such appeal shall be filed with the Board within ten
(10) days after the making of such order. Within ten (10) days after the filing
of such notice, the Board shall proceed to hear such appeal, at which hearing
all parties interested shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard. The Board
shall approve, modify or annul the order from which the appeal has been
performed, and the finding of the Board shall be final with respect to all
parties thereto.
(Ord. No. 2487-A-89. Passed 6-18-90, eff. 6-27-90)
§ 683.99 Penalty
   (a)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty
of a fourth degree misdemeanor and, upon a first offense, shall be fined two
hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00), which fine shall not be suspended, waived
or otherwise reduced below that amount, and subject to up to thirty (30) days
in jail. In addition, the equipment or device used in the commission of a
violation of Section
683.01 or
683.02 shall be seized and disposed of under RC Chapter 2981.
   (b)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter upon any subsequent
offense shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree, and shall be
fined five hundred dollars ($500.00), which fine shall not be suspended, waived
or otherwise reduced below that amount, and subject to up to sixty (60) days in
jail.
   (c)   An organization that violates any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be guilty of a fourth degree misdemeanor and, upon a first offense, shall
be fined two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) under Section
601.99(c), which fine shall not be suspended, waived or otherwise reduced below
that amount. In addition, the equipment or device used in the commission of a
violation of Section
683.01 or
683.02 shall be seized and disposed of under RC Chapter 2981.
   (d)   An organization that violates any provision of this chapter upon any
subsequent offense shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree, and
shall be fined three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) under Section
601.99(c), which fine shall not be suspended, waived or otherwise reduced below
that amount. In addition, the City of Cleveland shall revoke any Music
Entertainment permit issued to the organization under Chapter
692. The equipment or device used in the commission of a violation of Section
683.01 or
683.02 shall be seized and disposed of under RC Chapter 2981.
   (e)   Each day upon which a violation occurs or continues shall be a
separate offense and punishable as such hereunder.
(Ord. No. 830-10. Passed 7-14-10, eff. 7-22-10)
CHAPTER 683A – MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
683A.01   Definitions
683A.02   Establishments; Permit Required
683A.03   Permit Application; Fee
683A.04   Contents of Application
683A.05   Issuance of Permits; Effective Period
683A.06   Revocation or Suspension of Permits
683A.07   Masseur or Masseuse Permit Required
683A.08   Application Form for Masseur or Masseuse Permit
683A.09   Issuance of Masseur or Masseuse Permit; Effective Period
683A.10   Revocation of Masseur or Masseuse Permit
683A.11   Facilities
683A.12   Operating Requirements
683A.13   Inspections
683A.14   Employment of Person Under the Age of 18
683A.15   Identification Card
683A.16   Transfer of Permits
683A.17   Display of Permits
683A.18   Employment of Masseurs and Masseuses
683A.19   Time Limit for Filing Application for Permit
683A.191   Re-application Restriction
683A.20   Application of Chapter
683A.21   Rules and Regulations
683A.22   Keeping of Records
683A.23   Patrons under 18
683A.24   Maintaining a Public Nuisance
683A.25   Review
683A.99   Penalty
   Note: Ord. No. 2788-87, passed November 23, 1987, effective November 25,
1987, changed the numbering of sections in Chapter
683A which were inadvertently misnumbered in Ord. No. 222-87.
§ 683A.01 Definitions
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   “Applicant.” A person applying for a permit under this chapter and includes
all partners, including limited partners of a partnership applicant, any
officer or director of a corporate applicant, and any stockholder holding more
than two percent (2%) of the stock of a corporate applicant.
   “Employee.” Any and all persons, other than the masseurs or masseuses, who
render any service to the permittee, who receive compensation directly from the
permittee, and who have no physical contact with customers and clients.
   “Health Officer.” The Director of the Department of Public Health and
Welfare of the city or his or her authorized representative.
   “Massage.” Any method of pressure on or friction against or stroking,
kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating of the external
soft parts of the body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical or
electrical apparatus or appliance, with or without such supplementary aids as
rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powder, creams, lotions,
ointments or other similar preparation commonly used in this practice.
   “Massage Establishment.” Any establishment having a fixed place of business
where any person, firm, association or corporation engages in, or carries on,
any of the activities included in the definition of “Massage” above.
   “Masseur” or “Masseuse”. Any individual who, for any consideration
whatsoever, engages in the practice of massage.
   “Permittee.” The operator of a massage establishment.
   “Person.” Any individual, copartnership, firm, association, joint stock
company, corporation or combination of individuals of whatever form or
character.
   “Sexual or Genital Area.” The genitals, pubic area, anus and perineum of any
person, or the vulva or breasts of a female.
(Ord. No. 222-87. Passed 5-11-87, eff. 6-20-87)
§ 683A.02 Establishments; Permit Required
   No person shall engage in, conduct or carry on, or permit to be engaged in,
conducted or carried on, in the city, in or upon any premises in the city, the
operation of a massage establishment without first having obtained a permit
therefor from the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses, after approval of
the Health Officer.
(Ord. No. 222-87. Passed 5-11-87, eff. 6-20-87)
§ 683A.03 Permit Application; Fee
   (a)   Every applicant for a permit to maintain, operate, or conduct a
massage establishment shall file an application in duplicate, under oath, with
the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses on a form provided by the
Commissioner and pay a non- refundable filing fee of two hundred dollars
($200.00) to the City Treasurer, who shall issue a receipt which shall be
attached to the application filed with the Commissioner of Assessments and
Licenses.
   (b)   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses shall, within five (5)
days, refer copies of such application to the Fire Division, the Health
Commissioner, the Building Inspection Division, and the Police Division. These
agencies shall, within thirty (30) days, inspect the premises proposed to be
operated as a massage establishment and make written recommendations to the
Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses concerning compliance with the codes
and regulations that they administer.
   (c)   Within ten (10) days of receipt of the recommendations of the agencies
in division (b) of this section, the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses
shall notify the applicant that his or her application is granted, denied, or
held for further investigation. The period of the additional investigation
shall not exceed an additional thirty (30) days unless otherwise agreed to by
the applicant. On the conclusion of the additional investigation, the
Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses shall advise the applicant, in
writing, whether the application is granted or denied.
   (d)   Whenever an application is denied or held for further investigation,
the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses shall advise the applicant in
writing of the reasons for the action.
   (e)   The failure or refusal of the applicant to promptly give information
relevant to the investigation of the application or his or her refusal to
submit to or cooperate with any inspection required by this chapter shall
constitute an admission by the applicant that he or she is ineligible for the
permit and shall be grounds for denial by the Commissioner of Assessments and
Licenses.
   (f)   If the application is denied, the applicant shall have the right to
appeal to the Board of Appeals established under Section
76-6 of the Charter. The applicant shall within ten (10) days after
notification of denial file notice in writing with the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses of applicant’s intention to appeal to the Board. The
Board, after public hearing, may sustain, disapprove, or modify the order.
(Ord. No. 2393-02. Passed 2-3-03, eff. 2-3-03)
§ 683A.04 Contents of Application
   (a)   The application for a permit to operate a massage establishment shall
set forth the exact nature of the massage to be administered, the proposed
place of business and facilities therefor.
   (b)   In addition to the foregoing, any applicant for a permit, including
any partner or limited partner of a partnership applicant, and any officer or
director of a corporate applicant and any stockholder holding more than two
percent (2%) of the stock of a corporate applicant, shall furnish the following
information:
      (1)   His or her name and address;
      (2)   Written proof that the individual is at least eighteen (18) years
of age;
      (3)   All residential addresses for the past three (3) years;
      (4)   The applicant’s height, weight and color of eyes and hair;
      (5)   The business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the
three (3) years immediately preceding the filing of the application;
      (6)   The massage or similar business license history of the applicant;
whether such person, in previously operating in this or another city or state
under license, has had such license revoked or suspended, the reason therefor
and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension
or revocation;
      (7)   All criminal or city ordinances violated, convictions, forfeiture
of bond and pleadings of nolo contendere on all charges, except minor traffic
violations, within the last five (5) years;
      (8)   The fingerprints and two (2) front-face portrait photographs of the
applicant taken within thirty (30) days of the date of the application and at
least two (2) inches by two (2) inches in size; and
      (9)   If the applicant is a corporation, or a partner of a partnership is
a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown
in its articles of incorporation.
(Ord. No. 222-87. Passed 5-11-87, eff. 6-20-87)
§ 683A.05 Issuance of Permits; Effective Period
   (a)   Upon receipt of the certificate of the Health Officer that the massage
establishment is in compliance with all of the health and sanitation
requirements of this code, and the certificate of the Building Inspector and
the Fire Inspector that the building meets the requirements of the building
code and the fire prevention regulations, respectively, and the certificate of
the Chief of Police that the applicant or applicants have not been convicted in
a court of competent jurisdiction of the crimes listed in division (a)(2), the
Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses shall issue a permit to maintain,
operate or conduct a massage establishment, unless he or she finds:
      (1)   That the operation, as proposed by the applicant, if permitted,
would not have complied with all applicable laws of the city;
      (2)   That the applicant and any other person who will be directly or
indirectly engaged in the management and operation of a massage establishment
has been convicted of a felony; an offense involving sexual misconduct with
children; prostitution; soliciting for purposes of prostitution; pandering;
keeping a place of prostitution; pimping; any crime involving dishonesty, fraud
or deceit; or any other offense opposed to decency and morality; within the
last five (5) years.
   (b)   Every massage establishment permit issued pursuant to this chapter
will terminate at the expiration of one (1) year from the date of its issuance,
unless sooner suspended or revoked.
(Ord. No. 222-87. Passed 5-11-87, eff. 6-20-87)
§ 683A.06 Revocation or Suspension of Permits
   (a)   Any permit issued for a massage establishment may be revoked or
suspended by the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses after a hearing for
good cause, or in any case where any of the provisions of this chapter are
violated, or where an employee of the permittee, including a masseur or
masseuse, is engaged in any conduct at the permittee’s place of business which
violates any of the provisions of this chapter or any state law which provides
for imprisonment, and the permittee has actual or constructive knowledge of
such violation or the permittee should have actual or constructive knowledge by
due diligence, or where an applicant has made a false statement on an
application for a permit under this chapter, or in any case where the permittee
or licensee refuses to permit any duly authorized police officer or health
inspector of the city to inspect the premises or the operations therein. Such
permit may also be revoked or suspended by the Commissioner of Assessments and
Licenses after hearing, upon the recommendation of the Health Officer, when
such business is being managed, conducted or maintained without regard for the
public health or the health of patrons or customers or without due regard to
proper sanitation or hygiene.
   (b)   Any violation of this chapter by any employee of the permittee,
including a masseur or masseuse, shall be cause for suspension of the permit
for not more than thirty (30) days in the first instance. Any subsequent
violation of this chapter by any employee of the permittee, including a masseur
or masseuse, shall be cause for suspension or revocation of the permit.
   (c)   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses, before revoking or
suspending any permit, shall give the permittee at least ten (10) days written
notice of the charges against him or her and the opportunity for a public
hearing before the Board of Appeals established pursuant to Section
76-6 of the Charter. The applicant shall file notice in writing with the
Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses of applicant’s intention to appeal to
the Board. The Board, after public hearing, may sustain, disapprove or modify
such order.
(Ord. No. 222-87. Passed 5-11-87, eff. 6-20-87)
§ 683A.07 Masseur or Masseuse Permit Required
   Any person, including an applicant for a massage establishment permit, who
engages in the practice of massage, shall file an application for a masseur or
masseuse permit with the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses upon a form
provided by the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses and shall pay a
nonrefundable filing fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for an application to the
City Treasurer who shall issue a receipt which shall be attached to the
application filed with the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses.
(Ord. No. 2393-02. Passed 2-3-03, eff. 2-3-03)
§ 683A.08 Application Form for Masseur or Masseuse Permit
   The application for a masseur or masseuse permit shall contain the following
information:
   (a)   The name and residence address of the applicant;
   (b)   The social security number and driver’s license number, if any, of the
applicant;
   (c)   The applicant’s weight, height and color of hair and eyes;
   (d)   Written evidence that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of
age;
   (e)   The business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the three
(3) years preceding the date of application;
   (f)   Whether the applicant has been convicted of, pleaded nolo contendere
to, or suffered a forfeiture on a bond involving a charge of committing any
crime, except minor traffic violations, within the last five (5) years. If the
answer is in the affirmative, a statement must be made giving the place and the
court in which such conviction, plea or forfeiture was had, the specific charge
under which the conviction, plea or forfeiture was obtained, and the sentence
imposed as a result thereof;
   (g)   The Chief of Police, or his or her delegate, shall have the right to
take fingerprints and a photograph of the applicant and the right to confirm
the information submitted;
   (h)   All persons who desire to perform the services of masseur or masseuse
at a massage establishment shall first undergo a physical examination for
contagious and communicable diseases, which shall include a recognized blood
test for syphilis, a culture for gonorrhea, a test or tests which will
demonstrate freedom from tuberculosis, which is to be made and interpreted by a
licensed physician acceptable to the Health Officer, and such other laboratory
test done in a laboratory acceptable to the Health Officer, as may be
necessitated by the above examination, and shall furnish to the Health Officer
a certificate based upon the applicant’s physical examination and issued within
thirty (30) days of such examination, signed by a physician duly licensed by
the state and stating that the person examined is either free from any
contagious or communicable disease or incapable of communicating any of such
diseases to others. Such persons shall undergo the physical examination
referred to above and submit to the Health Officer the certificate required
herein prior to commencement of their employment and at least once every six
(6) months thereafter.
(Ord. No. 222-87. Passed 5-11-87, eff. 6-20-87)
§ 683A.09 Issuance of Masseur or Masseuse Permit; Effective Period
   (a)   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses may issue a masseur or
masseuse permit within twenty-one (21) days following application unless he or
she finds that the applicant for the permit has been convicted within the last
five (5) years of a felony; an offense involving sexual misconduct with
children; keeping or residing in a house of ill fame; solicitation of a lewd or
unlawful act; prostitution; pandering; or any crime involving dishonesty, fraud
or deceit.
   (b)   Every masseur or masseuse permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall
terminate at the expiration of one (1) year from the date of issuance, unless
sooner suspended.
   (c)   If the application is denied, the applicant shall have the right to
appeal to the Board of Appeals established pursuant to Section
76-6 of the Charter. The applicant shall within ten (10) days after
notification of denial file notice in writing with the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses of applicant’s intention to appeal to the Board. The
Board, after public hearing, may sustain, disapprove or modify such order.
(Ord. No. 222-87. Passed 5-11-87, eff. 6-20-87)
§ 683A.10 Revocation of Masseur or Masseuse Permit
   (a)   A masseur or masseuse permit issued by the Commissioner of Assessments
and Licenses shall be revoked or suspended where it appears that the masseur or
masseuse has been convicted of any offense which would be cause for denial of a
permit upon an original application; has made a false statement on an
application for a permit; or has committed an act in violation of this chapter.
   (b)   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses, in revoking or
suspending a masseur or masseuse permit, shall give the permit holder a written
notice specifying the grounds therefor. Such person may, within ten (10) days
of such revocation or suspension, file a written request with the Commissioner
of Assessments and Licenses for a public hearing before the Board of Appeals
established pursuant to Section
76-6 of the Charter. The Board, at said hearing, may sustain, disapprove or
modify such order.
(Ord. No. 222-87. Passed 5-11-87, eff. 6-20-87)
§ 683A.11 Facilities
   (a)   No massage establishment shall be issued a permit, nor be operated,
established or maintained in the city unless an inspection by the Health
Officer, Building Inspector and Fire Inspector reveals that the establishment
complies with each of the following minimum requirements:
      (1)   Construction of rooms used for toilets, tubs, steam baths and
showers shall be made waterproof with approved waterproof materials and shall
be installed in accordance with the Building Code;
      (2)   All massage tables, bathtubs, shower stalls and steam or bath areas
and floors shall have surfaces which may be readily disinfected;
      (3)   Adequate bathing, dressing and locker facilities shall be provided
for the patrons to be served at any given time. In the event male and female
patrons are to be served simultaneously, separate bathing, dressing, locker and
massage room facilities shall be provided;
      (4)   The premises shall have adequate equipment for disinfecting and
sterilizing non- disposable instruments and materials used in administering
massages. Such non-disposable instruments and materials shall be disinfected
after use on each patron;
      (5)   Closed cabinets shall be provided and used for the storage of clean
linens, towels and other materials used in connection with administering
massages. All soiled linens, towels and other materials shall be kept in
properly-covered containers or cabinets, which containers or cabinets shall be
kept separate from the clean storage areas;
      (6)   Toilet facilities shall be provided in convenient locations. When
employees and patrons of different sexes are on the premises at the same time,
separate toilet facilities shall be provided for each sex. A single water
closet per sex shall be provided for each twenty (20) or more employees or
patrons of that sex on the premises at any one time. Urinals may be substituted
for water closets after one (1) water closet has been provided. Toilets shall
be designated as to the sex accommodated therein;
      (7)   Lavatories or washbasins provided with both hot and cold running
water shall be installed in either the toilet room or a vestibule immediately
adjacent thereto. Lavatories or washbasins shall be provided with soap and a
dispenser and with sanitary towels;
      (8)   The premises shall be equipped with a service sink for custodial
services;
      (9)   The premises shall meet the requirements of the building code and
fire prevention regulations.
   (b)   The Health Officer, the Building Inspector and the Fire Inspector
shall certify that the proposed massage establishment complies with all the
requirements of this section and shall send such certification to the
Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses.
(Ord. No. 222-87. Passed 5-11-87, eff. 6-20-87)
§ 683A.12 Operating Requirements
   (a)   Every portion of the massage establishment, including appliances and
apparatus, shall be kept clean and operated in a sanitary condition.
   (b)   Price rates for all services shall be prominently posted in the
reception area in a location available to all prospective customers.
   (c)   All employees, including masseurs and masseuses, shall be clean and
wear clean, non- transparent outer garments, covering the sexual and genital
areas, whose use is restricted to the massage establishment. A separate
dressing room for each sex must be available on the premises and each dressing
room shall contain a tub or shower in good working order and individual lockers
for each employee and customer. Doors to such dressing rooms shall open inward
and shall be self-closing.
   (d)   All massage establishments shall be provided with clean, laundered
sheets and towels in sufficient quantity and shall be laundered after each use
thereof and stored in a sanitary manner.
   (e)   The sexual or genital area of patrons must be covered by towels,
cloths or undergarments when in the presence of an employee, masseur or
masseuse.
   (f)   No person, knowingly, in a massage establishment, shall place his or
her hand upon, touch with any part of his or her body, fondle in any manner, or
massage a sexual or genital area of any other person.
   (g)   No masseur or masseuse, employee or operator shall perform or offer or
agree to perform any act which would require the touching of the patron’s
genital area.
   (h)   All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms and
other physical facilities shall be in good repair and maintained in a clean and
sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms or steam or
vapor cabinets, shower compartments and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly
cleaned each day the business is in operation. Bathtubs, showers and toilets
shall be thoroughly cleaned after each use. When carpeting is used on the
floors, it shall be kept dry.
   (i)   Oils, creams, lotions or other preparations used in administering
massages shall be kept in clean, closed containers or cabinets.
   (j)   Eating in the massage work areas shall not be permitted. Animals,
except for seeing-eye dogs, shall not be permitted in the massage work area.
   (k)   Each masseur and masseuse shall wash his or her hands in hot running
water, using a proper soap or disinfectant before administering a massage to
each patron.
(Ord. No. 222-87. Passed 5-11-87, eff. 6-20-87)
§ 683A.13 Inspections
   The Police Division and the Department of Public Health and Welfare shall,
from time to time, and at least twice a year, make an inspection of each
massage establishment granted a permit under the provisions of this chapter for
the purposes of determining that the provisions of this chapter are complied
with. Such inspections shall be made at reasonable times and in a reasonable
manner. No permittee shall fail to allow such inspection officer access to the
premises or hinder such officer in any manner.
(Ord. No. 222-87. Passed 5-11-87, eff. 6-20-87)
§ 683A.14 Employment of Person Under the Age of 18
   No owner, proprietor, manager or other person in charge of any massage
establishment shall employ any person who is not at least eighteen (18) years
of age.
(Ord. No. 222-87. Passed 5-11-87, eff. 6-20-87)
§ 683A.15 Identification Card
   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses shall provide each masseur and
masseuse granted a permit with an identification card which shall contain a
photograph of the masseur or masseuse and the full name and permit number
assigned to such masseur or masseuse, which must be worn on the front of the
outermost garment at all times during the hours of operation of any
establishment granted a permit pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. No. 222-87. Passed 5-11-87, eff. 6-20-87)
§ 683A.16 Transfer of Permits
   No permit for the operation of a massage establishment issued pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter shall be transferable except with the written
consent of the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses and approval of the
Health Officer, provided, however, that upon the death or incapacity of the
permittee, the massage establishment may continue in business for a reasonable
period of time to allow for an orderly transfer of the permit.
(Ord. No. 222-87. Passed 5-11-87, eff. 6-20-87)
§ 683A.17 Display of Permits
   Every permittee shall display a valid permit in a conspicuous place within
the massage establishment so that the same may be readily seen by persons upon
entering the premises.
(Ord. No. 222-87. Passed 5-11-87, eff. 6-20-87)
§ 683A.18 Employment of Masseurs and Masseuses
   It shall be the responsibility of the permittee for the massage
establishment or the employer of any person purporting to act as a masseur or
masseuse to insure that each person employed as a masseur or masseuse has first
obtained a valid permit pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. No. 222-87. Passed 5-11-87, eff. 6-20-87)
§ 683A.19 Time Limit for Filing Application for Permit
   All persons who presently operate a massage establishment or who are
employed as a masseuse or masseur must file for a permit within thirty (30)
days of the effective date of this chapter. Applications for renewal of permits
must be filed not more than two (2) months nor less than one (1) month prior to
termination of an existing permit.
(Ord. No. 222-87. Passed 5-11-87, eff. 6-20-87)
§ 683A.191 Re-application Restriction
   (a)   No person may reapply for a masseur or masseuse permit within one (1)
year of the date of a denial or revocation of the same by the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses.
   (b)   If any person has been denied a permit to operate a massage
establishment at a given location or has had a permit revoked, then no person
may submit an application to operate a massage establishment at the same
location within one (1) year of the denial or revocation by the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses.
   (c)   In addition to and not in limitation of division (b) of this section,
no person who has been denied a permit to operate a massage establishment at a
given location or has had a permit revoked may apply to operate a massage
establishment at any other location within one (1) year of the denial or
revocation by the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses. This division shall
not apply if the sole reason for the denial or revocation was that the physical
facility of the massage establishment failed to meet any of the requirements of
Section
683A.11, or the second and third sentences of division (c) of Section
683A.12, or division (h) of Section
683A.12, the Building Code or the Fire Prevention Code.
(Ord. No. 90-96. Passed 3-18-96, eff. 3-26-96)
§ 683A.20 Application of Chapter
   This chapter shall not apply to hospitals, nursing homes, sanitaria or
persons holding an unrevoked certificate to practice the healing arts under the
laws of the state, or persons working under the direct supervision and in their
presence, of any such persons or in any such establishments, nor shall this
chapter apply to barbers or cosmetologists lawfully carrying out their
particular profession or business and holding a valid, unrevoked license or
certificate of registration issued by the state.
(Ord. No. 222-87. Passed 5-11-87, eff. 6-20-87)
§ 683A.21 Rules and Regulations
   The Director of Public Safety, the Health Officer, or both, may, after a
public hearing, make and enforce reasonable rules and regulations not in
conflict with, but to carry out the intent, of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 222-87. Passed 5-11-87, eff. 6-20-87)
§ 683A.22 Keeping of Records
   Every person who operates a massage establishment or practices or provides a
massage shall, at all times, keep an appointment book in which the name and
address of each and every patron shall be entered, together with the time,
date, service provided and the price charged. Such appointment book shall be
available at all times for inspection by either the Police Chief, the Health
Officer or authorized representative.
(Ord. No. 222-87. Passed 5-11-87, eff. 6-20-87)
§ 683A.23 Patrons under 18
   No person shall permit any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to
come or remain on the premises of any massage establishment as a patron.
(Ord. No. 222-87. Passed 5-11-87, eff. 6-20-87)
§ 683A.24 Maintaining a Public Nuisance
   Any building used as a massage establishment in violation of this chapter
with the intentional, knowing, reckless or negligent permission of the owner
thereof, or the agent of the owner managing the building, together with all
fixtures and other property used in violation of this chapter, are declared to
be a nuisance.
(Ord. No. 222-87. Passed 5-11-87, eff. 6-20-87)
§ 683A.25 Review
   The decision of the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses with regard to
the issuance, suspension or revocation of any permit under this chapter shall
be reviewable by the Board of Zoning Appeals upon the written request of the
party filed with the Board of Zoning Appeals within ten (10) days of such
refusal, revocation or suspension. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall review
evidence previously submitted to the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses
and any additional evidence presented with the written request for review. The
decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals, upon such review, shall be a final,
appealable order.
(Ord. No. 222-87. Passed 5-11-87, eff. 6-20-87)
§ 683A.99 Penalty
   Every person, except those persons who are specifically exempted by this
chapter, whether acting as an individual, owner, employee of the owner,
operator or employee of the operator, or whether acting as a mere helper for
the owner, employee or operator, or acting as a participant or worker in any
way, who gives massages or conducts a massage establishment without first
obtaining a permit and paying a license fee to do so from the City, or who
violates any of the provisions of this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.
(Ord. No. 222-87. Passed 5-11-87, eff. 6-20-87)
CHAPTER 684 – STREET ACTION PICTURES
684.01   Definitions
684.02   License Required
684.03   License Application; Fee
684.04   License Issuance
684.05   Revocation or Suspension of License
684.06   Appeals
684.07   Regulations
684.99   Penalty
   Note: The legislative history of this chapter, except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 63410-A, passed
September 22, 1924.
Cross-reference:
   Littering, CO
Ch. 613
§ 684.01 Definitions
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   “Street action picture” means a photograph taken upon the streets or
sidewalks of any person or persons in motion or at rest, by means of a quick
action camera and designed to be sold to such person or persons.
   (b)   “Pedestrian” means any person walking or standing upon the sidewalks
or streets of the City.
(Ord. No. 1097-39. Passed 12-11-39)
§ 684.02 License Required
   No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of taking action
pictures of pedestrians upon the sidewalks in the City unless and until such
person has been licensed as provided in this chapter.
§ 684.03 License Application; Fee
   Any person, firm or corporation desiring to engage in the business of taking
street action pictures upon the sidewalks or streets of the City shall make
application for a license to the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses upon
such forms as he or she may prescribe. Such application shall be accompanied by
a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each camera to be used.
(Ord. No. 1097-39. Passed 12-11-39)
§ 684.04 License Issuance
   When satisfied that the applicant is of good moral character, the
Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses shall issue a license for the calendar
year to the applicant to engage in the business of taking street action
pictures of pedestrians, and shall furnish the applicant with a circular badge
not less than two (2) inches in diameter which shall contain, in addition to
the license number, such other information as the Commissioner deems necessary.
(Ord. No. 1097-39. Passed 12-11-39)
§ 684.05 Revocation or Suspension of License
   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses, upon recommendation of the
Chief of Police, may at any time revoke or suspend licenses granted under the
authority of this chapter, for failure to comply with the terms of this chapter
or any of the laws or regulations relating to the taking of street action
pictures of pedestrians.
(Ord. No. 1097-39. Passed 12-11-39)
§ 684.06 Appeals
   In case of refusal to issue a license or of revocation or suspension of a
license by the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses, the applicants or
licensee may appeal from such order to the Board of Zoning Appeals established
pursuant to Charter Section
76-6. Notice of such appeal shall be in writing and filed with the Board within
ten (10) days after the making of such order. The Board shall fix a time of
hearing for such appeal not later than ten (10) days after the filing of such
notice, at which hearing all parties interested shall be afforded an
opportunity to be heard. Such Board shall approve, modify or annul such order
from which the appeal has been perfected. Such opinion of the Board shall be
final on all parties thereto.
(Ord. No. 1097-39. Passed 12-11-39)
§ 684.07 Regulations
   (a)   The street action picture licensee shall be governed by the following
regulations:
      (1)   He or she shall not obstruct or impede pedestrian traffic and shall
not remain more than five (5) minutes at any one (1) location on the sidewalk;
      (2)   He or she shall conduct himself or herself courteously at all times
and shall not make himself or herself a nuisance or annoy pedestrians by
importuning them to purchase pictures;
      (3)   He or she shall deliver or cause to be delivered the finished
photographs to the person purchasing the same within the time specified on the
card handed to the person at the time of taking the photographs;
      (4)   He or she shall hand out only such cards as have been approved as
to form and contents by the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses;
      (5)   He or she shall be accompanied at all times by a person whose duty
it shall be to pick up all such cards as may be cast upon the sidewalk by the
persons to whom they have been handed.
   (b)   The Commissioner is empowered to make such further regulations not
inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter as he or she may deem
necessary.
(Ord. No. 1097-39. Passed 12-11-39)
§ 684.99 Penalty
   Whoever violates the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less than
ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each
offense.
(Ord. No. 1097-39. Passed 12-11-39)
CHAPTER 685 – TRAILER RENTAL AGENCIES
685.01   Tail Light Required
685.02   Stay Chains Required
685.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Tail lights, CO
437.04
   Towing, CO
439.10
Statutory reference:
   Brake equipment required, RC 4513.20
§ 685.01 Tail Light Required
   No person, firm or corporation shall rent any trailer within the City unless
such trailer is equipped with at least one (1) tail light mounted on the rear
which, when lighted, during the time and conditions specified in Section
437.02 of the Codified Ordinances shall emit a red light visible from a
distance of five hundred (500) feet to the rear.
(Ord. No. 1107-57. Passed 5-12-58, eff. 5-17-58)
§ 685.02 Stay Chains Required
   No person, firm or corporation shall rent, within the City, any trailer, the
body of which is fifteen (15) feet or less in length, unless such trailer is
equipped with a drawbar, hitch or other towing connection designed to be
attached to the rear of the towing vehicle and of sufficient strength to pull
the net weight of the trailer and the maximum load capacity of the trailer with
which it is equipped; and, in addition, unless the trailer is equipped with a
stay chain, cable or other similar device of sufficient size and strength to
prevent the trailer from parting with the drawing vehicle in the event that the
drawbar, hitch or other towing connection should break or become disengaged.
(Ord. No. 2007-57. Passed 12-16-57, eff. 12-19-57)
§ 685.99 Penalty
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and fined not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than one
hundred dollars ($100.00).
(Ord. No. 1107-57. Passed 5-12-58, eff. 5-17-58)
CHAPTER 686 – HOSPITALS
686.01   Definitions
686.02   Notice of Operation
686.03   Notice of Decreased Operation
686.04   Equitable Remedies
686.99   Penalty
   Note: Ordinance No. 672-97, passed June 19, 2000 without the signature of
the Mayor, effective June 29, 2000, enacted Sections
686.01 to 686.10 and
686.99 of the Codified Ordinances relating to used motor vehicle storage
places. Ordinance No. 1488-2000, passed October 9, 2000, effective October 17,
2000, renumbered Sections
686.01 to 686.10 and
686.99, as enacted by Ordinance No. 672-97, to Sections
686C.01 to
686C.10 and
686C.99. Ordinance 1488-2000, passed October 9, 2000, effective October 17,
2000, also, in addition to renumbering, amended the text of the versions of
Sections
686.04 (
686C.04), 686.05 (
686C.05), 686.06 (
686C.06), and
686.99 (
686C.99) that were enacted by Ordinance No. 672-97.
§ 686.01 Definitions
   For purposes of this section,
   (a)   “Hospital” means any institution classified as a hospital under RC
3701.01 in which are provided to inpatients diagnostic, medical, surgical,
obstetrical, psychiatric or rehabilitation care for a continuous period longer
than twenty-four (24) hours. “Hospital” does not include a facility licensed
under RC Chapter 3721, a health care facility operated by the Ohio Department
of Mental Health or the Ohio Department of Mental Retardation and Developmental
Disabilities, a health maintenance organization that does not operate a
hospital, the office of any private licensed health care professional, whether
organized for individual or group practice, or a clinic that provides
ambulatory patient services and where patients are not regularly admitted as
inpatients.
   (b)   “Hospital bed” means a bed in a hospital with the attendant physical
space, fixtures, and equipment for use in caring primarily for inpatients.
Hospital beds also shall mean beds used for caring for patients who stay for
less than twenty-four (24) hours, but for which the primary use is the care of
inpatients.
   (c)   “Emergency services or facilities” mean a hospital based emergency
department or facility that accepts patients from ambulance delivery on a
regular basis, or holds itself out as accepting or treating life-or- limb
threatening conditions.
   (d)   “Staff member” means an employee, a leased employee, or independent
contractor of a hospital or emergency facility.
(Ord. No. 385-2000. Passed 3-13-00, eff. 3-23-00 without the signature of the
Mayor)
§ 686.02 Notice of Operation
   Upon fifteen (15) days following the passage hereof, the Chief Executive
Officer or Chief Administrative Officer of all hospitals and emergency
facilities operating within the City of Cleveland shall notify the City of its
number of staff members, number of beds, and the types of services provided at
the facility. Such written notice shall be updated annually, with a written
statement containing the aforementioned information to be provided to the City
no later than February 1 of each calendar year. For purposes of this chapter,
written notice shall be provided to the Clerk of Council, the Mayor, and the
Director of Public Safety.
(Ord. No. 385-2000. Passed 3-13-00, eff. 3-23-00 without the signature of the
Mayor)
§ 686.03 Notice of Decreased Operation
   At least ninety (90) days prior to commencing any of the following
activities, the Chief Executive Officer, Chief Administrative Officer or a
person planning an activity that includes any of the following changes from a
hospital or emergency facility’s operations as set forth in the prior years’
notice to the City, provided pursuant to Section
686.02, shall file a written notice of such intent with the Clerk of Council,
the Mayor, and the Director of Public Safety:
   (a)   Any reduction in, relocation to another facility or site, or changes
in the categorization of inpatient hospital beds by twenty percent (20%) or
greater;
   (b)   Any reduction in or significant operational change to hospital
facilities or services;
   (c)   Any reduction in staff members by twenty percent (20%) or greater; or
   (d)   Any reduction in or significant operational change to a hospital’s
emergency services or facilities.
(Ord. No. 385-2000. Passed 3-13-00, eff. 3-23-00 without the signature of the
Mayor)
§ 686.04 Equitable Remedies
   If a person violates or proposes to violate any section of this chapter, the
City, in addition to other remedies provided by law, may institute injunction,
mandamus or any other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, enjoin or
require compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. No. 385-2000. Passed 3-13-00, eff. 3-23-00 without the signature of the
Mayor)
§ 686.99 Penalty
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall, upon
being convicted of or pleading guilty to a violation of this chapter, be
subject to the penalties contained in Section
601.99. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. No. 385-2000. Passed 3-13-00, eff. 3-23-00 without the signature of the
Mayor)
CHAPTER 686A – HOTELS
686A.01   Definitions
686A.02   Room Rental
686A.03   Late Charges
686A.99   Penalty
§ 686A.01 Definitions
   As used in this chapter “hotel” shall have the same definition as found in
Section
363.08 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Cleveland, Ohio, 1976.
(Ord. No. 901-2000. Passed 10-9-00, eff. 10-17-00)
§ 686A.02 Room Rental
   No person, business or corporation shall offer a room for hire or rent in a
hotel for any increment other than a twenty-four (24) hour increment. This
provision shall not apply, however, to meeting, dining and banquet rooms
located in hotels.
(Ord. No. 901-2000. Passed 10-9-00, eff. 10-17-00)
§ 686A.03 Late Charges
   No provision of this chapter shall prohibit a hotel from assessing late
charges or similar charges to patrons who fail to check out in accordance with
posted check out times or procedures.
(Ord. No. 901-2000. Passed 10-9-00, eff. 10-17-00)
§ 686A.99 Penalty
   Whoever violates any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(Ord. No. 901-2000. Passed 10-9-00, eff. 10-17-00)
CHAPTER 686C – USED MOTOR VEHICLE STORAGE PLACES
686C.01   Intent
686C.02   Definitions
686C.03   License Required
686C.04   Application, Plans and Fees
686C.05   License Approval and Issuance
686C.06   Storage of Vehicles for Sale
686C.07   Fencing and Landscaping
686C.08   Maintenance of Premises
686C.09   Revocation or Suspension of License
686C.10   Appeals and Exceptions
686C.99   Penalty
   Note: Ordinance No. 672-97, passed June 19, 2000 without the signature of
the Mayor, effective June 29, 2000, enacted Sections
686.01 to 686.10 and
686.99 of the Codified Ordinances relating to used motor vehicle storage
places. Ordinance No. 1488-2000, passed October 9, 2000, effective October 17,
2000, renumbered Sections
686.01 to 686.10 and
686.99, as enacted by Ordinance No. 672-97, to Sections
686C.01 to
686C.10 and
686C.99. Ordinance 1488-2000, passed October 9, 2000, effective October 17,
2000, also, in addition to renumbering, amended the text of the versions of
Sections
686.04 (
686C.04), 686.05 (
686C.05), 686.06 (
686C.06), and
686.99 (
686C.99) that were enacted by Ordinance No. 672-97.
§ 686C.01 Intent
   The regulations of this chapter establish annual licensing requirements
intended to ensure that used motor vehicle storage places are improved and
maintained in a manner which promotes public safety and which protects the
value and character of nearby properties.
(Ord. No. 672-97. Passed 6-19-00, eff. 6-29-00 without the signature of the
Mayor)
   Note: Renumbered by Ord. No. 1488-2000. Passed 10-9-00, eff. 10-17-00.
§ 686C.02 Definitions
   As used in this chapter, the following terms shall be defined in the
following manner:
   (a)   “Commissioner” means the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses.
   (b)   “Director” means the Director of the City Planning Commission.
   (c)   “Motor vehicle” is as defined in Chapter
401 of the Codified Ordinances and refers, generally, to an automobile, truck
or motorcycle.
   (d)   “New motor vehicle dealer” means any person engaged in the business of
selling at retail, displaying, offering for sale, or dealing in new motor
vehicles pursuant to a contract or agreement entered into with the
manufacturer, remanufacturer, or distributor of the motor vehicles.
   (e)   “Used motor vehicle dealer” means any person engaged in the business
of selling, displaying, offering for sale, or dealing in used motor vehicles,
at retail or wholesale, but does not include any of the following:
      (1)   A new motor vehicle dealer selling, displaying, offering for sale,
or dealing in used motor vehicles incidental to engaging in the business of
selling, displaying, offering for sale, or dealing in new motor vehicles,
provided that the used motor vehicles are sold, displayed or offered for sale
on land that is adjacent or contiguous to the new motor vehicle sales lot; or
      (2)   A person engaged in the business of dismantling, salvaging, or
rebuilding motor vehicles by means of using used parts; or
      (3)   A public officer performing official duties.
   (f)   “Used motor vehicle sales place” means the business premises of a used
motor vehicle dealer. Two (2) or more adjoining or proximate parcels used for
such purposes and operated as a single business shall be considered one (1)
“used motor vehicle sales place” for purposes of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 672-97. Passed 6-19-00, eff. 6-29-00 without the signature of the
Mayor)
   Note: Renumbered by Ord. No. 1488-2000. Passed 10-9-00, eff. 10-17-00.
§ 686C.03 License Required
   No used motor vehicle storage place shall be established or operated without
a license issued pursuant to this chapter. Each motor vehicle sales place shall
require a separate license regardless of the number of such places operated by
a single business or dealership. Licenses shall be renewed on an annual basis
and shall not be assignable or transferable. A new license shall be required
for each new operator and for any enlargement or expansion of the area used for
storage of motor vehicles at a used motor vehicle storage place.
(Ord. No. 672-97. Passed 6-19-00, eff. 6-29-00 without the signature of the
Mayor)
   Note: Renumbered by Ord. No. 1488-2000. Passed 10-9-00, eff. 10-17-00.
§ 686C.04 Application, Plans and Fees
   (a)   License Application. Any person or firm operating or proposing to
operate a used motor vehicle storage place shall submit a license application
to the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses on a form provided by the
Commissioner, in accordance with the following provisions:
      (1)   Submission Date. For used motor vehicle storage places in operation
prior to the initial effective date of this chapter, the required license
application shall be submitted by October 31, 2000, for issuance by December
31, 2000. Thereafter, applications for license renewal shall be submitted by
October 31 of each year for issuance by December 31 of that year. For used
motor vehicle storage places established on or after the initial effective date
of this chapter, the required license application shall be submitted at least
two (2) months prior to the requested start of operation.
      (2)   Application Contents. License applications shall provide the
following information and any other information which the Commissioner deems
necessary to determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter:
         A.   The address, telephone number and name, if any, of the used motor
vehicle storage place and a map showing and identifying, by permanent parcel
number, the parcels of land which are occupied by such use;
         B.   Name, address, telephone number, and each social security number
of each operator of the used motor vehicle storage place, each partner in the
case of a partnership, and each officer and Director in the case of a
corporation;
         C.   A copy of the current Certificate of Occupancy for the premises,
indicating that the use has been legally established under applicable
provisions of the Zoning and Building Codes;
         D.   A list of temporary license plates issued by the used motor
vehicle sales place in the previous twelve (12) months.
      (3)   License Fee. Each application for issuance or renewal of a license’
shall be accompanied by a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00), submitted to
the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses (made payable to the “City of
Cleveland”).
   (b)   Improvement Plans. In the case of a proposal to establish a used motor
vehicle storage place or to expand or enlarge the motor vehicle storage area of
such place, and in the case of any existing used motor vehicle storage place
for which compliance with the fencing and landscaping requirements of Section
686C.07 is due during the current licensing year, the operator of such place
shall submit plans to the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses for approval
by Director of the City Planning Commission, demonstrating compliance with
those requirements. Such plans shall be prepared and submitted in accordance
with the following provisions:
      (1)   Submission Date. For used motor vehicle storage places in operation
and legally established prior to the initial effective date of this chapter,
the required improvement plans shall be submitted no later than February 28,
2001. In all other cases, the required plan shall be submitted with the license
application required in division (a) of this section.
      (2)   Plan Contents. In addition to listing the address of the used motor
vehicle storage place and the name, address and telephone number of the
operator, the submission of improvement plans shall include the following:
         A.   An accurately scaled and dimensioned site plan and elevation
drawing showing all existing and proposed fencing, landscaping, yard areas,
vehicle storage areas, customer and employee parking areas, sidewalks,
treelawns, curbs, driveways, wheelstops, guardrails, buildings, signs, and lot
lines;
         B.   Specifications for all proposed fencing and landscaping,
indicating the type, color, material and gauge of fencing; the type, height and
number of landscape materials, and a description of proposed ground cover and
landscape curbing.
      (3)   Plan Fee. Each plan submission shall be accompanied by a fee of one
hundred dollars ($100.00). Such Plan Fee shall be in addition to any License
Fee and shall be submitted to the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses
(made payable to the “City of Cleveland”).
(Ord. No. 1488-2000. Passed 10-9-00, eff. 10-17-00)
§ 686C.05 License Approval and Issuance
   (a)   Referral to Commissioner of Building and Housing. Upon receipt of a
complete license application and accompanying fee, the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses shall transmit the application to the Commissioner of
Building and Housing for a determination of compliance with the provisions of
this chapter, except as provided in division (b) for the determination of
initial compliance with the requirements of fencing and landscaping.
   (b)   Referral to City Planning Director. In the case of a license
application for which initial compliance with the fencing and landscaping
requirements of Section
686C.07 was required during the current licensing year, the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses shall transmit a copy of the application to the
Director of the City Planning Commission for a determination of compliance with
such requirements.
   (c)   Issuance of License. For used motor vehicle storage places which are
in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses shall issue a license not later than December 31 of
each year or not later than two (2) months after receipt of a complete
application, whichever date occurs later.
   (d)   Effective Period. Licenses, generally, shall be in effect for a period
of one (1) year, from January 1 to December 31. For a used motor vehicle
storage place established through licensing or re-licensing on a date other
than January 1, the license shall be in effect for the remainder of the regular
licensing year. For a license issued after September 1 but prior to December
31, the license shall be in effect until December 31 of the following calendar
year.
(Ord. No. 1488-2000. Passed 10-9-00, eff. 10-17-00)
§ 686C.06 Storage of Vehicles for Sale
   (a)   Storage. Motor vehicles stored for sale shall be kept off of public
sidewalks and public streets. Such vehicles shall be contained on private
property by means of the ornamental metal fencing and/or landscape strips as
required in Section
686C.07. In the case of a used motor vehicle storage place for which
installation of such fencing or landscaping is not yet required, stored
vehicles shall be kept off of the public right-of-way by maintenance of setback
areas required by zoning regulations and/or by anchored concrete or plastic
wheelstops, concrete or asphalt curbing, wooden bollards or black-painted posts
and metal chains/cables, or black-painted guard rails or pipe rail. Chain link
or wooden fencing shall not be used to contain stored vehicles on private
property, except that retention of such fencing, if in good repair, shall be
permitted until installation of ornamental metal fencing or landscaping is
required by the provisions of Section
686C.07.
   (b)   Use. If the operator of a motor vehicle sales place permits customers
to test drive vehicles offered for sale, the operator shall provide to each
such customer, immediately prior to the test drive, a written notice stating
that the vehicle shall be operated in accordance with all applicable traffic
laws, and, more specifically, shall not be operated in a manner that produces
excessive and unusual levels of noise or fumes. To facilitate compliance with
this notice, an employee of the used motor vehicle sales place shall accompany
any customer test-driving a vehicle being offered for sale. Repeated violations
of the provision of this section will be considered cause for suspension or
revocation of a license.
(Ord. No. 1488-2000. Passed 10-9-00, eff. 10-17-00)
§ 686C.07 Fencing and Landscaping
   Used motor vehicle storage places shall be bordered along all public
streets, except at permitted driveway openings, by fencing and/or landscape
strips which meet the standards established in this section.
   (a)   Landscape Strip. Except as provided in division (d) of this section, a
landscape strip shall be provided along the entire length of each street right-
of- way bordering the used motor vehicle storage place, except at permitted
driveway openings.
      (1)   Width. Each such landscape strip shall be a minimum of four (4)
feet in width, as measured inward from the public right-of-way line, but shall
be no narrower than any yard of setback required by Zoning Code regulations or
as established by action taken by the Board of Zoning Appeals prior to the
initial effective date of this chapter.
      (2)   Shrubs and Trees. The landscape strip shall be planted with
evergreen shrubs, at least two (2) feet in height above the grade of the
adjoining surface on which motor vehicles are stored or parked, with such
shrubs spaced at maximum intervals of five (5) feet along the length of each
strip. Trees, at least two (2) inches in caliper, shall be provided in each
landscape strip at maximum intervals of forty (40) feet. If the shrubs are
spaced at maximum intervals of two and an half (2-1/2) feet, no trees shall be
required.
      (3)   Ground Cover and Curbing. The landscape strip, if over four (4)
feet in width, shall be planted with grass or other vegetative ground cover. If
four (4) feet or less in width, the landscape strip may be covered with
decorative bark, mulch or stones, and such materials shall be bordered along
the sidewalk edge by concrete curbing and along other edges by concrete
curbing, asphalt curbing, or treated timbers.
   (b)   Ornamental Fencing. Fencing meeting the requirements of this division
shall be provided along the entire length of each street right-of-way bordering
the used motor vehicle storage place, except at permitted driveway openings and
except as provided in divisions (c) and (d) of this section. Such fencing shall
be composed of wrought iron-style ornamental metal pickets and rails, black in
color, constructed of iron, steel or aluminum, a minimum of four (4) feet in
height and a maximum of six (6) feet in height. Pickets shall be spaced no more
than six (6) inches apart, and shall be at least five-eights (5/8) inches in
diameter if hollow and at least three-eighths (3/8) inches in diameter if
solid. Brick or stone elements may also be incorporated into such fence. The
City Planning Commission may approve use of ornamental barriers as an
alternative to the otherwise-required wrought-iron style fencing, in accordance
with design guidelines adopted by the Commission. Any fencing provided along
street frontages, whether required or provided voluntarily, shall meet the
requirements of this division.
   (c)   Barriers. Non-ornamental barriers may be substituted for ornamental
fencing along street frontages where landscaping meeting the requirements of
division (a) of this section is provided. Such barriers may be composed of
either capped metal posts or wooden bollards, linked by metal chains or cables,
pipe rail, no more than four (4) feet in height. All metal posts and rails
shall be black in color. Wooden bollards shall be eight (8) inches square, with
a beveled or chamfer top edge, and a one (1) inch deep routed groove
approximately one (1) foot below the top edge.
   (d)   Landscaping and Fencing Exemptions. For used motor vehicle storage
places legally established prior to the initial effective date of this chapter,
no landscape strip shall be required along a street frontage where no yard or
setback area is required by Zoning Code regulations. For used motor vehicle
storage places located in General Industry and Unrestricted Industry zoning
districts, neither the requirements for landscape strips nor ornamental fencing
shall apply. No fencing, landscaping or other vehicular barriers shall be
required along alleys, as defined in Section
303.09 of the Codified Ordinances.
   (e)   Driveway Openings. The width of each driveway opening providing
ingress or egress to a used motor vehicle storage place shall not exceed a
twenty- four (24) feet, as measured at the property line. Any curb not in
compliance with Zoning Code regulations regarding number or spacing shall be
eliminated unless such curb cut was established pursuant to a permit issued by
the City.
   (f)   Compliance Schedule. Used motor vehicle storage places legally
established prior to the initial effective date of this chapter shall be made
to comply with the fencing and landscaping requirements of this section no
later than July 31, 2001. Used motor vehicle storage places established on or
after the initial effective date of this chapter shall be made to comply with
requirements of this section prior to issuance of a license.
(Ord. No. 672-97. Passed 6-19-00, eff. 6-29-00 without the signature of the
Mayor)
   Note: Renumbered by Ord. No. 1488-2000. Passed 10-9-00, eff. 10-17-00.
§ 686C.08 Maintenance of Premises
   The surface of outdoor areas used for the storage of motor vehicles shall be
paved with asphalt or concrete or, if permitted by Zoning Code regulations,
shall be covered by crushed stone. Such surface shall be kept in good repair,
level and reasonably free of dust if not hardsurfaced. Fencing and landscaping
shall also be maintained in good condition. Unhealthy or dead vegetation shall
be replaced promptly.
(Ord. No. 672-97. Passed 6-19-00, eff. 6-29-00 without the signature of the
Mayor)
   Note: Renumbered by Ord. No. 1488-2000. Passed 10-9-00, eff. 10-17-00.
§ 686C.09 Revocation or Suspension of License
   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses may at any time revoke or
suspend the license granted under authority of this chapter for failure to
comply with the terms of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 672-97. Passed 6-19-00, eff. 6-29-00 without the signature of the
Mayor)
   Note: Renumbered by Ord. No. 1488-2000. Passed 10-9-00, eff. 10-17-00.
§ 686C.10 Appeals and Exceptions
   (a)   Appeals. If the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses refuses to
issue or revokes or suspends a license, the applicant or licensee may appeal
such order to the Board of Zoning Appeals. Such appeal shall be filed in
writing with the Board within ten (10) days after the making of such order. The
Board shall hear the appeal within ten (10) days after the filing. At the
hearing, all interested parties shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard.
In considering the appeal, the Board shall determine whether the Commissioner’s
order was made in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The Board
shall approve, modify or annul such order, and the finding of the Board shall
be final with respect to all parties.
   (b)   Exceptions. If the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses refuses to
issue or revokes or suspends a license, the applicant or licensee may request
the Board of Zoning Appeals to issue an exception to the provision(s) of this
chapter upon which the Commissioner’s order was based, as applied to the
subject premises.
      (1)   Filing and Notice. Such request shall be filed in writing with the
Board within ten (10) days after the making of such order by the Commissioner
of Assessments and Licenses. The Board shall hold a public hearing to consider
the request after providing public notice and, also, written notice mailed to
the owner or his or her agent at the given address on the request and, so far
as is practical, written notice to directly affected property owners or their
agents given at least seven (7) days prior to the date of such proposed
hearing, in such manner as the Board may, by its rules, prescribe.
      (2)   Action by the Board. In considering the request for an exception,
the Board shall approve such request only if it determines that a strict
application of the regulations will result in practical difficulty which
inheres in and is peculiar to the subject premises and that granting of that
request will not be contrary to the intent of the provisions of this chapter.
In addition, the Board shall approve such request if it determines that the
applicant has proposed an alternate and equally effective means of achieving
the intent of such provisions.
(Ord. No. 672-97. Passed 6-19-00, eff. 6-29-00 without the signature of the
Mayor)
   Note: Renumbered by Ord. No. 1488-2000. Passed 10-9-00, eff. 10-17-00.
§ 686C.99 Penalty
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of Sections
686C.03,
686C.04,
686C.06,
686C.07, or
686C.08 shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor and fined not more than one
hundred dollars ($100.00). In addition to any other method of enforcement
provided for in this chapter, these minor misdemeanors may be enforced by the
issuance of a citation in compliance with Rule 4.1 of the Ohio Rules of
Criminal Procedure. Whoever violates any of the provisions of these sections,
having previously been convicted of a violation of any of these sections within
five (5) years, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(Ord. No. 1488-2000. Passed 10-9-00, eff. 10-17-00)
CHAPTER 687A – SURETY BAIL BOND AGENTS
687A.01   Definition of Surety Bail Bond Agent
687A.02   City Registration Required to Act in the Capacity of Surety Bail Bond
Agent
687A.03   Notification of Police Before Attempting Apprehension, Detention or
Arrest
687A.04   State License Required to Act in the Capacity of Surety Bail Bond
Agent
687A.05   Persons Who May Apprehend, Detain or Arrest a Principal on Bond
Identified
687A.06   Identification Card to be Visible
687A.07   Hiring Unqualified Surety Bail Bond Agent Prohibited
687A.08   Masks Prohibited
§ 687A.01 Definition of Surety Bail Bond Agent
   As used in this chapter, “surety bail bond agent” has the same meaning as in
RC 3905.83 to 3905.95.
(Ord. No. 2032-01. Passed 5-6-02, eff. 5-9-02)
§ 687A.02 City Registration Required to Act in the Capacity of Surety Bail Bond
Agent
   (a)   No person shall act in the capacity of a surety bail bond agent in the
City of Cleveland, or perform any of the functions, duties or powers prescribed
for surety bail bond agents under RC 3905.83 to 3905.95 in the City of
Cleveland, unless that person first registers with the Chief of Police, in the
manner described in this section.
   (b)   To register with the City of Cleveland, a surety bail bond agent shall
file the following with the Chief of Police:
      (1)   A certified copy of the surety bail bond agent’s appointment by
power of attorney from each insurer that the surety bail bond agent represents;
and
      (2)   A copy of the surety bail bond agent’s license issued by the Ohio
superintendent of insurance, and a copy of the wallet identification issued to
the agent under division (G) of RC 3905.85; and
      (3)   The address and telephone number of the surety bail bond agent and
such other information as the Chief of Police may require to effectuate the
purposes of this chapter.
   (c)   The Chief of Police shall not accept the registration of a surety bail
bond agent unless the surety bail bond agent is currently licensed and
appointed in accordance with RC 3905.83 to 3905.95.
   (d)   Each surety bail bond agent licensed and appointed in accordance with
RC 3905.83 to 3905.95 shall notify the Chief of Police within thirty (30) days
of any change of address or telephone number provided as part of the
registration required by this section.
   (e)   Any person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree on the first offense, and a misdemeanor of the first degree on
each subsequent offense.
(Ord. No. 2032-01. Passed 5-6-02, eff. 5-9-02)
§ 687A.03 Notification of Police Before Attempting Apprehension, Detention or
Arrest
   (a)   No person acting as a bail surety bond agent shall apprehend, detain
or arrest a principal on bond within the City of Cleveland without first
notifying the Division of Police that the same will be attempted. The Chief of
Police shall prescribe the method by which notification is made. The notice
required by this section shall be made at least thirty (30) minutes prior to
the attempted apprehension, detention or arrest, unless rules or regulations of
the Chief of Police shall otherwise direct.
   (b)   The Chief of Police may issue rules and regulations to effectuate the
provisions of this section, which shall be effective ten (10) days after
publication in the City Record.
   (c)   Any person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(Ord. No. 2032-01. Passed 5-6-02, eff. 5-9-02)
§ 687A.04 State License Required to Act in the Capacity of Surety Bail Bond
Agent
   (a)   No person shall act in the capacity of a surety bail bond agent, or
perform any of the functions, duties or powers prescribed for surety bail bond
agents under RC 3905.83 to 3905.95, unless that person is qualified, licensed,
and appointed as provided in those sections.
   (b)   This section shall not apply whenever the conduct prohibited by this
section constitutes a felony under RC 2927.27.
   (c)   Any person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(RC 3905.84; RC 3905.99; Ord. No. 2032-01. Passed 5-6-02, eff. 5-9-02)
§ 687A.05 Persons Who May Apprehend, Detain or Arrest a Principal on Bond
Identified
   (a)   No person, other than a law enforcement officer, shall apprehend,
detain, or arrest a principal on bond, wherever issued, unless that person
meets all of the following criteria:
      (1)   The person is any of the following:
         A.   Qualified, licensed, and appointed as a surety bail bond agent
under RC 3905.83 to 3905.95;
         B.   Licensed as a surety bail bond agent by the state where the bond
was written;
         C.   Licensed as a private investigator under RC Chapter 4749;
         D.   Licensed as a private investigator by the state where the bond
was written;
         E.   An off-duty peace officer, as defined in RC 2921.51.
      (2)   The person, prior to apprehending, detaining or arresting the
principal, has entered into a written contract with the surety or with a
licensed surety bail bond agent appointed by the surety, which contract sets
forth the name of the principal who is to be apprehended, detained or arrested.
      For purposes of this division, “surety” has the same meaning as in RC
3905.83.
      (3)   The person, prior to apprehending, detaining or arresting the
principal, has complied with the registration and notification requirements set
forth in Sections
687A.02 and
687A.03 of this chapter.
   (b)   This section shall not apply whenever the conduct prohibited by this
section constitutes a felony under RC 2927.27.
   (c)   Any person who violates this section is guilty of illegal bail bond
agent practices, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(RC 2927.27; Ord. No. 2032-01. Passed 5-6-02, eff. 5-9-02)
§ 687A.06 Identification Card to be Visible
   (a)   No person acting as a surety bail bond agent shall attempt an
apprehension, detention or arrest of a principal on bail without wearing on his
or her outermost clothing, in a conspicuous manner visible to any citizen or
police officer, the wallet identification issued to the agent by the
superintendent of insurance of Ohio under division (G) of RC 3905.85.
   (b)   Any person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
second degree.
(Ord. No. 2032-01. Passed 5-6-02, eff. 5-9-02)
§ 687A.07 Hiring Unqualified Surety Bail Bond Agent Prohibited
   (a)   No person shall employ as a surety bail bond agent any person who is
not licensed and appointed in accordance with RC 3905.83 to 3905.95 or who is
not registered with the Chief of Police in accordance with Section
687A.02 of this chapter.
   (b)   Any person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(Ord. No. 2032-01. Passed 5-6-02, eff. 5-9-02)
§ 687A.08 Masks Prohibited
   (a)   No person acting as a surety bail bond agent shall attempt an
apprehension, detention or arrest of a principal on bail while wearing any type
of mask, or similar facial covering.
   (b)   Any person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(Ord. No. 2032-01. Passed 5-6-02, eff. 5-9-02)
CHAPTER 687B – THIRD-PARTY FOOD DELIVERY SERVICES
687B.01   Definitions
687B.02   Limit on Commissions
687B.03   Compensation
687B.04   Reserved
687B.05   Effective dates
687B.06   Severability
687B.99   Penalties
§ 687B.01 Definitions
   For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall mean:
   (a)   "Commission" means a fee paid to a third-party food delivery service
for performing a transaction or a service.
   (b)   "Eating and drinking establishment" means a restaurant, bar, tavern,
cabaret, fast-food business, nightclub, pub, dining room, dinner theater, and
similar uses.
   (c)   "Person" means an organization, corporation for profit or not for
profit, partnership, limited partnership, joint venture, unincorporated
association, estate, trust, or other commercial or legal entity.
   (d)   "Purchase price" means the menu price of an online order, minus any
applicable coupon or promotional discount provided to the customer by the
eating and drinking establishment. Such price excludes taxes, gratuities, and
any other fees that make up the total cost to the consumer of an online order.
   (e)   "Third-party food delivery service" means any person who is engaged in
operating a website, mobile application, or other internet service business
that offers or arranges for the sale and/or delivery of food and beverages
prepared by eating and drinking establishments.
(Ord. No. 966-2020. Passed 12-9-20, eff. 12-15-20)
§ 687B.02 Limit on Commissions
   (a)   No third-party food delivery service shall charge an eating and
drinking establishment a commission per online delivery or pick-up order for
the use of its service that totals more than fifteen percent (15%) of the
purchase price of the online order.
   (b)   If a third-party food delivery service charges an eating and drinking
establishment a commission that exceeds fifteen percent (15%) of the purchase
price of a placed online order, the eating and drinking establishment shall
provide written notice to the third-party food delivery service requesting a
refund of the amount of commission paid in excess of the allowable fifteen
percent (15%) within seven (7) business days. No third-party food delivery
service shall fail to issue a refund within seven (7) business days of receipt
of the notice.
   (c)   An eating and drinking establishment may agree to pay a third-party
food delivery service a fee that exceeds the limits established in Section
687B.02(a) and (b) to obtain optional products or services, including
advertising, marketing, or access to customer subscription programs, in
addition to delivery or pick-up service.
(Ord. No. 966-2020. Passed 12-9-20, eff. 12-15-20)
§ 687B.03 Compensation
   No third-party food delivery service shall reduce the compensation rates
paid to any delivery service driver or garnish gratuities paid to any driver as
a result of the provisions in this chapter.
(Ord. No. 966-2020. Passed 12-9-20, eff. 12-15-20)
§ 687B.04 Reserved
(Ord. No. 966-2020. Passed 12-9-20, eff. 12-15-20)
§ 687B.05 Effective dates
   This chapter shall only be in effect from the effective date of this
ordinance until ninety (90) days after eating and drinking establishments are
permitted to operate with no restrictions.
(Ord. No. 966-2020. Passed 12-9-20, eff. 12-15-20)
§ 687B.06 Severability
   The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be severable; and if any
of its provisions shall be held unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, the decision of such court shall not impair any of the remaining
provisions.
(Ord. No. 966-2020. Passed 12-9-20, eff. 12-15-20)
§ 687B.99 Penalties
   (a)   A third-party food delivery service that violates any provision of
this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (b)   Strict liability is intended to be imposed as the culpable mental
state for a violation of this chapter.
   (c)   In accordance with Section
601.10 of the Codified Ordinance of Cleveland, Ohio, 1976, organizational
criminal liability is intended to be imposed for violations of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 966-2020. Passed 12-9-20, eff. 12-15-20)
TITLE IX: AMUSEMENTS
   Chapter
687   Amusement Parks
   Chapter
688   Billiard Rooms
   Chapter
689   Bowling Alleys
   Chapter
690   Dance Halls and Dances
   Chapter
691   Karting Parks and Saucer Tracks
   Chapter
692   Music Entertainment
   Chapter
692A   Coin Operated Amusement Devices
   Chapter
693   Picture Machines and Theaters
   Chapter
694   Roller Rinks
   Chapter
695   Shooting Galleries
   Chapter
696   Teen Clubs
   Chapter
697   Temporary Shows
   Chapter
697A   Major Qualifying Events
   Chapter
698   Ticket Brokers
   Chapter
698A   Outdoor Sales of Tickets of Admission to Sporting Events and Other
Events
   Chapter
699   Picture Arcades and Live Viewing Booths
   Chapter
699A   Community Entertainment Districts
   Chapter
699B   Designated Outdoor Refreshment Areas
CHAPTER 687 – AMUSEMENT PARKS
687.01   Definition
687.02   License Required; Application
687.03   License Issuance; Fee
687.04   Bond and Public Liability Insurance Requirements
687.05   Operating Regulations; Discrimination Prohibited
687.06   License Suspension; Revocation
687.07   Appeal
687.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Karting park license required, CO
691.02
   Unlawful discrimination, CO
Ch. 667
   Unnecessary noise, CO
605.10
§ 687.01 Definition
   “Amusement park” for the purposes of this chapter, means an outdoor place of
public resort other than a publicly owned park in which are provided one (1) or
more amusement devices or methods of entertainment for which a fee or charge is
exacted. For the purposes of explanation, but not of limitation, amusement
devices include merry-go-rounds, roller coasters, shoot-the-chutes and other
similar devices, and amusement methods include dance halls, shooting galleries,
roller skating rinks, open air theaters and the like.
(Ord. No. 2230-46. Passed 2-17-47)
§ 687.02 License Required; Application
   No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of operating an
amusement park in the City as defined in Section
687.01, without first obtaining a license to do so. Application for such
license shall be made in writing to the Commissioner of Assessments and
Licenses upon such forms as he or she shall prescribe.
(Ord. No. 2230-46. Passed 2-17-47)
§ 687.03 License Issuance; Fee
   Each application for a license shall be referred to the Director of Public
Safety for investigation and report on the character and experience of the
applicant, the safety of the devices and the compliance with the zoning
regulations. Based thereon the Director shall endorse his or her approval or
disapproval. If such application is approved by the Director, the Commissioner
of Assessments and Licenses shall issue a license therefor upon payment of a
fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per quarter, commencing on January 1,
April 1, July 1 and October 1 in each year.
(Ord. No. 2230-46. Passed 2-17-47)
§ 687.04 Bond and Public Liability Insurance Requirements
   Every licensee hereunder shall deposit with the Commissioner of Assessments
and Licenses a bond in the penal sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) with
a solvent and responsible surety company authorized under the laws of the State
as surety thereon, acceptable to and approved by the Commissioner and the
Director of Law, conditioned upon the faithful observance by the licensee, his
or her agents, employees, concessionaires and lessees, of all of the provisions
of law and ordinance relating to the operation of amusement places, and further
conditioned that the licensee will indemnify any person who has secured a
judgment based upon damage or loss, other than personal injury or death, by
reason of the operation of such amusement park, the aggregate liability of such
bond not to exceed the penal sum thereof. He or she shall also furnish a policy
of liability insurance acceptable to and approved by the Commissioner and the
Director of Law indemnifying the licensee for its legal liability for injury or
death by reason of the carelessness or negligence of the licensee, his or her
agents, employees, concessionaires or lessees, to one (1) person up to the sum
of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) and to more than one (1) person in any one
(1) accident up to the aggregate sum of one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00). Such bond and policy shall each contain a provision obligating
the surety or insurance company thereon to give ten (10) days written notice to
the Commissioner before cancellation of such bond or policy. If at any time, in
the judgment of the Commissioner, such bond or policy of insurance is not
sufficient for any cause, the Commissioner may require the licensee to replace
such bond or policy with another approved by the Commissioner and the Director
of Law. Any licensee who is a self-insurer and maintains an insurance fund
adequate, in the judgment of the Director of Finance, to meet the requirements
of the liability insurance herein set forth shall not be required to furnish a
policy of liability insurance.
(Ord. No. 981-47. Passed 6-16-47)
§ 687.05 Operating Regulations; Discrimination Prohibited
   (a)   No person shall operate any roller coaster, gravity railroad, shoot-
the-chutes, merry-go-round, carousel, shooting gallery, switch backs, giant
swing, revolving wheels, ferris wheels, scenic railways, whirligigs, flying
horses, round-abouts or loop-the- loops in any outdoor amusement park or place,
or upon any place where outdoor amusements are permitted, provided for or
conducted or carried on, nearer than one hundred fifty (150) feet from any
point on the boundary line of the property constituting such amusement park or
place where outdoor amusements are permitted, or nearer than three hundred
(300) feet from any adjacent land in a residence or retail business district as
designated in Chapter
335 of the Codified Ordinances. However, in the case of an amusement park in
existence at the time of the adoption of this section, the distance
requirements specified herein shall not apply to any of the amusement devices
in their several existing locations on the date of the adoption of this
section, and the distance requirements shall be subject to modification by the
Board of Zoning Appeals, established pursuant to Charter Section
76-6, in the case of proposed additional devices, substitutions or changes in
locations of or other changes pertaining to existing devices in such existing
amusement parks. No person shall operate in any outdoor place in the City other
than in an amusement park or place as hereinbefore described, any merry-go-
round, roller coaster, gravity railroad, shoot-the-chutes, carousel, shooting
gallery, switch back, giant swing, revolving wheel, ferris wheels, scenic
railway, whirligig, flying horses, round-about or loop-the-loop, when any part
of such device is nearer than one hundred (100) feet to a public street or
highway, or to an inhabited dwelling. If there is an inhabited dwelling within
one hundred fifty (150) feet of any such device the music, whether made by
organ, whistle or bells, shall be permitted only during the hours from 10:00
a.m. to 9:00 p.m. No person shall continue any such music beyond the hour of 9:
00 p.m. or commence the same earlier than 10:00 a.m. At his or her discretion,
the Director of Public Safety may grant a permit authorizing the continuance of
such music during the hours herein prohibited nearer than one hundred fifty
(150) feet to an inhabited dwelling and also permitting the operation of any of
the devices hereinbefore described nearer than one hundred (100) feet to a
public street or highway or to an inhabited dwelling. In either event such
permit is to be for not more than two (2) days in any calendar month. Strict
compliance shall be had with the provisions of law and ordinance relating to
the safe operation of all amusement devices and to the hazards of fire and
panic.
   (b)   No person shall be refused admission to or be denied any of the
amusement opportunities afforded by any amusement park, except for reasons
common to all other persons. In no event shall any person be discriminated
against in the enjoyment of such amusement opportunities and facilities because
of race, religion, color, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity or
expression, national origin, age, disability, ethnic group or Vietnam-era or
disabled veteran status.
(Ord. No. 1260-08. Passed 11-30-09, eff. 12-3-09)
§ 687.06 License Suspension; Revocation
   (a)   If the licensee fails to comply with any of the terms and conditions
of this chapter or any of the laws or ordinances relating to the business
licensed, other than the prohibition against discrimination contained in this
chapter and in the civil rights statutes of Ohio, the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses, upon the recommendation of the Director of Public
Safety, may suspend or revoke such license.
   (b)   If any licensee has been convicted of a violation of the civil rights
statutes, or if judgment has been obtained against such licensee because of
such violation, the Commissioner shall revoke the license issued hereunder and
no license shall be issued to any such licensee until the expiration of one (1)
year from the date of revocation. Upon the complaint of alleged discrimination
on the part of any licensee the Director, if satisfied after investigation that
such complaint is valid, may recommend the suspension of the license and
thereupon the Commissioner shall suspend such license for a period not less
than thirty (30) days nor more than six (6) months.
   (c)   The order of the Commissioner revoking or suspending a license shall
become effective forthwith except that in the case of violation of the civil
rights statutes or the anti-discrimination provisions of this chapter, such
order shall become effective at the expiration of ten (10) days from the
issuance thereof.
(Ord. No. 2230-46. Passed 2-17-47)
§ 687.07 Appeal
   In case of the refusal to issue a license or the revocation or suspension of
a license by the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses, the applicant or
licensee may appeal from such order to the Board of Zoning Appeals established
pursuant to Charter Section
76-6. Notice of such appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the
Commissioner within ten (10) days after making of such order. The Board, within
three (3) days after filing with the Commissioner such notice of appeal, shall
proceed with the hearing of such appeal, at which hearing all parties
interested shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard. Such Board shall
approve, modify or annul such order from which the appeal has been perfected,
and the finding of such Board shall be final on all parties.
(Ord. No. 2230-46. Passed 2-17-47)
§ 687.99 Penalty
   Whoever violates Section
687.05 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and fined not more than fifty dollars
($50.00) for the first offense and for a second or subsequent offense not more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisoned for not more than thirty
(30) days, or both. Each day’s violation constitutes a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 2230-46. Passed 2-17-47)
CHAPTER 688 – BILLIARD ROOMS
688.01   Definitions
688.02   License Required
688.03   License Application
688.04   Citizenship Required
688.05   Application Information Required
688.06   License Investigation; Rejection; Appeal
688.07   Inspector
688.08   License Fees; Disposition
688.09   License Expiration
688.10   License Transfer
688.11   Hours of Operation
688.12   Minors Prohibited
688.13   Owner’s Duty to Exclude Minors; Exceptions
688.14   Games of Chance Prohibited
688.15   Sanitary Condition; Inspection
688.16   License to be Posted
688.17   License Suspension; Revocation; Appeal
688.18   Reserved
688.99   Penalty
   Note: The legislative history of this chapter, except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 63410-A, passed
September 22, 1924.
Cross-reference:
   Gambling prohibitions, CO
Ch. 611
   Permit for musical entertainment, CO
692.01 et seq.
Statutory reference:
   Power to regulate, RC 715.51, 715.61
§ 688.01 Definitions
   “Billiards” as used in this chapter, means any of the several games played
on a table surrounded by an elastic ledge or cushions, with balls which are
impelled by a cue, and includes all forms of the game known as pool. “Billiard
room” means any public place wherein the game of billiards is permitted to be
played.
§ 688.02 License Required
   No person, society, club, firm or corporation shall open, conduct, maintain
or operate a billiard room within the City unless such person, society, club,
firm or corporation has first been duly licensed by the City for such purpose.
However, the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to private residences
or schools.
§ 688.03 License Application
   Every person, society, club, firm or corporation desiring to open or
maintain a billiard room must make application to the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses for a license, which application shall be in the form
prescribed in this chapter. Such application shall be filed at least ten (10)
days prior to the time of granting such license.
§ 688.04 Citizenship Required
   No license shall be granted to a person who is not a citizen of the United
States.
§ 688.05 Application Information Required
   Every applicant for a license shall file with the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses a written application stating the full name and
address, including street and number of the applicant, or if more than one (1)
person, or if an association or firm, the full names of all parties interested,
and the addresses, including street and number. If the applicant is a club,
society or corporation the application shall contain a complete list of the
officers of such club, society or corporation, with their names and addresses,
including street and number, and shall also give the state in which such club,
society or corporation is organized, and the names of one (1) or more persons
whom the club, or society or corporation desires to designate as its manager or
person in charge, with their addresses. The application shall also state the
following:
   (a)   The premises where such billiard room is to be conducted, including
the street and number;
   (b)   The age of the applicants in the case of individuals, and the age of
the manager and officers in the case of a club, society or corporation;
   (c)   Whether the applicant or manager is a citizen of the United States;
   (d)   Whether the applicant has ever been engaged in operating a billiard
room, and when, where and how long in each place within the past five (5)
years;
   (e)   The name of the owner of the premises in which such billiard room is
located and the complete address of such owner. The application shall be signed
by the applicant or applicants, or, in the case of a club, society or
corporation, the application shall be signed by the manager or any of its
officers.
§ 688.06 License Investigation; Rejection; Appeal
   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses shall cause an investigation to
be made as to the character of the applicant or the officers of the club,
society or corporation and of the person who is to have general management of
the business. The application shall be rejected if the Commissioner finds any
of the persons named in the application not of good moral character or that any
of such persons have previously been connected with any billiard room where the
license has been revoked, or where any of the provisions with reference to
billiard rooms have been violated, or if the billiard room sought to be
licensed does not comply in every way with the regulations, ordinances and laws
applicable thereto. If rejection of his or her application is made, the
applicant shall be notified in writing of the reasons for rejection and shall
have the right to appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals, established pursuant
to Charter Section
76-6. The Board shall have the power, after full hearing, to confirm the
rejection or order the license issued. The applicant shall within ten (10) days
after receiving notice of rejection file notice in writing of his or her
intention to appeal with the Board. Such appeal shall be set for hearing within
ten (10) days after such notice is filed with the Board.
§ 688.07 Inspector
   The Director of Finance shall appoint an Inspector of Billiard Rooms who
shall obtain information pertaining to all applicants for licenses concerning
their character, the physical condition of the place in which such billiard
room is to be located and all other information required by the Director in
determining the fitness of such applicant generally. The Inspector shall have
the assistance and cooperation of the Commissioner of Building, the
Commissioner of Health, the Chief of Police and any other department of the
City, in procuring such information. Such Inspector shall furnish such
information in writing to the Director and such Inspector shall be under the
direction of the Director. Such Inspector shall have access at all times to all
billiard rooms where applications for a license are pending, or to any part of
the building wherein they are located. He or she shall investigate all
complaints and shall at intervals inspect all billiard rooms within the City
and make a report of such inspection to the Director and also report all
violations of this chapter or the rules governing the same to the Director in
writing.
§ 688.08 License Fees; Disposition
   (a)   Every person, society, club, firm or corporation to whom a license is
granted shall pay a biennial fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first table
and twenty dollars ($20.00) for each additional table. However, where the
applicant is a society or club not organized for profit, no license fee shall
be charged for the use of any table.
   (b)   All moneys received by way of license fees shall be paid into the
General Fund of the City.
(Ord. No. 2393-02. Passed 2-3-03, eff. 2-3-03)
§ 688.09 License Expiration
   All licenses granted under the provisions of this chapter shall expire on
the 30th day of June in odd numbered years, unless sooner suspended or revoked
by the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses, provided, however, that any
license issued pursuant to this chapter between the effective date of this
section and June 30, 1993 shall expire on June 30, 1995, unless sooner revoked
by the Commissioner.
(Ord. No. 228-93. Passed 2-8-93, eff. 2-16-93)
§ 688.10 License Transfer
   No transfer of a license either as to person or place, shall be permitted
except with the consent of the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses, which
shall be endorsed upon the license. The applicant applying for the transfer of
any license shall comply with all the provisions of this chapter.
§ 688.11 Hours of Operation
   (a)   No person, society, club, firm or corporation shall operate a billiard
room between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. on weekdays, or before the
hours of 1:00 p.m., and after the hours of 11:30 p.m. on Sunday; or harbor or
permit any person to be or remain in any billiard room during such hours
provided, however, that a billiard room located more than one thousand (1,000)
feet from a residential district as set forth in Chapter
337 of the Codified Ordinances may operate until 2:30 a.m. on weekdays and
Sunday. This section shall not be construed to prevent regular employees from
performing necessary work within the premises.
   (b)   There shall be no restriction on the hours of operation of a billiard
hall located more than one thousand (1,000) feet from a residential district as
set forth in Chapter
337 of the Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 2267-90. Passed 9-14-92, eff. 9-17-92)
§ 688.12 Minors Prohibited
   No person shall play billiards or be permitted to remain in a billiard room
for any purpose who has not reached the age of eighteen (18) years and no
person shall represent himself or herself to have reached the age of eighteen
(18) years in order to obtain admission to such billiard room or to be
permitted to remain therein when such person, in fact, is under eighteen (18)
years of age.
   Note: Ordinance No. 877-95, passed July 19, 1995, amended Section
688.12 and Section
688.13 and enacted Section
688.18. However, Ordinance No. 877-95, passed July 19, 1995, was vetoed by the
Mayor. This veto was not overridden by City Council and, therefore, Ordinance
No. 877-95 was never effective. Thus, Section
688.12 is as enacted by Ordinance No. 63410-A, passed September 22, 1924, and
Section
688.13 is as enacted by Ordinance No. 534-66, passed October 10, 1966. Section
688.18 was never enacted.
§ 688.13 Owner’s Duty to Exclude Minors; Exceptions
   No owner, operator, agent or keeper of a billiard room shall permit any
person who has not reached the age of eighteen (18) years to remain in a
billiard room for any purpose. However, a minor under eighteen (18) years of
age, when accompanied by either parent or his or her legal guardian, may be
permitted to play both billiards and pool, or be in and remain in such parlor
or public place. An adult person, who is in charge of a group of minor children
under the age of eighteen (18) years, may bring such group into a billiard room
or pool parlor for the purpose of permitting them to play both billiards and
pool, and such group may be permitted to play billiards and pool or be in and
remain in such a parlor or public place so long as they remain under the
supervision and control of such adult person.
(Ord. No. 534-66. Passed 10-10-66, eff. 10-13-66)
   Note: Ordinance No. 877-95, passed July 19, 1995, amended Section
688.12 and Section
688.13 and enacted Section
688.18. However, Ordinance No. 877-95, passed July 19, 1995, was vetoed by the
Mayor. This veto was not overridden by City Council and, therefore, Ordinance
No. 877-95 was never effective. Thus, Section
688.12 is as enacted by Ordinance No. 63410-A, passed September 22, 1924, and
Section
688.13 is as enacted by Ordinance No. 534-66, passed October 10, 1966. Section
688.18 was never enacted.
§ 688.14 Games of Chance Prohibited
   No dice shall be thrown, nor shall a peaball be used, nor shall cards or
other games of chance or any form of gambling be permitted in any billiard room
or in the room in which such tables are located, or at any cigar stand or other
business in the same room, whether or not such room is divided by a partition,
nor shall any checks be given which can be redeemed for merchandise or cash.
§ 688.15 Sanitary Condition; Inspection
   All billiard rooms shall be kept at all times in a clean, healthful and
sanitary condition approved by the Inspector of Billiard Rooms, and the
Director of Finance shall have the power to determine if such rooms are so
kept. For such purpose he or she shall, when desired, have the assistance of
the Commissioner of Building and the Commissioner of Health.
§ 688.16 License to be Posted
   Every licensee shall keep his or her license conspicuously posted in his or
her billiard room.
§ 688.17 License Suspension; Revocation; Appeal
   The license of any billiard room may be suspended or revoked by the
Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses for disorderly or immoral conduct on
the premises or for the violation of any of the rules, regulations, ordinances
and laws governing or applying to billiard rooms. Ten (10) days before a
license is revoked the Commissioner shall notify the licensee in writing of the
reasons for such proposed revocation, and the licensee shall have the right to
appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals, established pursuant to Charter Section
76-6. The Board after full hearing shall have the power to suspend or revoke
the license or continue the same in force, and the action of this Board shall
be final. In order to perfect his or her appeal, the licensee shall file notice
in writing of his or her intention to appeal with the Board before the
expiration of ten (10) days. Any license thus forfeited or revoked shall not be
granted to the same person, society, club, firm or corporation, or for the same
premises until at least six (6) months have elapsed from the time of the
forfeiture or revocation of such license.
(Ord. No. 26-42. Passed 5-11-42)
§ 688.18 Reserved
   Note: Ordinance No. 877-95, passed July 19, 1995, amended Section
688.12 and Section
688.13 and enacted Section
688.18. However, Ordinance No. 877-95, passed July 19, 1995, was vetoed by the
Mayor. This veto was not overridden by City Council and, therefore, Ordinance
No. 877-95 was never effective. Thus, Section
688.12 is as enacted by Ordinance No. 63410-A, passed September 22, 1924, and
Section
688.13 is as enacted by Ordinance No. 534-66, passed October 10, 1966. Section
688.18 was never enacted.
§ 688.99 Penalty
   (a)   Any person, society, club, firm or corporation who violates any of the
provisions of this chapter for which no other penalty is provided, shall in
addition to the penalty provided in Section
688.17, be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or imprisoned not less
than thirty (30) days, or both.
   (b)   Whoever violates Section
688.12 shall be fined not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than ten
dollars ($10.00) and costs.
   (c)   Whoever violates Section
688.13 shall be fined not more than ten dollars ($10.00) and costs for the
first offense and not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than
fifty dollars ($50.00) and costs for each subsequent offense.
(Ord. No. 534-66. Passed 10-10-66, eff. 10-13-66)
CHAPTER 689 – BOWLING ALLEYS
689.01   Permit Required
689.02   Permit Issuance; Conditions and Hours
689.03   Permit Application; Refusal; Revocation
689.99   Penalty
   Note: The legislative history of this chapter, except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 63410-A, passed
September 22, 1924.
Cross-reference:
   Bowling alley and pin refinishing, CO
385.81
Statutory reference:
   Bowling establishments, state fire marshal regulations, OAC Ch. 1301:7-7
   Designation of nonsmoking areas in places of public assembly, RC 3791.031
   Power to regulate, RC 715.51, 715.61
§ 689.01 Permit Required
   No person, firm or corporation shall operate any bowling alley in the City
unless a permit therefor has first been obtained from the Director of Public
Safety.
§ 689.02 Permit Issuance; Conditions and Hours
   The Director of Public Safety may, upon application of the owner or
proprietor, and upon the payment by the owner or proprietor to the City
Treasurer of a biennial fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for the first
alley and twenty dollars ($20.00) for each additional alley in the same
building, issue a permit for the operation of any bowling alleys, provided that
the same shall be operated only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. of
the next day.
(Ord. No. 2393-02. Passed 2-3-03, eff. 2-3-03)
§ 689.03 Permit Application; Refusal; Revocation
   The application shall be made upon blanks furnished by the Director of
Public Safety and the same may be refused or revoked at any time by the
Director.
§ 689.99 Penalty
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than
fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) or
imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days, or both.
(Ord. No. 478-49. Passed 6-27-49)
CHAPTER 690 – DANCE HALLS AND DANCES
690.01   Definitions
690.02   License Required
690.03   License Application; Issuance; Rejection; Appeal
690.04   Operation; Maintenance
690.05   License Fee; Display; Transfer
690.06   License Suspension; Revocation
690.07   Hours of Operation; Exceptions
690.08   Minors Prohibited
690.09   Restrictions
690.10   Temporary Permit; Fees
690.11   Duties of Inspector of Dance Halls
690.12   Prohibited Locations; Exceptions
690.13   Appeal
690.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Gambling prohibitions, CO
Ch. 611
   Public intoxication, CO
605.13
   Unnecessary noise, CO
605.10
Statutory reference:
   Intoxicating liquor in dance hall, RC 4399.14
   Power to regulate dancing academies or public ballrooms, RC 715.61
§ 690.01 Definitions
   The terms used in this chapter shall have the following meanings unless
another meaning is clearly apparent in the language or context:
   (a)   “Public dance” or “public ball” means any dance or ball to which
admission can be had by payment of a fee or by the purchase, possession or
presentation of a ticket or token obtained for money or other valuable
consideration, or in which a charge is made for caring for clothing or other
property, or any other dance to which the public generally may gain admission,
with or without the payment of a fee, including restaurant dancing or any other
dance or party where dancing is held before or after a program of some other
nature and dancing to which any of the public generally may gain admission with
or without the payment of a fee.
   (b)   “Public dance hall” means any academy, room, place, restaurant or
night club in which a public dance or public ball is held or any room, place,
hall or academy in which classes in dancing are held or instruction in dancing
is held or given for a fee.
   (c)   “Known” as used in this chapter providing for restrictions, means
known to the manager, owner or lessee of a public dance hall, or to the persons
conducting a public dance or to the Division of Police.
   (d)   “Private dancing” means and includes any dance given at any home or by
any permanently organized clubs, societies or corporations, where the dancing
is restricted to members of the society, club or corporation admitted by
invitation only.
   (e)   “Home” means and includes only such buildings as are used exclusively
for private dwelling purposes.
   (f)   “Dancing” does not mean or include exhibitions or performances in
which the persons paying for admission do not participate.
(Ord. No. 101423. Passed 4-16-34)
§ 690.02 License Required
   No public dance or public ball or classes in dancing shall be held, or
instructions in dancing for hire given in any public dance hall, academy, room,
place or restaurant within the limits of the City until such public dance hall,
academy, room, place or restaurant has first been duly licensed for such
purpose in the manner provided in this chapter. No person, firm or corporation
shall permit any room or building owned or controlled by him or her to be used
for the purpose of a public dance hall unless the same has been licensed.
(Ord. No. 94275. Passed 5-11-31)
§ 690.03 License Application; Issuance; Rejection; Appeal
   Every person, society, club, firm or corporation desiring a license to
operate a public dance hall shall make application to the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses. Each application shall be in the form prescribed by
the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses, and shall contain the name,
residence, occupation and age of the applicants if individuals, and if a firm
or partnership, the name or names, residences and occupations of the manager
and each member of the firm or partnership, and if a corporation, the names of
its officers and manager. The application shall also contain the location of
such public dance hall, academy, room, place or restaurant, the street and
number of all entrances, and shall be accompanied by a plat showing the
arrangement of the rooms and amount of floor space to be used for dancing. Such
application shall be filed at least ten (10) days prior to the time of granting
such license. The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses shall transmit such
application for inspection and investigation to the Commissioner of Building,
the Division of Environmental Health and Sanitation, the Division of Fire, the
Inspector of Dance Halls, and the Director of Public Safety. The Building
Commissioner, Division of Environmental Health and Sanitation, Division of
Fire, Inspector of Dance Halls and Director of Public Safety shall, after such
inspection and investigation as they may deem necessary, make a report with
recommendation for the approval or disapproval of such application. If such
application is approved, the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses shall
issue a license on the payment of the proper fee provided herein; but no such
application shall be approved in which the dance hall does not comply with all
of the provisions of existing ordinances governing sanitary conditions, fire
protection and health regulations. The application shall be rejected if the
reports submitted thereon show that any of the persons named in the application
are not of good moral character; or that any of such persons have previously
been connected with a public dance hall where the license has been revoked; or
where any provision with reference to public dance halls has been violated; or
that the dance hall sought to be licensed does not comply with the health and
fire regulations applicable thereto; or that it is not properly ventilated and
supplied with separate and convenient toilet facilities for each sex; or that
it is not a safe and proper place for the purpose for which it is contemplated
to be used. If the application is rejected, the license applicant shall be
forthwith notified in writing of the reasons for rejection and shall have the
right to appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals established pursuant to Charter
Section
76-6. The Board shall have power, after full hearing, to affirm, modify or
reverse the finding of the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses and the
judgment of such Board shall be final. In case of appeal to such Board, the
applicant shall, within ten (10) days after notice of such rejection, perfect
his or her appeal by leaving notice in writing of his or her intention to
appeal at the office of the Director of Law. Such Board shall thereafter set a
time and place for such hearing, which shall not be more than ten (10) days
from the date of filing such notice of appeal and the appellant may be
represented by counsel. No applicant to whom a license has been refused shall
make further application until a period of at least six (6) months has elapsed
since the last previous rejection, unless he or she can show that the reason
for such rejection no longer exists. No license shall be granted to a person
under twenty-one (21) years of age, or to any person who is not a citizen of
the United States and the State, or renewed without a re-inspection of the
premises.
(Ord. No. 94275. Passed 5-11-31)
§ 690.04 Operation; Maintenance
   All public dance halls shall be kept at all times in a clean, healthful and
sanitary condition and all stairways and other passages shall be kept clear and
well lighted. After a public dance hall license has been granted, the
Commissioner of Health shall see that sufficient toilet conveniences, sanitary
drinking facilities and adequate ventilating facilities are maintained in such
dance halls. The Division of Fire shall see that all fire hazards are
immediately removed from such public dance halls. The Inspector of Dance Halls
may require the owner or manager of any public dance hall to employ a matron
who shall be in attendance at all dances to supervise the conduct and
deportment of patrons. No person shall be employed as matron unless first
approved by the Inspector.
(Ord. No. 94275. Passed 5-11-31)
§ 690.05 License Fee; Display; Transfer
   Any person, society, club, firm, or corporation to which a license is
granted, shall upon the granting of the license, pay a biennial fee as follows:
 
Floor Space (sq. ft.) Biennial Fee
Less than 2,500       $100.00
2,500 to 6,500        $130.00
Over 6,500            $170.00
 
   However, upon the voluntary surrender of a dance hall license within one
hundred twenty (120) days after the issuance of the license, one-half (1/2) of
the fee shall be returned to the owner of the license, payable out of the fund
into which the license fee has been paid. All money received by way of license
fees and permits shall be paid into the General Fund of the City. All licenses
granted under the provisions of this chapter shall expire on the 30th day of
June in odd numbered years, unless sooner suspended or revoked, provided,
however, that any license issued under Section
690.03 between the effective date of this section and June 30, 1993 shall
expire on June 30, 1995 unless sooner suspended or revoked by the Commissioner
of Assessments and Licenses. A license issued under the provisions of this
chapter shall be displayed at all times in a conspicuous place in the public
dance hall for which it is issued. No transfer of any license shall be
permitted.
(Ord. No. 2393-02. Passed 2-3-03, eff. 2-3-03)
§ 690.06 License Suspension; Revocation
   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses may, at any time, suspend, and
after giving written notice to the licensee and affording him or her an
opportunity to be heard, may revoke, any license granted under the provisions
of this chapter for disorderly or immoral conduct on the premises, or upon
proof that the public dance hall or a public dance given under the auspices of
such licensee, was frequented by disorderly or immoral persons; or for the
violation of any of the rules, regulations or ordinances governing and applying
to public dance halls and dances, or any ordinance regulating, controlling or
in any way relating to health, sanitation, fire protection or the public peace,
or for the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. Whenever any
license has been so revoked, no refund of any portion of the fee paid shall be
made, and at least six (6) months shall elapse from the time of such revocation
before another license shall be given to conduct a public dance hall or public
dance in the same premises. A public record of all such revocations shall be
made, containing the date and reasons for such revocation and the name of the
owners and managers.
(Ord. No. 94275. Passed 5-11-31)
§ 690.07 Hours of Operation; Exceptions
   All public dances and all public dance halls shall be closed on or before
12:00 midnight. However, upon the application of a bona fide responsible
person, club, organization, corporation or society and after investigation, the
Director of Public Safety may grant such person, club, organization,
corporation or society a permit to continue the dance until such time as in the
opinion of the Director is reasonable.
(Ord. No. 101423. Passed 4-16-34)
§ 690.08 Minors Prohibited
   No person conducting a public dance or public dance hall or any manager or
other agent of such person shall permit any person to attend or take part in
any public dance who has not reached the age of eighteen (18) years, unless
such person is accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. No person shall
represent himself or herself to have reached the age of eighteen (18) years in
order to obtain admission to a public dance hall or public dance, or be
permitted to remain therein when such person in fact is under eighteen (18)
years of age.
(Ord. No. 94275. Passed 5-11-31)
§ 690.09 Restrictions
   No person, firm, club, society or corporation conducting a public dance or
public dance hall or any agent or employee of such person, firm, club, society
or corporation shall:
   (a)   Permit any known prostitute, male or female procurer or vagrant to be
present at any public dance or public dance hall;
   (b)   Permit on the public dance hall premises any person having in his or
her possession or being under the influence of, selling or offering for sale,
giving away, or drinking any intoxicating liquors or drugs;
   (c)   Permit idlers, loiterers or other hangers-on to be on or about the
dance hall premises;
   (d)   Permit smoking except in rooms reserved for smoking or in a restaurant
or dining room when seated at a table;
   (e)   Permit gambling in any form on the premises;
   (f)   Permit men to enter the ladies’ room or parlor;
   (g)   Permit persons to indulge in dancing that is vulgar, suggestive or
immoral;
   (h)   Permit moonlight dances unless there is sufficient light in the dance
hall so that the patrons can be easily seen;
   (i)   Permit or employ any instructor under the age of twenty-one (21) years
to give instructions in dancing to persons of the opposite sex;
   (j)   Discriminate between sexes by offering free admission to either sex as
inducement to stimulate attendance;
   (k)   Permit endurance dancing contests commonly known as marathon dances;
   (l)   Permit dancing in restaurants with persons seated at different tables;
   (m)   Permit any cabaret or other similar entertainment in a restaurant
wherein any entertainers shall perform their acts by mingling with the audience
or traveling about among them.
(Ord. No. 101423. Passed 4-16-34)
§ 690.10 Temporary Permit; Fees
   No person, firm, society, club, or corporation shall hold a public dance or
public ball in any licensed dance hall within the limits of the City without
having first obtained a permit from the Director of Public Safety. Application
for the permit must be made at least two (2) days before the dance authorized
is to be held. The fees for the permits shall be as follows:
 
Floor Space (sq. ft.) Fee
Less than 2,500       $20.00
2,500 to 6,500        $30.00
Over 6,500            $40.00
 
   No permit shall be required from the owner of a duly licensed hall, when the
owner personally conducts the dance.
(Ord. No. 2393-02. Passed 2-3-03, eff. 2-3-03)
§ 690.11 Duties of Inspector of Dance Halls
   The Inspector of Dance Halls shall have authority to see that the provisions
of all ordinances in any way regulating or controlling public dances or dance
halls in the City are observed and enforced. The duties of the Inspector shall
be to examine all applicants for dance hall licenses and permits. He or she
shall investigate each application to determine whether or not the dance hall
sought to be licensed complies with the regulations, ordinances and laws
applicable thereto. In the making of such investigation, he or she shall, when
he or she so requests, have the assistance of the Commissioner of Building, the
Commissioner of Health, and the Chief of the Division of Fire. Such Inspector
of Dance Halls shall furnish to the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses,
in writing, the information derived from such investigation, accompanied by his
or her recommendation as to whether a license should be granted or refused. The
Inspector of Dance Halls, or any officer detailed by him or her, shall be
permitted to have access to all public dance halls at all times. He or she
shall investigate complaints and shall inspect at intervals the dance halls
within the City and shall report all violations in writing. The Inspector of
Dance Halls, with the approval of the Director of Public Safety, shall from
time to time formulate rules and regulations not inconsistent with this chapter
or any other ordinance governing the conduct of patrons of public dances,
stating what dances are permitted and what dances are forbidden, together with
correct position to be assumed by dancers, a copy of which rules and
regulations shall be printed in large type and posted at a conspicuous place in
any dance hall used for public dances.
   Members of the Division of Police under the supervision of the Chief of
Police and the Inspector of Dance Halls shall have access at all times to the
public dance halls and public dances. Officers and patrolmen of such Division
may be detailed to investigate all complaints and supervise such public dances,
and when so detailed shall visit such halls and dances and report any and all
violations. Such report or reports shall be turned over to their superior
officers who shall forthwith submit them to the Inspector of Dance Halls.
   The Inspector of Dance Halls, or the Chief of Police, shall have power and
shall close or cause to be vacated any academy, room, dance hall, place or
restaurant where any public dance is held or being given, whenever any rule or
regulation, or any provision of any ordinance regulating public dances or
public dance halls is being violated pending action by the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses.
(Ord. No. 94275. Passed 5-11-31)
§ 690.12 Prohibited Locations; Exceptions
   No owner, tenant, keeper, proprietor or other person in the interest of such
owner, tenant, keeper or proprietor, or any lessee of any such person or
corporation shall hold or permit to be held or operated a dance, entertainment,
musical concert or public meeting hall where people congregate within one
hundred fifty (150) feet of any school building, hospital or church. However,
the Director of Public Safety, when satisfied that the holding of a dance,
entertainment, musical concert or public meeting will not constitute a public
nuisance by the creation of unnecessary and unseemly noise, may issue a permit
for any such use upon application therefor. Notice of the application for any
permit hereunder shall be given to the hospital, school or church authorities
within sufficient time to permit the filing of objections to the issuance of
such permit. Upon the receipt of such objections, the Director shall proceed to
hold a hearing upon the question of the issuance of a permit for the holding of
such dance, entertainment, musical concert or public meeting, and if satisfied
that the same will not constitute a public nuisance by the creation of
unnecessary and unseemly noise, may issue such permit. The Director is hereby
authorized to impose such conditions upon the issuance of such permit as he or
she deems necessary for the prevention of unnecessary and unseemly noise. Such
permit shall be in addition to but not in substitution for any other permit or
license required for the holding of such dance, entertainment, musical concert
or public meeting and no such other permit or license shall be issued except
subsequent to the issuance of the permit herein provided for.
(Ord. No. 1328-40. Passed 9-24-41)
§ 690.13 Appeal
   In case of a refusal by the Director of Public Safety to issue the permit as
provided for in Section
690.12 or the issuance of such permit over the objection of the hospital,
church or school authorities, the applicant or objecting authority as the case
may be, may appeal from such action to the Board of Zoning Appeals, established
pursuant to Charter Section
76-6. Notice of such appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the
Board within ten (10) days after the making of the order granting or refusing
such permit. Such Board shall fix the time for the hearing of such appeal, at
which hearing all parties interested shall be afforded an opportunity to be
heard and the Board shall approve, modify or annul such order from which the
appeal has been perfected and the finding of such Board shall be conclusive on
all parties thereto.
(Ord. No. 1328-40. Passed 9-24-41)
§ 690.99 Penalty
   (a)   Any person, firm, society, club or corporation who violates any of the
provisions of this chapter for which no other penalty is provided, shall be
fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred
dollars ($100.00), or imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days, or both,
and shall stand committed until such fine is paid or sentence served, or until
otherwise discharged by due process of law.
(Ord. No. 94275. Passed 5-11-31)
   (b)   Whoever violates Section
690.12 shall, for the first offense, be fined one dollar ($1.00), or imprisoned
for one (1) day; for the second offense within one (1) year from the commission
of the first offense be fined two dollars ($2.00), or imprisoned for two (2)
days; for a third offense within one (1) year from the commission of the first
offense, be fined four dollars ($4.00), or imprisoned for four (4) days; for
the fourth offense and all subsequent offenses within one (1) year from the
commission of the first offense, be fined ten dollars ($10.00), or imprisoned
for ten (10) days, or both.
(Ord. No. 1328-40. Passed 9-24-41)
CHAPTER 691 – KARTING PARKS AND SAUCER TRACKS
691.01   Definitions
691.02   License Required
691.03   License Application
691.04   Compliance with Safety Standards
691.05   Inspection of Premises
691.06   Approval of Application
691.07   License Issuance; Fees
691.08   Bond
691.09   Insurance
691.10   Notice of Cancellation – Repealed
691.11   Replacement of Bond or Policy
691.12   Self-Insured Licensee
691.13   Location; Fencing; Alcoholic Beverages Prohibited
691.14   Operating Rules, Safety Regulations
691.15   Prohibited Practices
691.16   Discrimination Prohibited
691.17   License Suspension or Revocation
691.18   Appeal
691.19   Saucer Track Construction
691.99   Penalty
   Note: The legislative history of this chapter, except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 63410-A, passed
September 22, 1924.
Cross-reference:
   Public intoxication, CO
605.13
   Unlawful discrimination, CO
Ch. 667
§ 691.01 Definitions
   The following terms shall be defined, for the purposes of this chapter, as
follows:
   (a)   “Karting park” means and includes the entire area wherein the
operation and maintenance of any miniature vehicle, go-kart or quarter-midget
rides are conducted, and where a fee or charge is exacted either for the
operation of the rides or for the witnessing of the operation of the rides.
   (b)   “Ride” means and includes any miniature, go- kart or quarter-midget
vehicle powered by an internal combustion engine, having the general design and
appearance of an automobile, or chassis having one (1) or more seats for a
driver or passenger, and which may be operated and guided about by a steering
device and controlled exclusively by a person riding in the vehicle.
   (c)   “Karting track” means and includes any area designed and set aside for
the primary purpose of operating one (1) or more rides.
(Ord. No. 338-62. Passed 4-9-62, eff. 4-12-62)
§ 691.02 License Required
   No person, firm or corporation, whether operating in conjunction with an
amusement park license or whether operating alone shall engage in the business
of operating a karting park in the City, as defined in Section
691.01, without first obtaining a license to do so.
(Ord. No. 338-62. Passed 4-9-62, eff. 4-12-62)
§ 691.03 License Application
   Application for such license shall be made in writing to the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses upon such forms as he or she shall prescribe.
(Ord. No. 338-62. Passed 4-9-62, eff. 4-12-62)
§ 691.04 Compliance with Safety Standards
   Each application for a license shall be referred to the Director of Public
Safety for investigation and report on the character and experience of the
applicant, and on the safety of the karting park and its rides; and to the
Commissioner of Building for investigation and report of the compliance of the
karting park with the requirements of the Building Code of the City.
(Ord. No. 338-62. Passed 4-9-62, eff. 4-12-62)
§ 691.05 Inspection of Premises
   Each karting park and its rides shall be subject to inspection for
conformance with law and ordinance at any time during the hours of operation by
representatives of the Department of Public Safety or the Division of Building.
(Ord. No. 338-62. Passed 4-9-62, eff. 4-12-62)
§ 691.06 Approval of Application
   Based on the report on the character and experience of the applicant, the
safety of the karting park and its rides, the compliance of the karting park
with the building and zoning regulations, and all regulations applicable
thereto, the Director of Public Safety shall endorse his or her approval or
disapproval on the application.
(Ord. No. 338-62. Passed 4-9-62, eff. 4-12-62)
§ 691.07 License Issuance; Fees
   If such application is approved by the Director of Public Safety, the
Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses shall issue a license thereunder upon
payment of a fee of one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) per quarter,
commencing on January 1, April 1, July 1 and October 1 of each year.
(Ord. No. 338-62. Passed 4-9-62, eff. 4-12-62)
§ 691.08 Bond
   Every licensee shall deposit with the Commissioner of Assessments and
Licenses a bond in the penal sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) with a
solvent and responsible surety company authorized under the laws of the State
as surety thereon, acceptable to and approved by the Commissioner and Director
of Law, conditioned upon the faithful observance by the licensee, his or her
agents, employees, concessionaires and lessees of all of the provisions of law
and ordinance relating to the operating of karting parks, and further
conditioned that the licensee will indemnify any person who has secured a
judgment based upon damage or loss, other than personal injury or death, by
reason of the operation of such karting park, the aggregate liability of such
bond not to exceed the penal sum thereof.
(Ord. No. 338-62. Passed 4-9-62, eff. 4-12-62)
§ 691.09 Insurance
   Every licensee shall deposit with the Commissioner of Assessments and
Licenses a policy of liability insurance acceptable to and approved by the
Commissioner and the Director of Law indemnifying the licensee for its legal
liability for injury or death by reason of the carelessness or negligence of
the licensee, his or her agents, employees, concessionaires or lessees, to one
(1) person up to the sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) and to more than
one (1) person in any one (1) accident up to the aggregate sum of one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000.00).
(Ord. No. 338-62. Passed 4-9-62, eff. 4-12-62)
§ 691.10 Notice of Cancellation – Repealed
(Ord. No. 599-11, passed 6-6-11, eff. 6-13-11)
§ 691.11 Replacement of Bond or Policy
   If at any time, in the judgment of the Commissioner of Assessments and
Licenses, such bond or policy of insurance is not sufficient for any cause, the
Commissioner may require the licensee to replace such bond or policy with
another approved by the Commissioner and the Director of Law.
(Ord. No. 338-62. Passed 4-9-62, eff. 4-12-62)
§ 691.12 Self-Insured Licensee
   Any licensee who is a self-insurer and maintains an insurance fund adequate
in the judgment of the Director of Finance to meet the requirements of the
liability insurance set forth herein shall not be required to furnish a policy
of liability insurance.
(Ord. No. 338-62. Passed 4-9-62, eff. 4-12-62)
§ 691.13 Location; Fencing; Alcoholic Beverages Prohibited
   (a)   No person shall operate any ride nearer than one hundred fifty (150)
feet from any point on the boundary line of the property constituting such
karting park, or nearer than three hundred (300) feet from any adjacent land in
a residence or retail business district as designated in Chapter
335 of the Codified Ordinances. However, in the case of a karting park in
existence at the time of the adoption of this section the distance requirements
specified herein shall not apply to any rides in their several existing
locations on the date of the adoption of this section, and such distance
requirements shall be subject to modification by the Board of Zoning Appeals in
the case of proposed additional rides, substitutions or changes in location of
or other changes pertaining to existing rides in such existing karting park.
   (b)   No person shall operate any karting park unless the outer
circumference of the karting track is encircled with a fence at least four (4)
feet high and at least five (5) feet outside such circumference, to be
constructed of sufficient strength to withstand impact of rides and pressure
from spectators.
   (c)   No person shall possess any alcoholic beverages within any karting
park.
(Ord. No. 338-62. Passed 4-9-62, eff. 4-12-62)
§ 691.14 Operating Rules, Safety Regulations
   No person shall operate a karting park unless:
   (a)   Arrangements have been secured for immediate ambulance service when
necessary operated by registered medical personnel.
   (b)   Immediately adjacent to the outside and inside perimeter of the
karting track there is encircled a barrier or hubrail of strength sufficient to
prevent rides from leaving the track.
   (c)   All areas of the park are protected with fire protection equipment in
conformance with law and ordinance and approved by the Division of Fire.
   (d)   The inside circumference of the track is not less than one-tenth (0.1)
of a mile and its surface is level, non-skid and dustproof.
   (e)   Illumination is provided sufficient to render the entire track area
and objects thereon visible and free from shadows.
   (f)   Off-street parking is provided at least equal to the area within the
outside circumference of the track.
   (g)   Hours of operation are confined to between 10:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m.
   (h)   During the hours of operation, there is at least one (1) adult
representative of the management physically present at all times and
responsible for its supervision and operation.
   (i)   All known accidents involving substantial injury are reported to the
Director of Public Safety.
   (j)   Minors twelve (12) years of age or less are denied admittance to the
karting park after dark unless accompanied by a parent or guardian.
   (k)   All rides are mechanically regulated so that they may not be operated
at a speed exceeding twenty- five (25) miles per hour.
   (l)   All rides are equipped with a braking system applied to at least two
(2) wheels.
   (m)   Each ride is equipped with a muffling device and front and rear bumper
and roll-over bar.
   (n)   Refueling is conducted with the engine of the ride off, the capacity
of any fuel tank of any ride is not more than one (1) gallon and the capacity
of any fuel supply tank on the premises is not more than five (5) gallons
unless stored underground or in a method approved by the Division of Fire.
   (o)   Such park has prominent and visible signs posted regarding safety and
rules of operation of the track.
   (p)   Such park has a Park Personnel give verbal directions regarding safety
and rules of operation of the track by megaphone or other amplification system
at the start of each ride.
   (q)   At any overseer’s observation station, such park shall provide a
megaphone, flashlight and a fire extinguisher, each of which shall be
maintained in good working order.
   (r)   Such park shall provide and maintain a movable barrier in front of
such park’s garage, if such garage is open during track operation and is
adjacent to the track.
   (s)   Such park shall provide and maintain a barrier or barriers preventing
access to the track area by patrons, spectators and the general public.
(Ord. No. 2840-85. Passed 4-14-86, eff. 4-21-86)
§ 691.15 Prohibited Practices
   No person shall cause or allow the following practices on any karting park:
   (a)   The operation of any ride, when any part of such ride is nearer than
one hundred (100) feet to a public street or highway, or to an inhabited
dwelling. If there is, within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any such ride, an
inhabited dwelling, the music, whether made by organ whistle or bell, shall be
permitted only during the hours from 2:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m. No person shall
continue any such music beyond the hour of 9:00 p.m. or commence the same
earlier than 2:00 p.m. At his or her discretion, the Director of Public Safety
may grant a permit authorizing the continuance of such music during the hours
therein prohibited nearer than one hundred fifty (150) feet to an inhabited
dwelling and also permitting the operation of any of the rides hereinbefore
described nearer than one hundred (100) feet to a public street or highway or
to an inhabited dwelling. In either event, such permit shall be for not more
than two (2) days in any calendar month;
   (b)   The operation of rides in competition, racing or cutting in and out of
rides;
   (c)   The operation of rides by operators who are under the age of eight
(8), or whom the management finds are unable to operate the ride safely;
   (d)   The operation of rides not owned by the management;
   (e)   The operation of rides when any snow or ice is on the track;
   (f)   The operation of any ride on the premises that is both over five (5)
horsepower and exceeds the minimum horsepower of commercially available karts;
   (g)   The operation of rides by operators where safety helmets have not been
made available to operators;
   (h)   The operation on the premises of any ride that is both over five (5)
horsepower and exceeds the minimum horsepower commonly commercially available.
(Ord. No. 2276-A-84. Passed 10-7-85, eff. 10-8-85)
§ 691.16 Discrimination Prohibited
   No person shall be refused admission to or be denied any of the karting
opportunities afforded by any karting park as herein defined, except for
reasons common to all other persons. In no event shall any person be
discriminated against in the enjoyment of such karting opportunities and
facilities because of race, religion, color, sex, sexual orientation, gender
identity or expression, national origin, age, disability, ethnic group or
Vietnam-era or disabled veteran status.
(Ord. No. 1260-08. Passed 11-30-09, eff. 12-3-09)
§ 691.17 License Suspension or Revocation
   (a)   If the licensee fails to comply with any of the terms and conditions
of this chapter or any of the laws or ordinances relating to the business
licensed, other than the prohibition against discrimination contained in this
chapter and in the civil rights statutes of Ohio, the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses upon the recommendation of the Director of Public
Safety may suspend or revoke such license.
   (b)   If any licensee hereunder has been convicted of violation of the civil
rights statutes, or if judgment has been obtained against such licensee because
of such violation, the Commissioner shall revoke the license and no license
shall be issued to any such licensee or any license applicant at that location
until the expiration of at least six (6) months from the date of revocation.
   (c)   Upon the complaint of alleged discrimination on the part of any
licensee, the Director, if satisfied after investigation that such complaint is
valid, may recommend the suspension of the license, and thereupon the
Commissioner shall suspend such license for a period of not less than thirty
(30) days nor more than six (6) months.
   (d)   The order of the Commissioner revoking or suspending a license shall
become effective forthwith, except that in the case of violation of the civil
rights statutes or the anti-discrimination provisions of this chapter, such
order shall become effective at the expiration of ten (10) days from the
issuance thereof.
(Ord. No. 338-62. Passed 4-9-62, eff. 4-12-62)
§ 691.18 Appeal
   In case of the refusal to issue a license or the revocation or suspension of
a license by the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses, the applicant or
licensee may appeal from such order to the Board of Zoning Appeals established
pursuant to Charter Section
76-6. Notice of such appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the
Commissioner within ten (10) days after making of such order. The Board, within
fourteen (14) days after filing with the Commissioner of such notice of appeal,
shall proceed with the hearing of such appeal, at which hearing all parties
interested shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard. The Board shall
approve, modify or annul such order from which the appeal has been perfected,
and the finding of such Board shall be final on all parties thereto.
(Ord. No. 338-62. Passed 4-9-62, eff. 4-12-62)
§ 691.19 Saucer Track Construction
   No person, partnership or corporation shall exhibit to the public or to
spectators in the City, for money or other reward demanded or received, any
motorcycle operation, speeding or racing in any stadium or motordrome having a
saucer track, unless such saucer track has constructed entirely around its rim
or periphery, a metal screen or shield placed at such angle toward the center
of the stadium or motordrome as will effectually prevent a motorcycle, at
whatever speed operated or however directed, from passing beyond the rim or
periphery of the track and into the portions of the motordrome or stadium
designed or used for the accommodation of spectators. Such screen or shield
shall be of such strength and so braced by metal supports that a motorcycle
cannot break through it any place. The width of the screen or shield, the kind
of material used in its construction and the angle of its direction toward the
center of the course, shall all be such as are approved by the Commissioner of
Building and such as will in his or her judgment, accomplish the purpose of
safety to the public intended by this section.
§ 691.99 Penalty
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and fined not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first
offense and for a second or subsequent offense not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00), or imprisoned not more than thirty (30) days, or both. Each
day’s violation constitutes a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 338-62. Passed 4-9-62, eff. 4-12-62)
CHAPTER 692 – MUSIC ENTERTAINMENT
692.01   Permit Required
692.02   Permit Application; Fee; Term
692.03   Records to be Kept; Fee Disposition
692.04   Permit Exhibition
692.99   Penalty
   Note: The legislative history of this chapter, except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 63410-A, passed
September 22, 1924.
Cross-reference:
   Unnecessary noise, CO
605.10
§ 692.01 Permit Required
   No keeper or proprietor or other person in the interest of such keeper or
proprietor, or any lessee of any restaurant, coffee house, pool or billiard
room, night club, ice skating or roller rink, or other similar place where
refreshments or entertainment is provided for the general public shall have,
permit or allow therein any vocal or instrumental music, or mechanically
produced music, specifically excluding radios or television sets, without first
having obtained a permit from the Director of Public Safety. Nothing in this
section shall apply to the holder of a valid dance permit.
(Ord. No 456-64. Passed 3-16-64, eff. 3-19-64)
§ 692.02 Permit Application; Fee; Term
   The Director of Public Safety shall, upon payment by the applicant for the
permit of a fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) to the City Treasurer for each
permit requested, grant the permits for a two (2) year period, expiring on the
30th day of June in odd numbered years, unless sooner forfeited by the
Director, provided, however, that any permit issued under this section between
the effective date of this section and June 30, 1993, shall expire on June 30,
1995, unless sooner forfeited by the Director. A conviction for a violation of
any ordinance of the City governing such places shall be sufficient cause for
the forfeiture of the permits. No permits shall be issued to any person to whom
a permit formerly issued has been forfeited, or who has been convicted of a
felony. The permit shall bear the name of the person to whom granted, the name
of the street and number of the building where the music is to be employed, and
the terms on which the same is granted, as well as a clause specifying the
conditions of forfeiture, and shall be signed by the Director of Public Safety
and bear the seal of the City, and it shall not be transferred. The Director
may, notwithstanding the provisions of this section, issue a permit for one (1)
entertainment without the payment of a fee as provided in this section.
(Ord. No. 2393-02. Passed 2-3-03, eff. 2-3-03)
§ 692.03 Records to be Kept; Fee Disposition
   The Director of Public Safety shall keep a proper record and duplicate of
each permit granted, and all moneys collected for such permits shall be
immediately paid into the City Treasury to the credit of the General Fund.
§ 692.04 Permit Exhibition
   Any person holding a permit shall, upon demand, show the same to any police
officer of the City.
§ 692.99 Penalty
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of Sections
692.03 or
692.04 shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than fifty
dollars ($50.00), and forfeit the permit as above provided.
CHAPTER 692A – COIN OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES
692A.01   Definitions
692A.02   Gambling Devices Prohibited
692A.03   License Required
692A.04   License Fees
692A.05   Application for License
692A.06   Issuance of License
692A.07   Renewal of License
692A.08   Display of License
692A.09   Transferability
692A.10   Prohibited Hours: Minors
692A.11   Inspection
692A.12   Seizure of Machines
692A.13   Revocation of License
692A.14   Appeal
692A.99   Penalties
§ 692A.01 Definitions
   (a)   “Amusement device” as used in this chapter means any electronic and/or
video machine or mechanical device, including pinball machine, which, upon the
insertion or deposit of a coin, slug, token or disc, permits a person or
operator using such device, whether or not registering a score, to secure some
amusement, enjoyment, entertainment or relaxation by the use of such machine or
device. “Amusement device” does not include mechanically produced music as
regulated by Chapter
692, billiard or pool tables as regulated by Chapter
688, or picture arcades or live viewing booths as regulated by Chapter
699.
   (b)   “Pinball machine” means any machine or device commonly or popularly
known as a pinball machine and any machine or device which registers a score
and in which or on which a person can shoot or roll, either manually or
mechanically, one (1) or more pellets, balls or marbles upon the insertion or
deposit of a coin, slug, token or disc or upon the payment of a consideration.
   (c)   “Exhibitor” means any person in whose place of business an amusement
device is placed for use by the public.
(Ord. No. 356-A-91. Passed 3-28-91, eff. 4-2-91)
§ 692A.02 Gambling Devices Prohibited
   Nothing in this chapter shall in any way be construed to authorize, license
or permit any gambling device whatsoever, or any amusement device that has been
judicially determined to be a gambling device or that is prohibited by any
present or future law.
(Ord. No. 356-A-91. Passed 3-28-91, eff. 4-2-91)
§ 692A.03 License Required
   No exhibitor shall install or cause to be installed an amusement device in
his or her place of business for operation or use by the general public without
a license issued pursuant to this chapter for each place of business in which
an amusement device is to be installed. Nothing in this chapter shall be
construed to permit an amusement device to be located where it would be
prohibited by the Zoning Code, or to alter the Zoning Code in any way.
(Ord. No. 356-A-91. Passed 3-28-91, eff. 4-2-91)
§ 692A.04 License Fees
   (a)   Subject to the exemption in division (c) of this section, every
exhibitor who is required by Section
692A.03 to obtain a license shall pay a license fee for each two (2) year
license period or fraction of that period, under the following schedule:
 
Number of Devices Fee
at One Location
3 or less         $60.00 per device
4 - 20            $40.00 per device
Over 20           No charge
 
   (b)   Every exhibitor who obtains a license for a place of business under
division (a) of this section and who subsequently desires to increase the
number of amusement devices at that place of business shall file an additional
license application under Section
692A.05, and shall pay an additional license fee based on the amounts in
division (a) of this section taking into account the number of devices for
which annual license fees have already been paid.
   (c)   (1)   No license fee shall be required of a charitable organization
for any amusement device with respect to which:
         A.   The charitable organization is not subject to the tax imposed by
Section 511 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, for unrelated
business income with respect to the revenues derived from the device; or
         B.   The charitable organization is the owner of the device.
      (2)   For purposes of this division (c), a “charitable organization”
means any corporation, or association, or trust, or community chest, fund, or
foundation, organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable, or
educational purposes, or for the prevention of cruelty to children or animals,
and no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any private
shareholder or individual, and no substantial part of the activities of which
is carrying on propaganda or otherwise attempting to influence legislation;
provided, however, that nothing in this division shall include an organization
operated for the primary purpose of carrying on a trade or business for profit,
whether or not all of its profits are payable to one (1) or more organizations
described in this division.
(Ord. No. 2393-02. Passed 2-3-03, eff. 2-3-03)
   Note: Notwithstanding any other provision of this ordinance or Chapter
692A of the Codified Ordinances, any license to exhibit coin operated amusement
devices issued by the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses between January
1, 1995 and June 30, 1995, inclusive, shall be issued with an expiration date
of June 30, 1997. The fee in any such case shall be the same fee as specified
in Section
692A.04 of the Codified Ordinances, as enacted by Section
1 of this ordinance.
§ 692A.05 Application for License
   The application for each license required by this chapter shall be made to
the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses on forms to be prescribed by the
Commissioner, and shall contain the following information:
   (a)   The name and address, age and birth date of the applicant, including
all partners in the case of a partnership and all officers and directors in the
case of a corporation;
   (b)   The location where the amusement device or devices shall be displayed
or operated and the business conducted therein;
   (c)   Such other information as the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses
may require.
(Ord. No. 356-A-91. Passed 3-28-91, eff. 4-2-91)
§ 692A.06 Issuance of License
   (a)   The Director of Public Safety or the Commissioner of Building and
Housing, as appropriate, shall determine that the following prerequisites to
the issuance of a license have been established:
      (1)   The applicant has not been convicted within the previous five (5)
years of a felony, a misdemeanor involving minors, a misdemeanor involving
moral turpitude, or a crime of violence;
      (2)   A license properly issued to the applicant has not been revoked or
forfeited within the previous five (5) years; and
      (3)   The location, structure, placement, wiring and connections of the
amusement devices covered by the application are suitable under the
requirements of the Building Code, the Zoning Code and this chapter, and all
required inspection fees have been paid to the City. No extension cords shall
be used for such devices.
   (b)   The Director of Public Safety and the Commissioner of Building and
Housing shall endorse on each application their approval or disapproval with
reasons for any disapproval and return the same to the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses within ten (10) working days of receiving notice of
the application. Upon approval by the Director of Public Safety and the
Commissioner of Building and Housing and upon the payment of the license fee,
the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses shall issue to the applicant one
(1) license for each location set forth in the application. Each license shall
indicate the number of amusement devices thereof which are permitted at that
location.
   (c)   Each license issued pursuant to this section shall be issued for a
period of two (2) years or such lesser period of time as results in the
expiration of all licenses on the 30th day of June in odd numbered years.
(Ord. No. 1104-94. Passed 6-13-94, eff. 6-22-94)
   Note: Notwithstanding any other provision of this ordinance or Chapter
692A of the Codified Ordinances, any license to exhibit coin operated amusement
devices issued by the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses between January
1, 1995 and June 30, 1995, inclusive, shall be issued with an expiration date
of June 30, 1997. The fee in any such case shall be the same fee as specified
in Section
692A.04 of the Codified Ordinances, as enacted by Section
1 of this ordinance.
§ 692A.07 Renewal of License
   An application for renewal of a license shall be filed not sooner than
ninety (90) days and not later than forty-five (45) days prior to the
expiration of the existing license, in accordance with the procedures and
requirements of the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses.
(Ord. No. 356-A-91. Passed 3-28-91, eff. 4-2-91)
§ 692A.08 Display of License
   Every license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be posted in a
conspicuous place in the location for which it is issued.
(Ord. No. 356-A-91. Passed 3-28-91, eff. 4-2-91)
§ 692A.09 Transferability
   (a)   Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall not be transferable
from one (1) location to another.
   (b)   Amusement devices shall be freely transferable from location to
location, provided that the exhibitor files a license application pursuant to
Section
692A.05 and pays a license fee pursuant to Section
692A.04 for every such device which represents a net increase in the number of
devices at any one (1) location.
(Ord. No. 356-A-91. Passed 3-28-91, eff. 4-2-91)
§ 692A.10 Prohibited Hours: Minors
   (a)   No person under eighteen (18) years of age shall operate an amusement
device in the establishment of an exhibitor during the following hours:
      (1)   Between the hours of midnight and 5:00 a.m., unless such person is
accompanied by a parent or guardian; and
      (2)   When the Cleveland public schools are in session, between the hours
of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
   (b)   No exhibitor, either personally or through an agent or employee, shall
permit a person under eighteen (18) years of age to operate an amusement device
in violation of division (a) of this section.
(Ord. No. 356-A-91. Passed 3-28-91, eff. 4-2-91)
§ 692A.11 Inspection
   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses and any law enforcement officer
are hereby authorized to make periodic checks of any business establishment in
which an amusement device is located during the business hours of such
establishment for the purpose of inspection of such amusement device to protect
the health, safety and welfare of the general public using such device.
(Ord. No. 356-A-91. Passed 3-28-91, eff. 4-2-91)
§ 692A.12 Seizure of Machines
   Any amusement device for which no license has been issued and which is found
in possession or custody of any person, may be sealed, padlocked or seized by
the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses or any duly authorized law
enforcement officer of the City, in order to secure the same for trial for
failure to have a license issued or for any other violation of this chapter,
and such seal or padlock shall not be removed, nor seizure lifted, nor shall
the amusement device be removed from the location where it may have been sealed
or padlocked by anyone other than the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses
or a duly authorized law enforcement officer until a license first has been
issued and any fines and penalties have been fully paid.
(Ord. No. 356-A-91. Passed 3-28-91, eff. 4-2-91)
§ 692A.13 Revocation of License
   The Commissioner may at any time revoke or suspend any license granted under
authority of this chapter for failure to comply with the terms of this chapter,
Chapter
199 or any laws or regulations of the City or the State of Ohio relating to
amusement devices.
(Ord. No. 356-A-91. Passed 3-28-91, eff. 4-2-91)
§ 692A.14 Appeal
   If the Commissioner refuses to issue or revokes or suspends a license, the
applicant or licensee may appeal such order to the Board of Zoning Appeals
established pursuant to Charter Section
76-6. Written notice of such appeal shall be filed with the Board within ten
(10) days after the making of such order. Within ten (10) days after the filing
of such notice, the Board shall proceed to hear such appeal, at which hearing
all parties interested shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard. The Board
shall approve, modify or annul the order from which the appeal has been
perfected, and the finding of the Board shall be final with respect to all
parties thereto.
(Ord. No. 356-A-91. Passed 3-28-91, eff. 4-2-91)
§ 692A.99 Penalties
   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Any exhibitor who, personally or
through an agent or employee, permits a minor to operate an amusement device in
violation of Section
692A.10 shall, upon each subsequent offense, be guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree. Each day’s violation shall constitute a separate offense as to
each such amusement device.
(Ord. No. 356-A-91. Passed 3-28-91, eff. 4-2-91)
CHAPTER 693 – PICTURE MACHINES AND THEATERS
693.01   Picture Machine Defined
693.02   Scope of Provisions
693.03   Compliance
693.04   Use of Picture Machines
693.05   Films Within the Booth
693.06   Hot Carbons
693.07   Qualified Operators Required
693.08   License Examinations – Repealed
693.09   License Issuance; Fee; Renewal – Repealed
693.10   Premises Compliance Certificate Required
693.11   Certificate Revocation
693.12   Drive-In Theater Defined; License Required
693.13   License Application; Approval or Disapproval
693.14   License Fee; Expiration; Posting
693.15   Drive-In Theater Operation Restrictions
693.16   License Suspension or Revocation
693.17   Appeal
693.99   Penalty
   Note: The legislative history of this chapter, except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 63410-A, passed
September 22, 1924.
§ 693.01 Picture Machine Defined
   “Picture machine” as used in this chapter means any machine or device,
either permanently located or portable in nature, operated by or with the aid
of electricity or any other illuminant, and which is designed, intended or used
to produce and/or reproduce images whether by film, video disc, or picked up by
delivered signal with or without sound with equipment of all types and sizes,
mechanical and/or electronic, including but not limited to, standard motion
picture projectors automated or not, audio visual equipment, telecine
projectors, video tape equipment, television projectors whether on closed or
open circuit and whether for large or small screens or monitors, and components
and apparatus pertaining thereto.
(Ord. No. 1252-92. Passed 5-17-93, eff. 5-24-93)
§ 693.02 Scope of Provisions
   The provisions of Sections
693.01 through
693.11 shall apply to theaters, auditoriums, schools, churches, halls and such
other exhibition or meeting rooms to which the public, or any segment thereof,
is admitted to view the showing of any pictorial representations projected from
a picture machine.
(Ord. No. 191-70. Passed 6-1-70, eff. 6-4-70)
§ 693.03 Compliance
   No picture machine shall be installed, maintained or operated within the
City except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter and such other
provisions of the Codified Ordinances relating to the installation and
construction of a booth for the enclosing of a picture machine, as well as such
requirements relating to the location, construction and other safety
regulations for theaters, exhibition or meeting halls, auditoriums or other
places of amusement or any segment thereof.
(Ord. No. 191-70. Passed 6-1-70, eff. 6-4-70)
§ 693.04 Use of Picture Machines
   All picture machines within which combustible film is used shall be equipped
with incombustible magazines for receiving and delivering the films during the
operation of the machine. A shutter must be provided and placed in front of the
condenser of the machine, so arranged that it can be instantly closed by the
operator.
(Ord. No. 191-70. Passed 6-1-70, eff. 6-4-70)
§ 693.05 Films Within the Booth
   Films, not in the picture machine, within the booth enclosing the machine,
shall be kept in metal boxes with tight fitting covers.
(Ord. No. 191-70. Passed 6-1-70, eff. 6-4-70)
§ 693.06 Hot Carbons
   Hot carbons taken from the lamps used in the picture machines shall be
deposited in a metal receptacle equipped with a self-closing hinged cover
provided in the booth for such purpose.
(Ord. No. 191-70. Passed 6-1-70, eff. 6-4-70)
§ 693.07 Qualified Operators Required
   Only holders of a Certificate of Qualification, for Picture Machine
Operator, as described in Codified Ordinance Chapter
3107, shall be employed or permitted to operate any picture machine unless the
picture machine is used by and incidental to the purposes of any charitable,
religious, benevolent or public or private educational organization. At the
Cleveland Convention Center, the Convention Center Work Rules and any
applicable collective bargaining agreements shall govern the use of licensed
picture machine operators, to the extent applicable.
(Ord. No. 377-03. Passed 5-19-03, eff. 5-27-03)
§ 693.08 License Examinations – Repealed
(Ord. 377-03. Passed 5-19-03, eff. 5-27-03)
§ 693.09 License Issuance; Fee; Renewal – Repealed
(Ord. 377-03. Passed 5-19-03, eff. 5-27-03)
§ 693.10 Premises Compliance Certificate Required
   No individual, partnership or corporation shall be permitted to conduct the
business of moving picture exhibitions, until he or she has applied for and
procured from the Commissioner of Building a certificate that the premises
wherein the exhibitions are to be given and the apparatus used in connection
therewith are in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and such other
sections of the Codified Ordinances relating thereto.
(Ord. No. 191-70. Passed 6-1-70, eff. 6-4-70)
§ 693.11 Certificate Revocation
   The Commissioner of Building shall have authority and shall revoke the
certificate issued to any person, firm or corporation for conducting or
maintaining picture machine exhibitions when he or she is satisfied that such
person has violated any of the provisions of this chapter or such other
sections of the Codified Ordinances relating thereto. However, before revoking
such certificate, opportunity shall be given such person to correct such
violations.
(Ord. No. 191-70. Passed 6-1-70, eff. 6-4-70)
§ 693.12 Drive-In Theater Defined; License Required
   (a)   No person, firm or corporation shall open, operate or maintain, or
cause to be opened, operated or maintained, any drive-in theater without first
obtaining a license to do so as hereinafter provided.
   (b)   For the purposes of this chapter, “drive-in theater” means any
enclosed premises in which motion pictures are projected upon a screen which
are viewed by patrons seated in automobiles parked within such enclosure and
for which privilege an admission charge is made.
(Ord. No. 1242-49. Passed 6-27-49)
§ 693.13 License Application; Approval or Disapproval
   Application for a drive-in theater license shall be made to the Commissioner
of Assessments and Licenses on forms to be prescribed by him or her, and shall
set forth the name, residence and business address of the owner, the name and
address of the applicant, if individuals, and if a firm or partnership, the
name or names, residence and occupation of the manager and each member of the
firm or partnership, and if a corporation, the names of its officers and
manager, and such other information as the Commissioner of Assessments and
Licenses may require. The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses shall
transmit such application for inspection and investigation to the Commissioner
of Building, Commissioner of Health, Chief of Fire and Chief of Police. The
Commissioner of Building, Commissioner of Health, Chief of Fire and Chief of
Police each shall, after such inspection and investigation as they may deem
necessary, make a report with their recommendations for approval or disapproval
of such application. If such application is approved, the Commissioner of
Assessments and Licenses shall issue a license on payment of the proper fee
hereinafter provided. The application for license shall be rejected if the
report submitted shows that any person named in that application is not of good
moral character or that the drive-in theater sought to be licensed does not
comply with the health and fire regulations applicable thereto.
(Ord. No. 1242-49. Passed 6-27-49)
§ 693.14 License Fee; Expiration; Posting
   Any person, firm, corporation or association to which a drive-in theater
license is granted shall pay an annual fee therefor as follows:
 
Number of Cars Fee
500 or less    $500.00
501 to 1,000   $1,500.00
Over 1,000     $2,500.00
 
   All licenses granted under the provisions of this chapter shall expire on
May 1. The license shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the drive-in
theater for which it is issued. No transfer of any license shall be permitted.
(Ord. No. 1242-49. Passed 6-27-49)
§ 693.15 Drive-In Theater Operation Restrictions
   No drive-in theater shall be maintained or operated:
   (a)   In violation of any provision of the Zoning Code;
   (b)   So as to constitute a fire or traffic hazard;
   (c)   Unless adequate provision, in the judgment of the Commissioner of
Health, is made for sanitary needs of patrons;
   (d)   Unless the parking and driving areas are hard surfaced or so treated
as to minimize the creation of dust;
   (e)   Except in a clean and orderly manner;
   (f)   After 12:00 midnight;
   (g)   In or upon which immoral acts are permitted.
(Ord. No. 1242-49. Passed 6-27-49)
§ 693.16 License Suspension or Revocation
   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses, upon recommendation of the
Commissioner of Health, Chief of Fire and Chief of Police, or any of them, may
at any time revoke or suspend licenses granted under the authority of this
chapter for the failure to comply with the terms of this chapter or any of the
other laws of the State or any ordinance of the City applicable to the
operation of drive-in theaters.
(Ord. No. 1242-49. Passed 6-27-49)
§ 693.17 Appeal
   In case of refusal to issue a license or of revocation or suspension of a
license by the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses, the applicant or
licensee may appeal from such order to the Board of Zoning Appeals, established
pursuant to Charter Section
76-6. Notice of appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the Board
within ten (10) days after the making of such order. The Board shall fix a time
of hearing for such approval not later than ten (10) days after the filing of
such notice at which all parties interested shall be afforded an opportunity to
be heard. Such Board shall approve, modify or annul such order from which such
appeal has been perfected. The opinion of the Board shall be final on all
parties thereto.
(Ord. No. 1242-49. Passed 6-27-49)
§ 693.99 Penalty
   Any person, firm, corporation, or association who violates any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less than five dollars ($5.00)
nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00).
(Ord. No. 1242-49. Passed 6-27-49)
CHAPTER 694 – ROLLER RINKS
694.01   Defined
694.02   License Required
694.03   License Application; Approval or Disapproval
694.04   License Fee; Expiration; Posting Required
694.05   Maintenance Requirements; Minors’ Attendance Restricted
694.06   Hours of Operation
694.07   Extending Closing Hour
694.08   License Revocation or Suspension
694.09   Appeal
694.99   Penalty
§ 694.01 Defined
   As used in this chapter, “roller rink” means a building, room, enclosure,
premises, place or establishment in the City where roller skating is offered to
the general public upon payment of a fee or charge.
(Ord. No. 357-A-42. Passed 6-15-42)
§ 694.02 License Required
   No person, firm, corporation or association shall engage in the business of
operating any roller skating rink within the limits of the City without first
having applied for and obtained from the Commissioner of Assessments and
Licenses a license as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. No. 357-A-42. Passed 6-15-42)
§ 694.03 License Application; Approval or Disapproval
   Application for the license shall be made to the Commissioner of Assessments
and Licenses on forms to be prescribed by him or her, and shall set forth the
name, residence and business address of the owner, the name and address of the
applicant, if individuals, and if a firm or partnership, the names, residences
and occupations of the manager and each member of the firm or partnership, and
if a corporation, the names of its officers and manager, and such other
information as the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses may require. The
Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses shall transmit such application for
inspection and investigation to the Commissioner of Building, Commissioner of
Health, Chief of Fire and Chief of Police. The Commissioner of Building,
Commissioner of Health, Chief of Fire and Chief of Police each shall, after
such inspection and investigation as they may deem necessary, make a report
with their recommendation for approval or disapproval of such application. If
such application is approved, the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses
shall issue a license on payment of the proper fee. The application for a
license shall be rejected if the report submitted thereon shows that any person
named in the application is not of good moral character or that the roller
skating rink sought to be licensed does not comply with the health and fire
regulations applicable thereto.
(Ord. No. 357-A-42. Passed 6-15-42)
§ 694.04 License Fee; Expiration; Posting Required
   Any person, firm, corporation, or association to which a license is granted
shall pay an annual fee as follows:
 
Skating Area (sq. ft.) Fee
Less than 2,500        $50.00
2,500 to 5,000         $60.00
5,001 to 6,500         $65.00
Over 6,500             $80.00
 
   All licenses granted under the provisions of this chapter shall expire on
May 1. The license shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the roller
skating rink for which it is issued. No transfer of any license shall be
permitted.
(Ord. No. 2393-02. Passed 2-3-03, eff. 2-3-03)
§ 694.05 Maintenance Requirements; Minors’ Attendance Restricted
   (a)   All roller skating rinks shall be kept at all times in a clean,
healthful and sanitary condition and all stairways and other passages shall be
kept clear and well lighted. After a license has been issued for the operation
of such roller skating rink, the Commissioner of Health and the Chief of Fire
shall strictly enforce the conditions herein set forth.
   (b)   No firm, person, corporation or association, or their agent or
operator, shall permit a minor under the age of eighteen (18) years to remain
on the premises of such roller skating rink after the hour of 11:00 p.m.,
unless such minor is accompanied by a parent or guardian. No person shall
represent himself or herself to have reached the age of eighteen (18) years in
order to obtain admission to a roller skating rink, or be permitted to remain
therein when such person is in fact under the age of eighteen (18) years.
(Ord. No. 357-A-42. Passed 6-15-42)
§ 694.06 Hours of Operation
   All roller skating rinks shall be closed on or before the hour of 1:00 a.m.
(Ord. No. 301-83. Passed 6-13-83, eff. 6-16-83)
§ 694.07 Extending Closing Hour
   Notwithstanding the provisions of Section
694.06, on application the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses may issue a
permit to any bona fide club, association or organization to continue the use
of any roller skating rink after the hour of 11:00 p.m. but not later than 1:30
a.m., which rink shall not be open to the public generally. The Chief of Police
shall furnish a report approving the operating of such roller skating rink
after having made an investigation to determine whether such applicant is a
bona fide club, association or organization and that such operation of the
roller skating rink after the hour of 11:00 p.m. shall not constitute a
nuisance or in any way interfere with or endanger the health and welfare,
morals or safety of the residents of the City.
(Ord. No. 357-A-42. Passed 6-15-42)
§ 694.08 License Revocation or Suspension
   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses, upon recommendation of the
Commissioner of Building, Commissioner of Health, Chief of Fire and Chief of
Police, or any of them, may at any time revoke or suspend licenses granted
under the authority of this chapter for the failure to comply with the terms of
this chapter or any of the other laws of the State or any ordinance of the City
applicable to the operation of such roller skating rink.
(Ord. No. 357-A-42. Passed 6-15-42)
§ 694.09 Appeal
   In case of refusal to issue a license or revocation or suspension of a
license by the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses, the applicant or
licensee may appeal from such order to the Board of Zoning Appeals, established
pursuant to Charter Section
76-6. Notice of appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the Board
within ten (10) days after the making of such order. The Board shall fix a time
of hearing for such approval, not later than ten (10) days after the filing of
such notice, at which all parties interested shall be afforded an opportunity
to be heard. Such Board shall approve, modify or annul such order from which
the appeal has been perfected. The opinion of the Board shall be final on all
parties thereto.
(Ord. No. 357-A-42. Passed 6-15-42)
§ 694.99 Penalty
   Any person, firm, corporation, or association who violates any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less than five dollars ($5.00)
nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00).
(Ord. No. 357-A-42. Passed 6-15-42)
CHAPTER 695 – SHOOTING GALLERIES
695.01   Shooting Gallery Defined
695.02   License Required
695.03   License Application
695.04   Investigation
695.05   License Issuance; Posting
695.06   Bond; Liability Insurance
695.07   Operating Regulations for Public Ranges
695.08   License Suspension; Revocation
695.09   License Appeals
695.10   Definitions
695.11   Private Range Permit Required
695.12   Application for Private Range Permit
695.13   Investigation; Permit Issuance
695.14   Permit Appeals
695.15   Operating Regulations for Private Ranges
695.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Gambling prohibitions, CO
Ch. 611
   Use of weapons while drugged, intoxicated, CO
627.04
§ 695.01 Shooting Gallery Defined
   As used in this chapter, “shooting gallery” means a place open to the public
where a charge is made for discharging firearms at a target, and does not
include ranges maintained by any military, police or other organization to
which the public generally is not admitted.
(Ord. No. 105351. Passed 12-21-36)
§ 695.02 License Required
   No person, firm or corporation shall open, operate or maintain, or cause to
be opened, operated or maintained, any shooting gallery without first obtaining
a license to do so as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. No. 105351. Passed 12-21-36)
§ 695.03 License Application
   Application for a license to operate a shooting gallery shall be filed with
the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses upon forms to be furnished by him
or her. Such application shall contain the name and address of the applicant;
and if a corporation, the full and accurate corporate name, when and where
incorporated, name of county where certificate has been filed and date of
filing; principal place of business; full name and address of corporate
officers; and if a partnership, the name and address of the members thereof;
and if the applicant conducts business under a trade name, the full and
complete trade name and the name and address of the person or persons doing
business under such trade name. Such application shall give the proposed
location of the shooting gallery or galleries, and the number and type of arms
to be used and a full and complete description of the plan for construction of
the place for stopping and controlling bullets, and such other information as
the Commissioner prescribes. A copy of the target to be used shall be submitted
with the license application.
(Ord. No. 105351. Passed 12-21-36)
§ 695.04 Investigation
   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses shall refer each application to
the Chief of Police who shall forthwith make or cause to be made an
investigation of the character of the applicant and of the fitness and
suitability of the shooting gallery from the standpoint of public safety and
compliance with the regulations hereinafter set forth. After completing such
investigation, the Chief of Police shall return the application to the
Commissioner with his or her recommendation endorsed thereon.
(Ord. No. 105351. Passed 12-21-36)
§ 695.05 License Issuance; Posting
   Upon receipt of the application from the Chief of Police, with his or her
endorsement thereon approving the same, the Commissioner of Assessments and
Licenses shall issue a license upon the payment of a fee of fifty dollars
($50.00) per year for each shooting gallery licensed to be operated. All such
licenses shall be for the period of one (1) year and shall expire on September
30 next following the date of issuance, and there shall be no rebate for any
lesser time. The license shall be conspicuously exhibited upon the premises.
(Ord. No. 105351. Passed 12-21-36)
§ 695.06 Bond; Liability Insurance
   No license shall be issued by the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses
until there has been deposited with the Director of Finance a bond of five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for the benefit of any person or persons who may
receive injuries or suffer death by reason of the operation of such shooting
gallery, which bond shall be approved by the Director of Law and the Director
of Finance; or such applicant may deposit a policy or certificate of liability
insurance acceptable to and approved by the Director of Law and the Director of
Finance, insuring and indemnifying the applicant in a sum of at least five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for injury or death of one (1) person, and ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for injury or death of two (2) or more persons in
any one (1) accident resulting from the operation of such shooting gallery. If
a cancelled, terminated, or lapsed policy of insurance required by this section
is not immediately replaced without any lapse in coverage, the license shall
forthwith be cancelled.
(Ord. No. 599-11. Passed 6-6-11, eff. 6-13-11)
§ 695.07 Operating Regulations for Public Ranges
   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses, and any person or persons
designated by him or her, and every police officer shall enforce the following
regulations:
   (a)   The backstop behind the target shall be made rigid; be at least
sixteen (16) gauge steel boiler plate; extend the full width of the room and
extend forward at an angle which in the opinion of the Police Division officer
in charge of ordnance section is adequate to protect the employees and the
public from bullet ricochet.
   The sides of the room shall be protected by steel boiler plate of a
thickness satisfactory to the Police Division officer in charge of ordnance
section and shall extend from the floor not less than ten (10) feet. There
shall be provided a six (6) inch sand trap at the bottom and directly in front
of the backstop, the full width and depth of the same.
   However, where the room is surrounded by walls of heavy masonry, the Police
Division officer in charge of ordnance section is hereby empowered to modify
the above regulations.
   (b)   No owner, operator or attendant shall permit any person under the
influence of intoxicants or narcotics, or any person under the age of sixteen
(16) years to handle or discharge any firearms upon the premises.
   (c)   The use of pistols or revolvers shall not be permitted and no rifle
discharging a cartridge at a velocity exceeding one thousand two hundred
(1,200) feet per second shall be permitted.
   (d)   All doors, gates and entrances leading into that part of the premises
between the firing point and the backstop shall be securely locked, and no
person shall be permitted therein, at all times while persons are engaged in
shooting, or have access to the rifles used.
   (e)   No shooting gallery shall be located nearer than two hundred (200)
feet of any school, church or hospital.
   (f)   All rifles, including the sights thereon, shall be kept at all times
in first class condition, and the adjustment and blackening of sights shall be
permitted.
   (g)   The ammunition used shall be smokeless, and only twenty-two (.22)
caliber short cartridges shall be permitted to be used.
   (h)   Such shooting gallery shall be open to the public only between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight.
   (i)   The shooting gallery shall be properly and adequately ventilated at
all times.
   (j)   Attendants shall wear a uniform, brassard or other distinguishing mark
to identify them as employees of the licensee, and no attendant or employee
shall have charge of more than four (4) rifles while actually being used on the
firing line.
   (k)   No gambling shall be permitted upon the premises licensed as a
shooting gallery, but this shall not be construed to prevent the offering of
prizes for marksmanship. All paper targets used shall be of a quality and
texture of paper to be prescribed by the Commissioner of Assessments and
Licenses.
   In addition to the foregoing, the City is hereby empowered to make such
further regulations not inconsistent herewith, which may from time to time be
required for the protection of the public safety and welfare.
(Ord. No. 106257-A. Passed 1-31-38)
§ 695.08 License Suspension; Revocation
   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses, upon the recommendation of the
Chief of Police, may at any time revoke or suspend the license granted under
authority of this chapter for failure to comply with the terms of this chapter
or any of the laws or regulations relating to the use of shooting galleries.
(Ord. No. 105351. Passed 12-21-36)
§ 695.09 License Appeals
   In case of the refusal to issue a license or the revocation or suspension of
a license by the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses, the applicant or
licensee may appeal from such order to the Board of Zoning Appeals, established
pursuant to Charter Section
76-6. Notice of such appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the
Board within ten (10) days after the making of such order. The Board within ten
(10) days after filing with the Board of such notice of appeal shall proceed
with the hearing of such appeal, at which hearing all parties interested shall
be afforded an opportunity to be heard. Such Board shall approve, modify or
annul such order from which the appeal has been perfected. The finding of such
Board shall be final on all parties thereto.
(Ord. No. 105351. Passed 12-21-36)
§ 695.10 Definitions
   As used in this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as follows:
   (a)   “Private range” includes a private rifle range, private pistol range
and a private pistol and rifle range, and means every place whether indoors or
out, or underground, open to or used by members of a gun club or guests, where
firearms are discharged at a target, but does not include ranges maintained by
any military or police agencies, or public shooting galleries provided for
under Sections
695.01 through 695.09.
   (b)   “Gun club” means and includes every two (2) or more persons banded
together to promote and engage in the shooting of firearms at targets in a
private range.
(Ord. No. 783-A-41. Passed 10-27-41)
§ 695.11 Private Range Permit Required
   No person, association, board of education or gun club shall construct,
open, operate or maintain or cause to be constructed, opened, operated or
maintained, a private range nor shall any gun club use a private range without
first obtaining a permit therefor, and complying with the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. No. 783-A-41. Passed 10-27-41)
§ 695.12 Application for Private Range Permit
   Application for a permit to construct, open, operate and maintain a private
range, or for a gun club to use a private range, shall be filed with the
Director of Public Safety in a form prescribed and furnished by him or her.
   Such application shall state:
   (a)   The name of the applicant;
   (b)   Kind of permit requested;
   (c)   Name and address of range;
   (d)   Names and addresses of officers and members of the club;
   (e)   Type of firearms to be used;
   (f)   The type of target to be used;
   (g)   Such other information as the Director may require.
(Ord. No. 783-A-41. Passed 10-27-41)
§ 695.13 Investigation; Permit Issuance
   (a)   The Director of Public Safety or any member of the Department of
Public Safety designated by him or her, shall forthwith make an investigation
of the character of the person or persons named in the application, and of the
fitness and suitability of the private range from the standpoint of public
safety and compliance with the regulations as set forth herein.
   (b)   The application may be rejected if the Director finds any of the
persons named in the application not of good moral character, or any who
belonged to a gun club the permit of which was revoked because of violation of
any of the provisions of this chapter. After completing such investigation, a
report of the same shall be made to the Director.
   (c)   On a receipt of any application upon which there is endorsed a
recommendation approving the same, the Director shall issue a permit to the
applicant without charge therefor, for the constructing, opening, operating or
maintaining a private range, or for the use of a private range as the case may
be.
(Ord. No. 783-A-41. Passed 10-27-41)
§ 695.14 Permit Appeals
   In case of the refusal to issue a permit or the revocation or suspension of
a permit by the Director of Public Safety, the applicant or permittee may
appeal from such order to the Board of Zoning Appeals, established pursuant to
Charter Section
76-6. Notice of such appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the
Board within ten (10) days after the making of such order. The Board within ten
(10) days after filing of such notice of appeal, shall proceed with the hearing
of such appeal, at which hearing all parties interested shall be afforded an
opportunity to be heard. The Board shall approve, modify or annul such order
from which the appeal has been perfected, and the finding of such Board shall
be final on all parties thereto.
(Ord. No. 783-A-41. Passed 10-27-41)
§ 695.15 Operating Regulations for Private Ranges
   The Director of Public Safety, and any member or members of the Department
of Public Safety so designated by him or her, and every police officer shall
enforce the following regulations:
   (a)   (1)   For ranges where rifles of no more than twenty-two (.22) caliber
and bullets having no greater velocity than one thousand two hundred (1,200)
feet per second are used, the backstop behind each target shall be at least
one-fourth (1/4) inch steel boiler plate, having a minimum width of four feet
for each firing point, slant forward at an angle of not less than thirty (30)
degrees with the floor, but of rigid construction, and at least six (6) feet
high from the floor.
      (2)   For ranges where pistol and rifle shooting is done and bullets
having no greater velocity than one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet per
second are used, the backstop shall be of at least three-eighths (3/8) inch
steel boiler plate and extend the full width and height of the room, and the
ceiling above the range from a point over the head of the shooter and for a
distance of ten (10) feet in the direction of the target shall be one-fourth
(1/4) inch steel plate. However, if the ceiling is of concrete or brick
construction, the Director may waive this requirement of steel for the ceiling.
      (3)   There shall be provided a one (1) foot sand trap at the bottom and
directly in front of the backstop, the full width of the range.
   (b)   No person under the influence of intoxicants or narcotics shall be
permitted to handle or discharge any firearms on a private range; nor shall any
person under the age of sixteen (16) be permitted to handle or discharge
firearms on any private range unless done under adult supervision.
   (c)   All doors, gates and entrances leading into that part of the premises
between the firing point and backstop shall be securely locked, and no person
shall be permitted therein, at all times when persons are engaged in shooting.
   (d)   There shall be, at all times, proper and adequate ventilation of all
private ranges.
   (e)   (1)   Every private range holding a permit shall have a registration
book for members, and a registration book for guests, and each day that a
member or guest uses the range, he or she shall register under proper date,
name, address and the club to which they belong, in the respective book for
that purpose.
      (2)   Every gun club shall keep a current roster of the names and
addresses of its officers and members. Such books shall be subject at all times
to examination by the persons designated herein to enforce the regulations
provided for in this chapter.
   (f)   No rifles other than twenty-two (.22) caliber, rim fire shall be used
in private ranges permitted under this chapter.
   (g)   The storage of common powder shall be in conformity with all
provisions of the Codified Ordinances.
   (h)   No permit issued under this chapter shall be transferred from one (1)
gun club to another gun club.
   (i)   The Director of Public Safety shall have the right to make such
further regulations not inconsistent herewith as he or she deems necessary for
the proper enforcement of this chapter, and the Director shall have the right,
at his or her discretion, to revoke any permit issued by him or her pursuant to
the authority of this chapter. Every permit issued hereunder shall expire on
June 30 of each year and must be renewed for the ensuing year at the office of
the Director.
(Ord. No. 783-A-41. Passed 10-27-41)
§ 695.99 Penalty
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and fined not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than two
hundred dollars ($200.00) or imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days or
both.
(Ord. No. 783-A-41. Passed 10-27-41)
CHAPTER 696 – TEEN CLUBS
696.01   License Required
696.02   License Application; Fee; Approval or Disapproval
696.03   Limitations on License
696.04   License Revocation; Suspension
696.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Minors’ curfew, CO
605.14
§ 696.01 License Required
   No person, firm, corporation, society or club, or the officers, employees or
agents thereof, shall operate or solicit membership in any club, canteen or
organization, whether public or private, which is principally devoted to the
entertainment or recreation of persons in their teens, that is, persons between
the ages of thirteen (13) and seventeen (17) years, inclusive, without first
obtaining a license as provided in this chapter. Nothing in this section shall
be deemed to apply to any teenage club, canteen or organization sponsored and
supervised by a bona fide religious or school group or organization, the
proceeds of which are to be expended for charitable, religious or educational
purposes.
(Ord. No. 1990-67. Passed 8-29-67, eff. 9-1-67)
§ 696.02 License Application; Fee; Approval or Disapproval
   (a)   Each applicant for a license required by Section
696.01 shall make an application to the Commissioner of Assessments and
Licenses. The applications shall be on forms provided by the Commissioner. The
application shall be filed at least sixty (60) days prior to the effective date
of the required license. The application for the license shall be accompanied
by an affidavit stating that the premises to be occupied conform with existing
health, safety, and fire ordinances of the City and that the proposed occupancy
and use do not violate any applicable ordinance of the City. In addition to the
name and address of the applicant, the application shall contain the name and
address of all officers or partners of the applicant, if it is other than an
individual, as well as other relevant information as the Commissioner may
require.
   (b)   The application shall be accompanied by a fee of one hundred dollars
($100.00) which shall be used to defray the cost of processing the application.
   (c)   Upon the filing of the application the Commissioner shall refer it to
the Director of Public Safety, who shall investigate the proposed location to
determine compliance with fire regulations, and also to determine whether the
applicant or any officers have been convicted for violating any law or
ordinance, other than those relating to traffic violations. The Commissioner
shall also refer the application to the Director of Community Development, who
shall investigate to determine compliance with all applicable building,
housing, or zoning ordinances and, the Commissioner shall also refer the
application to the Director of Public Health and Welfare, who shall investigate
to determine compliance with all ordinances and laws relating to health and
sanitation.
   (d)   If any of the departments in division (c) of this section disapproves
the application either because of failure to comply with applicable ordinances
or laws or because of past criminal convictions of the applicant or its
officers, the Commissioner shall reject the application. On approval of all the
departments the Commissioner shall issue to the applicant a license subject to
the limitations in Section
696.03.
(Ord. No. 2393-02. Passed 2-3-03, eff. 2-3-03)
§ 696.03 Limitations on License
   (a)   A licensee shall not hold any event or permit his or her premises to
be occupied by any teenager later than 12:00 a.m. provided that on Sunday to
Thursday, the time limitation shall be 9:00 p.m.
   (b)   No licensee shall accept the application of any teenager for admission
to any private club or canteen unless the teenager accompanies the application
with the consent of his or her parents, signed before a Notary Public.
(Ord. No. 1521-67. Passed 7-24-67, eff. 7-26-67)
§ 696.04 License Revocation; Suspension
   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses, upon recommendation of the
Directors of Public Safety, Community Development or Public Health and Welfare,
or upon his or her own initiative, may at any time revoke or suspend any
license granted hereunder, for the violation of any law or ordinance relating
to the operation of such licensee or for the violation of any other law or
ordinance relating to the public health, safety or welfare, either by the
applicant or any officer, employee or agent thereof.
(Ord. No. 1521-67. Passed 7-24-67, eff. 7-26-67)
§ 696.99 Penalty
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
or imprisoned not more than one (1) year, or both.
(Ord. No. 1521-67. Passed 7-24-67, eff. 7-26-67)
CHAPTER 697 – TEMPORARY SHOWS
697.01   License Required; Fees
697.02   Trapeze Protection
697.99   Penalty
   Note: The legislative history of this chapter, except where specifically
noted at the end of a section, is as follows: Ordinance No. 63410-A, passed
September 22, 1924.
Cross-reference:
   Unnecessary noise, CO
605.10
Statutory reference:
   Contests or games at county fairs, RC 1711.09, 1711.11
   Power to regulate, RC 715.48, 715.63, 3765.02
   State licensing of portable amusement devices, RC 1711.11
§ 697.01 License Required; Fees
   (a)   No person or corporation, either as owner, lessee, manager, officer or
agent, or in any capacity, shall give, conduct, produce, present or offer for
gain or profit any circus, menageries, wild west show, dog and pony show, or
other shows and exhibitions under canvas or within or under any structure
intended for temporary use and capable of easy transfer and removal, without
first securing from the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses a license for
that purpose and paying therefor a license fee as follows:
 
Seating Capacity Fee
600 or less      $10.00/week
601 to 2,000     $50.00/week
2,001 to 5,000   $50.00/day
Over 5,000       $200.00/day
 
   (b)   All moneys collected by the issuance of licenses shall be credited to
the General Fund and paid into the City Treasury.
   (c)   Every license granted under the provisions of this section shall at
all times be subject to the ordinances of the City so far as the same apply.
§ 697.02 Trapeze Protection
   Any proprietors or managers of any theater or other place of amusement,
which exhibits or gives any entertainment, called or known as a trapeze
performance, shall provide and use in every case of such performance, and keep
properly stretched and in place, suitable netting or other like adequate
protection under the performer, which shall secure the performer from personal
injury in the case of accidental fall. The provisions of this section shall not
apply to circuses or other shows wherein such performance is performed on
apparatus which is suspended over soft earth and sawdust.
§ 697.99 Penalty
   (a)   Any person or corporation who violates any of the provisions of
Section
697.01 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and fined not less than ten
dollars ($10.00) nor more than four hundred dollars ($400.00) for each offense.
Each and every day upon which such person or corporation gives or presents any
such entertainment contrary to the provisions of Section
697.01 constitutes a separate offense.
   (b)   Any person being a proprietor or manager of any theater or other place
of amusement, who violates the provisions of Section
697.02, shall be fined not more than fifty dollars ($50.00).
CHAPTER 697A – MAJOR QUALIFYING EVENTS
697A.01   Definitions
697A.02   Major Qualifying Event Permits
697A.03   Major Qualifying Event Security and Traffic Plan
697A.04   Major Qualifying Event Vending and Peddling Plan
697A.99   Prohibitions and Penalties
§ 697A.01 Definitions
   As used in this chapter, the following words, phrases and terms have the
following meaning:
   (a)   "Local Organizing Committee" means an organization located in the
Greater Cleveland area and responsible for performing and providing support,
hospitality and local organizing functions in connection with the Major
Qualifying Event.
   (b)   "Major Qualifying Event" means an event for which the City has entered
into an agreement, authorized by Council, to host the event in conjunction with
the Local Organizing Committee or Sponsor.
   (c)   "Major Qualifying Event Security and Traffic Plan" means the plan
developed and implemented by the Director of Public Safety under this chapter.
   (d)   "Sponsor" means the organization responsible for conducting the Major
Qualifying Event.
(Ord. No. 1028-18. Passed 1-14-19, eff. 1-15-19)
§ 697A.02 Major Qualifying Event Permits
   (a)   Notwithstanding any Code provision or ordinance to the contrary, the
Directors of Public Works, Parks and Recreation, Public Safety, Building and
Housing, Capital Projects, and the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses, as
applicable to the duties of their respective departments or divisions, are
authorized to issue appropriate permits and authorizations related to
activities associated with Major Qualifying Event.
   (b)   Notwithstanding any Code provisions or ordinances to the contrary, the
various City directors are authorized to develop and implement policies and
practices for consolidating applications for and expediting review and issuance
of City licenses, permits, approvals, reviews and inspections as required by
the laws of the City as needed for the Major Qualifying Event and related
activities and to issue a comprehensive permit that incorporates various City
permits for the Major Qualifying Event, including review and approval of a
comprehensive signage plan in the Central Business District and the major
routes into the City as proposed by the Local Organizing Committee or Sponsor,
in a form acceptable to the Director of Law. The consolidated application
process and issuance of a comprehensive City permit as described in this
section shall be coordinated by the Director of Public Works or the Director's
designee.
(Ord. No. 521-2024. Passed 7-10-24, eff. 7-16-24) (BOC Res. 377-24. Adopted 8-
7-24)
§ 697A.03 Major Qualifying Event Security and Traffic Plan
   (a)   Notwithstanding any Code provision or ordinance to the contrary, the
Director of Public Safety is authorized to develop and implement a security and
traffic control plan during the Major Qualifying Event in consultation with
Local Organizing Committee and the Sponsor, including the development and
implementation of a traffic plan that involves the closing of streets and
rerouting of traffic to accommodate the increased traffic, buses and vehicles
related to the event, and designation of passenger pick-up and drop-off areas
during the event.
   (b)   As part of the Major Qualifying Event Security and Traffic Plan and
notwithstanding any Code provision or ordinance to the contrary, the Director
of Public Safety may promulgate regulations to be approved by the Board of
Control that place reasonable time, place and manner restrictions on the use of
the public rights-of-way and public property during the Major Qualifying Event,
to allow appropriate access and operation of affected businesses and/or to
protect public safety, person, property, and to accommodate the interests of
person participating in the Major Qualifying Event and persons not
participating in the Major Qualifying Event. The regulations may include the
issuance of public gathering permits, demonstration permits, temporary use
permits, parade permits, and business access permits during the Major
Qualifying Event, may exclude public assemblies in certain areas defined in the
regulations and as required by the Major Qualifying Event Security and Traffic
Plan, and may prohibit materials and objects defined in the regulations in
certain areas of the city around the Major Qualifying Event and related venues.
(Ord. No. 1028-18. Passed 1-14-19, eff. 1-15-19)
§ 697A.04 Major Qualifying Event Vending and Peddling Plan
   (a)   Notwithstanding any Code provisions or ordinances to the contrary, the
Director of Capital Projects and/or the Commissioner of Assessments and
Licenses, as appropriate to their respective duties, are authorized to
promulgate and implement a vending and peddling plan during the Major
Qualifying Event.
   (b)   As part of the Major Qualifying Event Vending and Peddling Plan and
notwithstanding any Code provision or ordinance to the contrary, the Director
of Capital Projects and/or the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses, as
appropriate to their respective duties, may promulgate regulations to be
approved by the Board of Control that place reasonable restrictions on the sale
of goods, wares and merchandise on public rights-of-way and public property
during the Major Qualifying Event in areas identified in the regulations. The
regulations may include the issuance of special vending permits, may limit the
size of vendor signage in areas identified in the regulations, prohibit the
sale of goods, wares or merchandise containing counterfeit trademarks, and may
prohibit the distribution of free samples of commercial goods, ware, or
merchandise in areas identified in the regulations.
(Ord. No. 1028-18. Passed 1-14-19, eff. 1-15-19)
§ 697A.99 Prohibitions and Penalties
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Fail to comply with the regulations promulgated under division (b)
of Section
697A.03;
      (2)   Have in his or her possession any prohibited item identified in the
regulations promulgated under division (b) of Section
697A.03 in any area identified in the regulations; or
      (3)   Sell, offer for sale, or distribute items in violation of the
regulations promulgated under division (b) of Section
697A.04 in any area identified in the regulations.
   (b)   (1)   Whoever violates any of the prohibitions of division (a)(1) and
(a)(2) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (b)(3), whoever violates any
prohibition of division (a)(3) is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the
offender persists after reasonable warning or request to desist, a violation of
division (a)(3) is a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (3)   Whoever engages in the sale of goods, wares or merchandise
containing counterfeit trademarks as prohibited under division (a)(3) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(Ord. No. 1028-18. Passed 1-14-19, eff. 1-15-19)
CHAPTER 698 – TICKET BROKERS
698.01   Definitions
698.011   Online Sales
698.02   License Required
698.03   License Application
698.04   Bond Required
698.05   License Issuance; Fees; Posting
698.06   Operating Regulations
698.07   Misrepresentation; License Forfeiture
698.08   Complaint Investigation
698.09   License Suspension; Revocation; Appeal
698.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Power to regulate, RC 715.48
§ 698.01 Definitions
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   “Ticket broker” means any person, firm or corporation engaged in
conducting, managing or carrying on the business of buying, selling or
otherwise dealing in tickets of admission, or any other evidence of right of
entry to a theater, place of amusement or entertainment, or other place where
public exhibitions, games, contests or performances are held within the City,
at a price greater than the price printed on the ticket, or procuring or
reserving theater or amusement admissions for a fee or compensation in addition
to such box office price.
   (b)   “Engaged in conducting, managing or carrying on the business of ticket
broker” means the sale of two (2) or more tickets of admission or other
evidence of right of entry to, or the procuring or reserving of two (2) or more
admissions to any of the places of amusement set forth in the definition of
ticket brokers, within any calendar year.
(Ord. No. 2092-99. Passed 3-27-00, eff. 4-6-00)
§ 698.011 Online Sales
   This chapter shall not apply to sales of tickets of admission to the places
described in Section
698.01 that are made on the internet.
(Ord. No. 957-06. Passed 6-12-06, eff. 6-16-06)
§ 698.02 License Required
   No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of ticket broker
in the City unless licensed as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. No. 1290-A-43. Passed 10-22-45)
§ 698.03 License Application
   Application for license as ticket broker shall be filed with the
Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses upon forms to be furnished by him or
her. Such application shall contain the name and address of the applicant, and
if a corporation the full and accurate corporate name, when and where
incorporated, name of county where certificate has been filed and date of
filing, principal place of business, full name and address of corporate
officers, and if a partnership, the names and addresses of the members thereof,
and if the applicant conducts business under a trade name, the full and
complete trade name, and the name and address of the person or persons doing
business under such trade name. Such application shall give the proposed
location or locations where the business is to be carried on. The application
must contain references of at least two (2) reputable residents of the City as
to the character of the applicant and such other information as the
Commissioner shall prescribe.
(Ord. No. 1290-A-43. Passed 10-22-45)
§ 698.04 Bond Required
   No license shall be issued unless and until the applicant has filed with the
Director of Finance a bond of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) to be approved
by the Director of Law as to form and surety, which bond shall be conditioned
upon the faithful observance of the provisions of the ordinances of the City
and laws of the State relating to the business of ticket broker or applicable
thereto. Such bond shall contain a further provision that the applicant will
pay all final judgments recovered against him or her by reason of any damage
sustained on account of the violation of such ordinances or laws or because of
any misrepresentation or deception which may have been practiced on the person
securing such judgment by the licensee for or on account of the business so
licensed. The bond shall further provide for continuing liability thereunder to
the full amount thereof, notwithstanding any recovery thereon, and that the
surety shall be obliged to give ten (10) days’ notice in writing to the
Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses before cancellation.
(Ord. No. 1290-A-43. Passed 10-22-45)
§ 698.05 License Issuance; Fees; Posting
   Upon the posting of the bond required by Section
698.04 and payment of a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per year for the
first or principal location and twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per year for each
additional location, the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses shall issue a
license. All such licenses shall be for the period of one (1) year and shall
expire on August 31 next following the date of issuance and there shall be no
rebate for any lesser time. Each license shall contain the name under which the
business is to be conducted and the name of the person to whom issued. The
license shall not be transferable and the business shall be conducted only at
the location or locations specified in the license. The license shall be
conspicuously exhibited upon the premises licensed thereunder.
(Ord. No. 1290-A-43. Passed 10-22-45)
§ 698.06 Operating Regulations
   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses, and any person or persons
designated by him or her, and every police officer shall enforce the following
regulations:
   (a)   There shall be conspicuously posted and at all times displayed
prominently at the location licensed, a price list showing the price charged by
the person, firm or corporation owning, operating or controlling the theater,
place of amusement or entertainment, or the place where the public exhibition,
game, contest or performance for which a ticket is being sold by such licensee,
together with the price being charged by such licensee for the resale of such
ticket so that all persons visiting such place may readily see the same. The
licensee shall also on request, furnish each purchaser of a ticket with a
receipt showing the same information.
   (b)   No licensee shall pay to any officer or employee of any theater or
place of amusement or entertainment or other place where public exhibitions,
games, contests or performances are held, or to any producer or manager or
employee of any theatrical or other exhibition or theatrical company, any
commission, gratuity or bonus in connection with the sale, delivery or payment
of tickets or in connection with the business being done by such licensee in
tickets of admission to such places.
(Ord. No. 961-08. Passed 7-2-08, eff. 7-7-08)
§ 698.07 Misrepresentation; License Forfeiture
   Any false or misleading statement made in an application for a license, or
in any advertising, or orally by any officer, agent or employee of the
licensee, made in furtherance of the business of the licensee, shall render the
license issued to such licensee null and void and shall forfeit to the City the
license fee paid in addition to the penalties otherwise provided.
(Ord. No. 1290-A-43. Passed 10-22-45)
§ 698.08 Complaint Investigation
   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses shall have the power, upon
complaint of any resident or on his or her own initiative, to investigate the
business, business practices and business methods of any such licensee, if in
the opinion of such Commissioner such investigation is warranted. Each such
licensee shall be obligated at the request of the Commissioner to furnish such
information as may be required concerning his or her business, business
practices or business methods, and the Commissioner may put under oath and
command answers to any questions pertaining to such investigation from any and
all persons who may be connected in any manner with the business of the
licensee for the transaction or transactions which constitute the subject of
the investigation.
(Ord. No. 1290-A-43. Passed 10-22-45)
§ 698.09 License Suspension; Revocation; Appeal
   The Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses may, at any time, cite the
holder of a license to appear before him or her and show cause why such license
should neither be revoked or suspended because of failure to comply with the
terms of any of the laws or ordinances relating to the business so licensed,
but no order of suspension or revocation made by the Commissioner shall become
operative until the effective time for filing an appeal from such order has
elapsed, and the filing of such appeal shall further serve to stay such order
until final decision is rendered by the Board of Zoning Appeals, established
pursuant to Charter Section
76-6. In case of the refusal to issue a license or the revocation or suspension
of a license by the Commissioner of Assessments and Licenses, the applicant or
licensee may appeal from such refusal or order or revocation or suspension to
the Board.
(Ord. No. 1290-A-43. Passed 10-22-45)
§ 698.99 Penalty
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree and fined not more than two hundred and fifty
dollars ($250.00), or imprisoned not more than thirty (30) days, or both, for
the first offense. Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter
within two (2) years of the first conviction hereunder shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor of the second degree for a second or subsequent offense and shall
be fined not more than seven hundred and fifty dollars ($750.00), or imprisoned
not more than ninety (90) days, or both. Each day’s violation constitutes a
separate offense.
(Ord. No. 2092-99. Passed 3-27-00, eff. 4-6-00)
CHAPTER 698A – OUTDOOR SALES OF TICKETS OF ADMISSION TO SPORTING EVENTS AND
OTHER EVENTS
698A.01   Outdoor Sales of Tickets of Admission to Sporting Events and Other
Events Restricted
698A.99   Penalty
§ 698A.01 Outdoor Sales of Tickets of Admission to Sporting Events and Other
Events Restricted
   (a)   Findings. The activities of vendors of tickets of admission to
sporting events and other events in and near the Central Business District has
caused inconvenience and annoyance to persons on their way to the events or
patronizing restaurants and other businesses in the vicinity of the events. At
times, pedestrians encounter a gauntlet of ticket vendors employing aggressive
sales tactics, or witness sidewalk turf disputes among ticket vendors that
sometimes escalate to physical altercations. The time, place and manner
restrictions imposed by this section are narrowly tailored to respond to this
matter of public and governmental interest.
   (b)   Offense. No person who possesses a ticket or tickets of admission to a
sporting event, theater, show or other event shall, after first being warned by
a law enforcement officer to desist, sell, hawk, peddle, display for sale or
solicit another to purchase the ticket or tickets outdoors within the zone
identified in division (c) of this section, except the parts of the zone
designated as permissive ticket sales areas, for a period of six (6) hours
before or during any event at the Cleveland State University Convocation Center
or Gateway complex or the event regardless of venue to which the ticket or
tickets pertain.
   (c)   Ticket Zone Established. The zone referred to in division (b) of this
section and the permissive ticket sales areas within the zone are shown on the
map and set forth by legal description both contained in File No. 961-08-A. The
Director of Public Safety may, through the issuance of a regulation, modify the
boundaries or placement of the zone or permissive ticket sales areas as set
forth in the file if the Director determines that such changes are needed to
advance the purposes of this legislation as stated in division (a). Any such
regulation shall take effect fourteen (14) days after its publication in the
City Record.
   The Director of Public Safety may cause signs to be posted to apprise
persons of the existence of the zone and permissive ticket sales areas
established by this section, but the absence of signs or any deficiency of
signs shall not constitute a defense to division (b) of this section provided
that the offender, in accordance with division (b), has first been warned by a
law enforcement officer to desist from the proscribed conduct.
(Ord. No. 961-08. Passed 7-2-08, eff. 7-7-08)
§ 698A.99 Penalty
   Whoever violates division (b) of Section
698A.01 is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on the first offense, a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree on the second offense, and a misdemeanor of the second degree
on the third and any subsequent offense.
(Ord. No. 961-08. Passed 7-2-08, eff. 7-7-08)
   Outdoor Ticket Sales Exclusion Zone and Permissive Ticket Sales Areas
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4cc937dcc99cd9ae45e5f9bfbf6bc5ab64112b8f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11416.jpg]
 
   Beginning on the projected Northerly line of the South Roadway of Public
Square at its intersection with the centerline of Ontario Street (ninety-nine
(99) ft. wide); Southerly along the centerline of said Ontario Street to its
intersection with the centerline of West Prospect Avenue (one hundred (100) ft.
wide); thence Westerly along the centerline of said West Prospect Avenue to its
intersection with the centerline of West 6 Street (seventy (70) ft. wide);
thence Southerly along the centerline of said West 6 Street to its Southerly
prolongation to its intersection with the centerline of Canal Road (width
varies); thence Easterly and Southerly along the centerline of said Canal Road
to the Southerly limited access line of the Innerbelt Freeway so called; thence
Easterly along the Southerly limited access line of the said Innerbelt Freeway
to its intersection with the centerline of East 14 Street (width varies);
thence Northerly along the centerline of said East 14 Street and its Northerly
prolongation to its intersection with the Northerly line of Euclid Avenue
(ninety-nine (99) ft. wide); thence Westerly along the Northerly line of said
Euclid Avenue to its intersection with the Easterly line of Public Square;
thence Westerly in a direct line to the Northerly line of the South Roadway of
said Public Square to the place of beginning excepting therefrom the two (2)
permissive zones which are the Northerly sidewalk area of Huron Road between
Ontario Street and East 4th Street and being ten (10) feet away from the
crosswalks at Ontario Street and East 4th Street, and the Northerly sidewalk
area of Huron Road (99 ft. wide) extending Easterly from East 9 Street (ninety-
nine (99) ft. wide) about two hundred fifty (250) ft.
CHAPTER 699 – PICTURE ARCADES AND LIVE VIEWING BOOTHS
699.01   Definitions – Repealed
699.02   License Required – Repealed
699.03   License Fee – Repealed
699.04   Application for License – Repealed
699.05   Issuance of License – Repealed
699.06   Renewal of License – Repealed
699.07   Display of License – Repealed
699.08   Inspection – Repealed
699.09   Visibility of Interiors – Repealed
699.10   Minimum Lighting Standards – Repealed
699.11   Location of Picture Arcades – Repealed
699.12   Minors Prohibited; When – Repealed
699.13   Responsibility of the Operator – Repealed
699.14   Nuisance – Repealed
699.15   Applicability of Chapter – Repealed
699.16   Revocation or Denial of License – Repealed
699.17   Appeal – Repealed
699.18   Severability – Repealed
699.99   Penalties – Repealed
   Note: Ordinance No. 1520-03, passed January 26, 2004, repealed Chapter 699
and enacted Chapter
237 relating to Adult Video Arcades and Adult Live Entertainment Arcades.
§ 699.01 Definitions – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1520-03. Passed 1-26-04, eff. 3-6-04)
§ 699.02 License Required – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1520-03. Passed 1-26-04, eff. 3-6-04)
§ 699.03 License Fee – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1520-03. Passed 1-26-04, eff. 3-6-04)
§ 699.04 Application for License – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1520-03. Passed 1-26-04, eff. 3-6-04)
§ 699.05 Issuance of License – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1520-03. Passed 1-26-04, eff. 3-6-04)
§ 699.06 Renewal of License – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1520-03. Passed 1-26-04, eff. 3-6-04)
§ 699.07 Display of License – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1520-03. Passed 1-26-04, eff. 3-6-04)
§ 699.08 Inspection – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1520-03. Passed 1-26-04, eff. 3-6-04)
§ 699.09 Visibility of Interiors – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1520-03. Passed 1-26-04, eff. 3-6-04)
§ 699.10 Minimum Lighting Standards – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1520-03. Passed 1-26-04, eff. 3-6-04)
§ 699.11 Location of Picture Arcades – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1520-03. Passed 1-26-04, eff. 3-6-04)
§ 699.12 Minors Prohibited; When – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1520-03. Passed 1-26-04, eff. 3-6-04)
§ 699.13 Responsibility of the Operator – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1520-03. Passed 1-26-04, eff. 3-6-04)
§ 699.14 Nuisance – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1520-03. Passed 1-26-04, eff. 3-6-04)
§ 699.15 Applicability of Chapter – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1520-03. Passed 1-26-04, eff. 3-6-04)
§ 699.16 Revocation or Denial of License – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1520-03. Passed 1-26-04, eff. 3-6-04)
§ 699.17 Appeal – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1520-03. Passed 1-26-04, eff. 3-6-04)
§ 699.18 Severability – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1520-03. Passed 1-26-04, eff. 3-6-04)
§ 699.99 Penalties – Repealed
(Ord. No. 1520-03. Passed 1-26-04, eff. 3-6-04)
CHAPTER 699A – COMMUNITY ENTERTAINMENT DISTRICTS
699A.01   Districts Generally
699A.011   Districts Defined
699A.02   Application Submission
699A.03   Application Processing
699A.04   Supplemental Standards for Designation
699A.05   Prohibited Uses
699A.06   Removal of Designation
§ 699A.01 Districts Generally
   As used in this chapter and in RC 4301.80, “Community Entertainment
District” means a bounded area of at least twenty (20) contiguous acres that
includes or will include a combination of entertainment, retail, educational,
sporting, social, cultural, or arts establishments within close proximity to
some or all of the following types of establishments within the district, or
other types of establishments similar to these:
   (a)   Hotels;
   (b)   Restaurants;
   (c)   Retail sales establishments;
   (d)   Enclosed shopping centers;
   (e)   Museums;
   (f)   Performing arts theaters;
   (g)   Motion picture theaters;
   (h)   Night clubs;
   (i)   Convention facilities;
   (j)   Sports facilities;
   (k)   Entertainment facilities or complexes; or
   (l)   Any combination of the establishments described in division (a) - (l)
of this section that provide similar services to the community.
(Ord. No. 286-05. Passed 3-28-05, eff. 3-30-05)
§ 699A.011 Districts Defined
   Community Entertainments Districts are limited to the following defined
areas of the City of Cleveland and meet all the requirements of Section
699A.01 of this chapter:
   (a)   Playhouse Square District. An area more fully described in Ordinance
File No. 1222-13-A.
   (b)   Waterloo District. An area centered on Waterloo Avenue, east of East
156th Street, more fully described in Ordinance File No. 620-15-A.
   (c)   Cleveland Hopkins International Airport, Cleveland Airport System,
5300 Riverside Drive, Cleveland, Ohio 44181-0009, particularly the Main
Terminal and Concourses A, B, C, and D.
   (d)   Uptown District. An area centered on the intersection of Euclid Avenue
and Mayfield Road, containing approximately 98 acres, more fully described in
Ordinance File No. 759-12-A.
      (1)   There is established an Uptown Community Entertainment District
Committee (the "UCED Committee"), whose primary purpose and function is to
review each applicant for one of the D-5(j) liquor permits authorized by the
establishment of the Uptown Community Entertainment District in meetings that
are open to the public and make recommendations to the City Council. The UCED
Committee shall also serve to make recommendations to the City Council with
regard to applications for the issuance, transfer, or renewal of any liquor
permit in the District.
      (2)   The UCED Committee shall be composed of four (4) members: AJAPPJR
Uptown LLC, University Circle Incorporated, Case Western Reserve University,
and the UCED Community Representative. AJAPPJR Uptown LLC, University Circle
Incorporated, and Case Western Reserve University shall each appoint a single
member to the UCED Committee. The UCED Community Representative shall be
appointed by the Committee from nominations made by the City Council members
representing wards that are located in whole or in part within the boundaries
of the District.
      (3)   Three (3) of the four (4) members of the UCED Committee shall
constitute a quorum to transact business and to issue any recommendation or
advisory opinion.
      (4)   The UCED Committee may promulgate its own internal rules of
procedure and review.
   (e)   Flats East Bank District. An area designated by the permanent parcel
numbers that are set forth and more fully described in Ordinance File No. 759-
12-A.
   (f)   Gordon Square District. An area more fully described in Ordinance File
No. 59-14-A.
(Ord. No. 620-15. Passed 6-8-15, eff. 6-9-15)
§ 699A.02 Application Submission
   Any owner of property seeking to have that property, or that property and
other surrounding property, designated as a Community Entertainment District
shall file an application seeking this designation with the Mayor of the City
of Cleveland and the Director of the City Planning Commission. An application
to designate an area as a Community Entertainment District shall contain all of
the following:
   (a)   The applicant’s name and address;
   (b)   A map or survey of the proposed Community Entertainment District in
sufficient detail to identify the boundaries of the district and the property
owned by the applicant;
   (c)   A general statement of the nature and types of establishments
described in Section
699A.01 of this chapter that are or will be located within the proposed
Community Entertainment District and any other establishments located in the
proposed Community Entertainment District that are not described in Section
699A.01 of this chapter;
   (d)   If some or all of the establishments within the proposed Community
Entertainment District have not yet been developed, the proposed time frame for
completing the development of these establishments;
   (e)   Evidence that the uses of land within the proposed Community
Entertainment District are in accord with the Zoning Code and Map of the City
of Cleveland;
   (f)   A certificate from a surveyor or engineer licensed under RC Chapter
4733 indicating that the area encompassed by the proposed Community
Entertainment District contains no less than twenty (20) contiguous acres; and
   (g)   A handling and processing fee of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) to
accompany the application, payable to the City of Cleveland, to cover
administrative costs and legal advertisements.
(Ord. No. 1096-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 699A.03 Application Processing
   (a)   Action by Mayor. Within thirty (30) days after receiving the
application, the Mayor shall submit the application with the Mayor’s
recommendation to the City Council. The application is a public record for
purposes of RC 149.43 upon its receipt by the Mayor.
   (b)   Public Notice by City Council. Within thirty (30) days after it
receives the application and the Mayor’s recommendations relating to the
application, the City Council, by notice published once a week for two (2)
consecutive weeks in at least one (1) newspaper of general circulation in the
City of Cleveland, shall notify the public that the application is on file in
the office of the Clerk of City Council and is available for inspection by the
public during regular business hours. The notice shall also indicate the date
and time of any public hearing to be conducted by Cleveland City Council.
   (c)   Action by City Council. Within seventy-five (75) days after the date
the application is filed with the Mayor, the City Council by ordinance or
resolution shall approve or disapprove the application based on whether the
proposed Community Entertainment District does or will substantially contribute
to entertainment, retail, educational, sporting, social, cultural, or arts
opportunities for the community. In making its determination, the City Council
shall also consider the supplemental standards established in Section
699A.04 of this chapter. Any approval of an application shall be by an
affirmative majority vote of the City Council. In the event that City Council
fails to act within seventy-five (75) days, the application shall be deemed to
be disapproved and the application fee shall be returned to the applicant,
minus advertising fees.
   (d)   Revision and Re-Submission. If the City Council disapproves the
application, the applicant may make changes in the application to secure its
approval by City Council. Any area contained in an application that is approved
by the City Council constitutes a Community Entertainment District, and a local
option election may be conducted in the district, as a type of community
facility, under RC 4301.356.
(Ord. No. 1096-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 699A.04 Supplemental Standards for Designation
   City Council shall not approve an application for a Community Entertainment
District if any perimeter boundary of the district is within five hundred (500)
feet of an elementary or secondary school, a City park or City recreation
facility, or a facility whose principal use is the holding of religious
services, if the Council determines that the Community Entertainment District
will adversely affect the operation of such facilities. In reviewing an
application for a Community Entertainment District, City Council shall also
consider the appropriateness of the proposed district with respect to the City
of Cleveland’s General Plan and other comprehensive plans adopted by the City
Planning Commission, as well as with respect to the proximity and extent of
residential uses, the availability of off-street parking, and crime statistics
for the immediate area.
(Ord. No. 1096-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 699A.05 Prohibited Uses
   Notwithstanding any other provisions of the Codified Ordinances of the City
of Cleveland, “adult entertainment uses,” as defined in Section
347.07 of the Codified Ordinances, shall be prohibited in a Community
Entertainment District.
(Ord. No. 1096-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
§ 699A.06 Removal of Designation
   All or part of an area designated as a Community Entertainment District may
lose this designation as provided in RC 4301.80 and by this section. The City
Council, after giving notice of its proposed action by publication once a week
for two (2) consecutive weeks in at least one (1) newspaper of general
circulation in the City of Cleveland, may determine by ordinance or resolution,
that all or part of the area fails to meet the standards described in RC
4301.80 and in this ordinance for designation of a Community Entertainment
District. If the City Council so determines, the area designated in the
ordinance or resolution shall no longer constitute a Community Entertainment
District.
(Ord. No. 1096-04. Passed 12-13-04, eff. 12-17-04)
CHAPTER 699B – DESIGNATED OUTDOOR REFRESHMENT AREAS
699B.01   Definitions
699B.02   Application Submission
699B.03   Application Processing
699B.04   Requirements
699B.05   Review of Outdoor Refreshment Areas
§ 699B.01 Definitions
   (a)   As used in this section, "qualified permit holder" means the holder of
an A-1, A-l-A, A-lc, A-2, or D permit issued under RC Chapter 4303.
   (b)   "Outdoor refreshment area" shall mean a designated area in the City of
Cleveland, which shall not exceed three hundred twenty (320) contiguous acres
or one-half (1/2) square mile.
(Ord. No. 666-16. Passed 6-6-16, eff. 6-7-16)
§ 699B.02 Application Submission
   (a)   Any owner of property seeking to have that property designated as an
outdoor refreshment area or to expand an existing outdoor refreshment may file
an application seeking this designation with the Mayor and the Director of
Public Safety.
   (b)   An application to designate an area as an outdoor refreshment area
shall contain all of the following:
      (1)   A map or survey of the proposed outdoor refreshment area in
sufficient detail to identify the boundaries of the area, which shall not
exceed three hundred twenty (320) contiguous acres or one-half (1/2) square
mile;
      (2)   A general statement of the nature and types of establishments that
will be located within the proposed outdoor refreshment area;
      (3)   A statement that the proposed outdoor refreshment area will
encompass not fewer than four (4) qualified permit holders;
      (4)   Evidence that the uses of land within the proposed outdoor
refreshment area are in accord with the master zoning plan or map of the City;
      (5)   Evidence that the proposed outdoor refreshment area does not
include an area that may be hazardous to pedestrian use including, but not
limited to, railroad tracks, an area with a steep grade or slope, or an area
that abuts waters in this City. For purposes of this section, "waters in this
City" means all streams, rivers, lakes, ponds, marshes, water courses,
waterways, and all other bodies of water, natural or human-made, which are
situated wholly or partially within the jurisdiction of the City of Cleveland.
      (6)   Proposed requirements for the purpose of ensuring public health and
safety within the proposed outdoor refreshment area.
      (7)    A petition of support with signatures from not less than seventy-
five percent (75%) of commercial tenants within the outdoor refreshment area,
indicating approval of the designation for the area. The Director of Public
Safety may modify the petition boundaries when deemed appropriate.
(Ord. No. 666-16. Passed 6-6-16, eff. 6-7-16)
§ 699B.03 Application Processing
   (a)   Action by Mayor. After receiving an application under Section
699B.02, the Mayor may submit the application with the Mayor's recommendation
to City Council to have the area described in the application designated as an
outdoor refreshment area or to expand an existing outdoor refreshment area to
include additional property within the city.
   (b)   Public Notice by City Council. Within forty-five (45) days after the
date the application is filed with the City Council, the City Council shall
publish public notice of the application once a week for two (2) consecutive
weeks in one (1) or more newspapers of general circulation in the municipal
corporation. The City Council shall ensure that the notice states that the
application is on file in the office of the clerk of council of the municipal
corporation and is available for inspection by the public during regular
business hours. The City Council also shall indicate in the notice the date and
time of any public hearing to be held regarding the application by the City
Council. The public hearing shall be held at a location within the proposed
outdoor refreshment area.
   (c)   Action by City Council. Not earlier than thirty (30) but not later
than sixty (60) days after the initial publication of notice, the City Council
shall approve or disapprove the application by an affirmative vote of a
majority of the City Council. Upon approval of the application by the City
Council, the territory described in the application constitutes an outdoor
refreshment area. The designation of the outdoor refreshment area shall be for
a period of three (3) years, after which the owner of the property may re-
apply. The City Council shall provide to the Division of Liquor Control and the
investigative unit of the Department of Public Safety notice of the approval of
the application and a description of the area specified in the application. If
the City Council disapproves the application, the Mayor may make changes in the
application to secure its approval by the City Council.
   (d)   The number of outdoor refreshment areas is limited as provided in RC
4301.82.
   (e)   Any qualified permit holder that receives an outdoor refreshment area
designation from the Division of Liquor Control shall comply with all laws,
rules, and regulations that govern its license type, and the applicable public
health and safety requirements established for the area under Section
699B.04.
   (f)   Any person, including any qualified permit holder, is required to
obtain a special event permit under
Chapter 131 for organized events held in an outdoor refreshment area.
(Ord. No. 666-16. Passed 6-6-16, eff. 6-7-16)
§ 699B.04 Requirements
   (a)   At the time of the creation of an outdoor refreshment area, the City
Council shall establish the requirements that City Council determines necessary
to ensure public health and safety within the area. The City Council shall
include in the ordinance or resolution all of the following:
      (1)   The specific boundaries of the area, including street addresses;
      (2)   The number, spacing, and type of signage designating the area;
      (3)   The hours of operation for the area;
      (4)   The number of personnel needed to ensure public safety in the area;
      (5)   A sanitation plan that will help maintain the appearance and public
health of the area;
      (6)   The number of personnel needed to execute the sanitation plan;
      (7)   A requirement that beer and intoxicating liquor be served solely in
plastic bottles or other plastic containers in the area;
      (8)   A regulation prohibiting any qualified permit holder from
installing, operating, or causing to be installed or operated any sound
amplifying device on the outside of the premises of the qualified permit holder
without first obtaining a permit;
      (9)   A requirement that applicant shall indemnify the City and provide
one million dollars ($1,000,000) of liability and property damage insurance
which includes the City of Cleveland as an additional insured.
   (b)   The City Council may include in the ordinance any public health and
safety requirements proposed in an application under division (b) of Section
699B.02 to designate or expand the outdoor refreshment area. The City Council
may subsequently modify the public health and safety requirements as determined
necessary by the City Council.
   (c)   Prior to adopting an ordinance or resolution under this division, the
City Council shall give notice of its proposed action by publication once a
week for two (2) consecutive weeks in one (1) newspaper of general circulation
in the municipal corporation or as provided in RC 7.16.
   (d)   The City Council shall provide to the Division of Liquor Control and
the investigative unit of the Department of Public Safety notice of the public
health and safety requirements established or modified under this division.
   (e)   RC 4399.18 applies to a liquor permit holder located within an outdoor
refreshment area in the same manner as if the liquor permit holder were not
located in an outdoor refreshment area.
(Ord. No. 666-16. Passed 6-6-16, eff. 6-7-16)
§ 699B.05 Review of Outdoor Refreshment Areas
   (a)   One (1) year after the date of creation of an outdoor refreshment
area, the City Council of the municipal corporation that created the area under
this section shall review the operation of the area and shall, by ordinance or
resolution, either approve the continued operation of the area or dissolve the
area. Prior to adopting the ordinance, the City Council shall give notice of
its proposed action by publication once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks in
one (1) newspaper of general circulation in the municipal corporation or as
provided in RC 7.16.
   (b)   If the City Council dissolves the outdoor refreshment area, the
outdoor refreshment area ceases to exist. The City Council then shall provide
notice of its action to the Division of Liquor Control and the investigative
unit of the Department of Public Safety. Upon receipt of the notice, the
Division shall revoke all outdoor refreshment area designations issued to
qualified permit holders within the dissolved area. If the City Council
approves the continued operation of the outdoor refreshment area, the area
continues in operation.
   (c)   One (1) year after the approval of the continued operation of an
outdoor refreshment area under division (a) of this section, the City Council
shall conduct a review in the same manner as provided in division (a) of this
section. The City Council also shall conduct such a review each year after any
subsequent approval of continued operation under division (b) of this section.
   (d)   At any time, the City Council may dissolve all or a part of an outdoor
refreshment area. Prior to adopting the ordinance or resolution, the City
Council shall give notice of its proposed action by publication once a week for
two (2) consecutive weeks in one (1) newspaper of general circulation in the
municipal corporation or as provided in RC 7.16. If the City Council dissolves
all or part of an outdoor refreshment area, the area designated in the
ordinance or resolution no longer constitutes an outdoor refreshment area. The
City Council shall provide notice of its actions to the Division of Liquor
Control and the investigative unit of the Department of Public Safety. Upon
receipt of the notice, the Division shall revoke all outdoor refreshment area
designations issued to qualified permit holders within the dissolved area or
portion of the area.
(Ord. No. 666-16. Passed 6-6-16, eff. 6-7-16)
 
